CCS         £6 5 /s - iz.




SECTION 6
HER MAJESTY *S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
              (WEST DISTRICT)
                                                 73
     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE
  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER
         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                  Before

. J5„L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED-Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          fHer Majesty’s Coroner)




                    At

              The Town Hall,
                Sheffield.

                    On

             19th March, 1991




         TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




   From the Notes of J.L. Harphaa, Ltd.,
        Official Shorthand Writers,
    55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                         INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




SUBMISSION BY MR. MAXWELL

SUBMISSION BY MR. PAYNE

SUBMISSION BY MR. ISAACS

SUBMISSION BY MR. MANNING

SUBMISSION BY MR. KING
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
            SEVENTY-THIRD DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                TUESDAY, 19th MARCH, 1991


     THE CORONER:   Good morning.   What I think I will
do is I will read Mr. Maxwell's submission.   Then we
will turn to Mr. Payne.
      This is then the submission submitted to me under a
covering letter by Keeble Hawson, and it is signed by Mr.
Maxwell on the 15th March, 1991.    It is headed,
"Inquests into the Deaths of the Victims of the
Hillsborough Football Stadium Disaster on the 15th April,,
1989.    Submissions on behalf of Sheffield City Council.

"INTRODUCTION
1.    These submissions relate only to the possibility of
the Jury being directed to consider a verdict of unlawful
kiy.i*ig.   The submissions below are developed both
generally in order to make relevant submissions of law
and specifically with a view to showing that Sheffield
City Council and the Council's employees could not
possibly be regarded as persons who unlawfully killed any
of the deceased.    Sheffield City Council do not presume
to enter the debate that will no doubt arise as to
whether any other person, whether corporation or natural
human being, might, or might not, possibly be regarded as
one who unlawfully killed the deceased, and so far as
that issue goes Sheffield city Council take up a neutral
position.

POSSIBLE   BASIS FOR VERDICT OF UNLAWFUL KILLING

2.   For the purpose of these Inquests a verdict of
unlawful killing would be justified if the Jury were
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that some person or
persons (whom the Jury must under no account name or
identify) had brought about the death of the deceased, or
some or any of them, as a result of committing the
offence of manslaughter.   It would be improper to direct
the Jury to consider the possibility of a verdict of
unlawful killing based upon the offence of murder having
been committed, as there is no evidence at all to show
that any person caused the death of the deceased through
some unlawful act or that any person intended to kill or
to cause grievous bodily harm.   Neither the actus reus
nor the mens rea of murder is established on the evidence
before this Jury.

3.   If the Jury are to be directed to consider a verdict
of unlawful killing on the basis that any or some or all
                                                        2

                                              MR. MAXWELL


of the deceased died as a consequence of manslaughter
then the Jury must be warned in terms that they are being
directed to consider whether a criminal offence of
manslaughter has been committed.   They must be given the
appropriate direction as to the standard of proof for
manslaughter, and the appropriate direction is the simple
one that they should be satisfied beyond all reasonable
doubt or, as sometimes said, satisfied so that they are
sure that all the wecessary elements of the offenee are-
proved ; and that the verdict of unlawful killing must
not be returned unless they are satisfied beyond all
reasonable doubt that such elements are proved.    When
directions are given as to any other verdict that may be
brought in, eg accident/misadventure or open, it should
be stressed that a different standard of proof applies
viz, proof on a balance of probabilities, with an
appropriate explanation of what that means and how that
differs from the criminal standard of proof.

4.   So far as the offence of manslaughter goes there is
no question of any of the deceased having been killed as
a result of an unlawful act.   For these purposes an
unlawful act is one which is unlawful for soine reason
other than the negligent manner of its performance.    The
Jury should not, therefore, be directed to consider the
possibility of any person having killed the deceased or
any of them as a result of an unlawful act.    Involuntary
manslaughter of that form could not possibly form the
basis for a verdict of unlawful killing.

5.   The question is whether the Jury should be directed
to consider a verdict of unlawful killing based upon
reckless manslaughter, that is to say, to consider
whether the Jury are satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
that some person or persons (whom they must under no
account name) has brought about the death of any or some
or all of the deceased as a result of recklessness.   It
is not necessary, and it will be unhelpful and confusing,
to direct the Jury to consider 'gross negligence
manslaughter'•

FIRST ELEMENT OF RECKLESS MANSLAUGHTER - CAUSATIVE
CONDUCT

6.   If the Jury are to consider whether some specific
individual committed the offence of reckless manslaughter
then the Jury have to consider firstly whether that
person by his conduct, ie, some act or omission to act
(where there was a duty to act), was a substantial cause
of the death of any or some of all of the deceased.    In
order to prove causation the following matters must be
established:
                                                        3

                                               MR. MAXWELL


     (i)    that but for the conduct of the person under
            consideration the death of the deceased would
            not have occurred.

     (ii)   that although the conduct of the person under
            consideration need not be the sole or the main
            cause of death it must be a substantial cause.

     (i±i) that'where the conduct of the person--under
           consideration was performed prior to the 15th
           April 1989 then a subsequent and intervening
           act which causes death breaks the chain of
           causation if that intervening act is not
           foreseeable; and that this means that such
           prior conduct is not, in law, to be regarded
           as a substantial cause of such subsequent
           event.    This is consistent with the Jury's
           function of establishing how the deceased came
           by his death since the Jury are there
           concerned to find out what circumstances are
           directly responsible for the death of the
           deceased.    Such an intervening and
           unforeseeable act prevents any prior
           circumstances, by way of earlier acts or
           omissions, from being directly responsible for
           subsequent death.

(b) It is submitted on behalf of Sheffield City Council
that no reasonable Jury properly directed could possibly
conclude:

     (i)    that but for the conduct of the Sheffield City
            Council, or any of its employees, the deaths
            would not have occurred.

     (ii)   That any conduct of the Sheffield City Council
            or any of its employees was a substantial
            cause of death.

     (iii) That the events occurring at the ground on the
           15th April 1989 from 2.30 pm onwards were
           foreseeable.   The events referred to are the
           sudden introduction of a large number of fans
           en masse into an area of the terraces which
           was already crowded and full.   On the
           contrary, no reasonable Jury properly directed
           could find that such events were foreseeable
           by Sheffield City Council or any of its
           employees or that any chain of causation which
           might otherwise have been established by any
           prior conduct on the part of Sheffield City
           Council was other than broken.
                                                           4
                                                MR. MAXWELL


(c) Accordingly as a matter of law the Jury should not be
directed to consider the conduct of Sheffield City Council
or any of its employees in the context of any verdict of
unlawful killing based upon involuntary reckless
manslaughter.

(d) If the submission at (c) is rejected, then the Jury
must be properly directed to consider the issue of
c.susH tixon xn tiis specif xc c o d ^s x ^ of o>oxiduot of
Sheffield City Council and be given full instructions to
the relevant criteria to be applied i.e. as per (b) above,
but amplified as necessary.

SECOND ELEMENT OF RECKLESS MANSLAUGHTER - MENTAL ELEMENT

7.   The second matter to be considered is the mental
element involved in reckless manslaughter.  So far as this
mental element is concerned the appropriate direction is
that known as the Lawrence Direction which is to be found
in the following passage of the speech of lord Diplock in
R.-v-Lawrence 1982 A.C. 510 at 526E to 527B as follows:

     'Recklessness on the part of the doer of an act does
     presuppose that there is something in the
     circumstances that would have drawn the attention of
     an ordinary prudent individual to the possibility
     that his act was capable of causing the kind of
     serious harmful consequences that the section which
     creates the offence was intended to prevent, and that
     the risk of those harmful consequences occurring was
     not so slight that an ordinary prudent individual
     would feel justified in treating them as negligible.
     It is only when this is so that the doer of the act
     is acting 'recklessly' if before doing the act, he
     either fails to give any thought to the possibility
     of there being any such risk or, having recognised
     that there was such risk, he nevertheless goes on to
     do it.

     In my view, an appropriate instruction to the Jury of
     what is meant by driving recklessly would be that
     they must be satisfied of two things:

     First, that the defendant was in fact driving the
     vehicle in such a manner as to create an obvious and
     serious risk of causing physical injury to some other
     person who might happen to be using the road or of
     doing substantial damage to property; and

     Second, that in driving in that manner the defendant
     did so without having given any thought to the
     possibility of there being any such risk or, having
     recognised that there was some risk involved, had
     nonetheless gone on to take it.
                                                        5

                                               MR. MAXWELL


    It is for the Jury to decide whether the risk created
    by the manner in which the vehicle was being driven
    was both obvious and serious and, in deciding that,
    they might apply the standard of the ordinary prudent
    motorist as represented by themselves.

    If satisfied that an obvious and serious risk was
    created by the manner of the defendant's driving, the
    Jury are entitled to. infer, that he, was in, one or
    other of the states of mind required to constitute
    the offence and will probably do so; but regard must
    be given to any explanation he gives as to his state
    of mind which may displace the inference.1

A practical application of the Lawrence Direction can be
seen in action in R.-v~Seymour 1983 2 A.C. 493. The
importance of this decision is that Lord Diplock was a
member of the Court and he (and all their Lordships)
agreed with the speech of Lord Roskill.  In the speech of
Lord Roskill at page 504C to 504G appears the following:

    'The learned judge rejected the submission and gave
    the 'Lawrence Direction' subject only to the omission
    of any reference to the 'obvious and serious risk ...
    of doing substantial damage to property' see R.-v-
    Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510, 526. In my view,
    he was entirely right not to refer to damage to
    property, a reference to which was irrelevant in this
    case and might well have confused the Jury. His
    admirably clear direction not only properly reflected
    the decision of this House in Lawrence but also Lord
    Atkin's speech in Andrews [1937] A.C. 576. I quote
    the relevant passages:

    'The second question you have to decide; was the
    driving that caused those injuries reckless? If so,
    then it is manslaughter.  If you are not satisfied
    that it was reckless, then the verdict is not guilty.
    To amount to reckless driving mere negligence is not
    enough. His conduct must go beyond the question of
    compensation between citizens and amount to, in your
    view, criminal conduct requiring punishment. You
    have to be satisfied upon the question of
    recklessness that he drove in such a manner as to
    create an obvious and serious risk of causing
    physical harm to some other person who might happen
    to be using the road at the time .... Once you are
    satisfied that the manner of his driving was such as
    to create an obvious and serious risk of causing
    physical harm to a person using the road at the time,
    you also have to be satisfied that driving in that
    manner he did so without having given any thought to
    the possibility of there being any such risk, or
    alternatively, having-recognised that there was some
                                                        6

                                               MR. MAXWELL


    risk involved, nonetheless went on to take it; in
    other words, he was reckless. He reckoned not of the
    consequences.

    In determining the quality of his driving, you apply
    the standards of the ordinary reasonable motorist.
    You, of course, take into account all the evidence
    including his explanation ....111

A suggested direction:

The passage last quoted can be adapted as appropriate to
the context of any specific person, whether corporation or
natural human being, whose conduct the Jury are directed
to consider for the purposes of deciding whether that
person committed reckless manslaughter. The passage
quoted from Lord Roskill's speech presupposes that the
Jury have concluded that the issue of causation is proved.
The adaptation of this passage of speech might be on the
following lines:

    'If you are satisfied so as to be sure that the first
    question is proved that is to say that the act of X
    was a substantial cause of the death of any of the
    deceased then the second question you have to decide
    is was the act that caused those deaths reckless? If
    so then it is manslaughter.  If you are not satisfied
    that it was reckless then a verdict of unlawful
    killing is not open to you. To amount to a reckless
    act mere negligence is not enough. His conduct must
    go beyond the question of compensation between
    citizens and amount to, in your view, criminal
    conduct requiring punishment. You have to be
    satisfied upon the question of recklessness that he
    acted in such a manner as to create an obvious and
    serious risk of causing physical harm to some other
    person who might happen to be using the terraces at
    the time. Once you are satisfied that his act was
    such as to create an obvious and serious risk of
    causing physical harm to a person using the terraces
    at the time you also have to be satisfied that acting
    in that manner he did so without having given any
    thought to the possibility of there being any such
    risk, or alternatively having recognised that there
    was some risk involved nonetheless went on to take
    it; in other words he was reckless. He reckoned not
    of the consequences. In determining the quality of
    his act you apply the standards of the ordinary
    reasonable person who happened to be in the same
    circumstances as X. You of course take into account
    all the evidence including his explanation ....'
Lord Roskill added at 508C that it is appropriate also to
point out that in order to constitute the offence of
manslaughter the risk of death being caused must be very
high, and such a remark should be made to the Jury here.
Lord Roskill said:
   *I. would- therefore answer the certified question as
   follows: 'Where manslaughter is charged and the
   circumstances are that the victim was killed as a
   result of the reckless driving of the defendant on a
   public highway, the trial judge should give the Jury
   the direction suggested in R. -v- Lawrence but it is
   appropriate also to point out that in order to
   constitute the offence of manslaughter the risk of
   death being caused by the manner of the defendant's
   driving must be very high.•
In deciding whether or not a risk was obvious the Jury should
have regard to whether the risk would have been obvious to an
ordinary prudent individual in the relevant circumstances.
The Jury should be told that they may take account of what
any witness has told them was obvious or not to that witness
as a risk. The witnesses' perception of the risk can provide
an indication of whether or not the risk was obvious to an
ordinary prudent person, and especially so if the Jury
conclude that the witness in question was such an ordinary
prudent person. For this purpose 'witness' includes a person
whose conduct has been called into question at the Inquest
and Lord Roskill made it clear that a Jury can take into
account an explanation given by such a person.

It is important to stress to the Jury that a failure to
appreciate that there was such a risk would not by itself be
sufficient to amount to recklessness see Rea -v- West London
Coroner ex parte Gray 1988 1 Queen's Bench page 477B per Lord
Justice Watkins:
      'He deliberately chose to run the risk by doing nothing
      about it. It should be emphasised, however, that a
      failure to appreciate that there was such a risk would
      not bv itself be sufficient to amount to recklessness.'

FURTHER RELEVANT MATTERS:
(1)      PRIMA FACIE CASE

8.     The Jury should only be directed to consider a verdict
of unlawful killing based upon reckless manslaughter if the
Coroner concludes as a matter of law that there is a prima
facie, that is to.say, a case fit to be left to the Jury
where the Coroner concludes, as a matter of law, that a
reasonable Jury properly directed might bring in such a
verdict. If the Coroner concludes, as a matter of law, that
                                                    MR. MAXWRT.T.


there is no such case fit to be left to the Jury then the
Coroner must direct the Jury not to consider that verdict,
that is, he must withdraw the verdict from them.

(ii)    INDIVIDUAL CONSIDERATION - THE DECEASED.

9.     The death of each deceased must be considered
individually. Before the Jury may be invited to consider a
verdict of unlawful killing in respect of any of the deceased
the Coroner must direct himself as to whether or not there is
a prima facie case so far as that individual deceased is
concerned.

A verdict in the case of each deceased is required and if
unlawful killing is to be left to the Jury it must be
considered by the Jury in relation to each of the deceased.
The Jury should be directed that if, having considered the
circumstances of death affecting each of the individual
deceased, they are satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
some or all of them may be considered as a group of persons
whose death was caused as a result of reckless manslaughter
committed by some specific individual or individuals (who
must under no account be named or identified), the" similar
verdicts may be returned in the case of each member of such
group. There will, therefore, be 95 verdicts but some or all
may be in similar terms.

However, the Jury must be directed that it is improper to
consider unlawful killing in relation to the 95 deceased as a
whole or to any group of the deceased without first
considering the individual circumstances of the death of each
particular deceased. The Jury must be warned that no short
cut is available to them permitting them to proceed on the
presumption that they are entitled to consider the
circumstances of death of the 95 deceased as a whole, or of
any group of the deceased as a group, unless some cause is
shown why they should not do so. That would reverse the
order in which relevant consideration should be dealt with.
They are concerned with the Inquest^ relating to the death&
of the victims of the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster.
There is no presumption that a verdict in common form is
applicable to the 95 deceased persons. Only after a careful
consideration of each individual case can the Jury establish
what verdict is appropriate.

(iii)   NO AGGREGATION

10.    The Jury must be directed that they can return a
verdict of unlawful killing only if they can attribute the
ingredients of the relevant offence, reckless manslaughter,
to some individual person or persons whom they should on no
account name or otherwise identify:
                                                                 9
                                                   M R,   MAYWPT.T.



Reaina -v- West London Coroner ex parte Gray 1988 1 Queen's
Bench page 477B. In this context the Jury should consider
the position of each single person who may be a candidate
taking each such person in turn and coming to a conclusion.

In this context the Jury must be warned that whatever person
is being considered (and be .that person.a corporation or a
natural human being) the ingredients of manslaughter must be
established by proving the necessary mens rea (mental
element) and actus reus (criminal conduct) of manslaughter
against it or him by evidence properly to be relied on
against it or him and a case against any person cannot be
fortified by evidence against another person. No aggregation
of criminal culpability is permitted.

(iv)   ORDER OF PRIORITY IN CONSIDERING VERDICT

11.    If unlawful killing is to be left to the Jury as a
possible verdict then the Coroner should indicate to the Jury
that they must deal with that issue first; and that they
should approach, therefore, initially the question whether or
not they are satisfied so that they are. sure beyond a
reasonable doubt that the verdict o£ unlawful killing may be
returned in respect of any or some or all of the deceased.
If they conclude that unlawful killing is not an appropriate
verdict, or are not sure that it is an appropriate verdict,
in the case of any or some or all of the deceased then they
should go on to consider other possible verdicts, ie
accident/misadventure or open verdict. Support for this is
to be found in Regina -v- Wolverhampton Coroner ex parte
McCurbin 1990 1 Weekly Law Reports page 728B-D:

   'It is true that, in many cases where it is open to a
   Coroner's Jury to find a verdict of unlawful killing,
   they may also have to consider the question of death by
   misadventure. However, in my view, this does not and
   should not give rise to problems. The Coroner should
   indicate to the Jury that they should approach,
   initially, the question as to whether or not they are
   satisfied so that they are sure that this is unlawful
   killing. If they come to the conclusion that it is not
   unlawful killing, they are not satisfied so that they
   are sure that the verdict is appropriate, then they
   will consider the question of misadventure and, in so
   doing, they do not need to bear in mind the heavy
   standard of proof which is required for unlawful
   killing. They can approach the matter on the basis of
   the balance of probabilities. The situation is that,
   just as it is important that a jury should not bring in
   a verdict of suicide unless they are sure, likewise
   they should not bring in a verdict of unlawful killing
   unless they are sure.'
                                                            10


                                        MR. MAXWELL



SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
12. The Jury have heard a variety of criticisms of
different persons and such criticisms have been voiced
wholly or mainly in cross-examination. Representation
of certain persons whose conduct was likely to be called
into question has been permitted.   One of those persons,
legal persons is the Sheffield City Council.

In the case of any such person whose conduct has been
called into question then, unless a reasonable Jury
properly directed could conclude that such person committed
the offence of manslaughter against any or all or some of
the deceased, the Jury must be directed in terms either
(1) to exclude that person from their consideration of
the issue whether or not they are satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the verdict of unlawful killing
is appropriate or (2) to consider such a verdict only
in the case of some other person or persons (who should
be named in the direction but not of course in the verdict)
and not to consider such a verdict in the case of any other
person.
The reasons for discriminating in this way are:-

(a) For reasons of justice and humanity there should be
no question of any risk arising that a verdict of unlawful
killing, where the Jury are forbidden to'name any culprit,
might be understood in the context of the evidence to
refer to one or more of those persons whose conduct was
called into question at the Inquest, but in respect of whon
no reasonable Jury properly directed could conclude that
such person had committed the offence of manslaughter.
Such a risk does arise where there have been criticism
of and suggestions, express or implied, of negligence
against a variety of persons; and all the more so where
the verdict of unlawful killing involves a finding of
recklessness which the Jury and the public may be at risk
of confusing with negligence. There must be no risk of
those who are innocent of criminal culpability being
caught up with any whom the Jury may regard as criminally
responsible.
(b) The converse to (a) is also true, namely that, in the
case of a person whose conduct the Jury are rightly scruti­
nising to see whether they are satisfied so as to be sure
that such conduct is criminal, any allegations against
or criticism of any other person might give rise to
prejudice. Such a risk does arise where the Jury may be
tempted to aggregate fault.
(c) Without discrimination and exclusion of persons who
ought not to be regarded as candidates in terms of
criminal culpability there is a risk that the Jury may be
confused by an unnecessarily and erroneously wide choice
of candidates.
                                        MR. MAXWELL



13. No reasonable Jury properly directed could find
that Sheffield City Council, or any employee or agent
of Sheffield City Council whether it be Mr. Butler or
Mr. Bownes or anyone else employed by Sheffield City
Council, has or have committed any offence of
manslaughter. The Jury should be directed accordingly,
with an instruction that as a matter of law there is no
evidence on which the Jury could, find that any of those
persons committed any such offence. The Jury should
be told in terms that quite apart from the difficulties
relating to the issue of causation (as Paragraph 6 above):

(i) There is no evidence on which any reasonable Jury
could find that any of such persons acted in a manner
so as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing
physical injury to any football fan or fans.

(ii) There is no evidence on which any reasonable
Jury could find that any of such persons acted recklessly,
having regard to the definition of such term as above.

 (iii) Specifically in the case of Sheffield City Council
no verdict of corporate manslaughter could possibly be
established here; and any verdict that Sheffield City
Council committed the offence of manslaughter would be
unreasonable and improper. No further direction is needed
but if it was thought desirable to amplify such direction
then the appropriate indication would be that for a
corporation to be criminally liable for manslaughter then
it is required that the mens rea (alternatively the
mental element of recklessness) and the actus reus
(alternatively the conduct complained of) comprised in
the alleged offence of manslaughter should be established
not against those who acted for or in the name of the
corporation but against those who were to be identified
as the embodiment of the corporation itself. Neither
Mr. Bownes nor Mr. Butler nor anyone else referred to at
the Inquest could properly be regarded as the embodiment
of the Council. No sustainable case in manslaughter
arises here against Sheffield City Council.

See for example R. -v- H.M. Coroner for East Kent
ex parte Spooner 1989 88 Cr. App. R. page 10 at page 16-17

Then it is signed.

"NOTE:  (i) Copies of Cases referred to above are annexed
for ease of reference, to the copy of these submissions
filed with the Coroner's Court. The cases are:

Reg, -v- Lawrence 1982 AC510

Reg, -v- Seymour 1983 2 AC493
                                                           12


                                         MR. MAXWELL



Reg, -v- West London Coroner ex p. Gray 1988 1 Q.B. 467

Reg, -v- Wolverhampton Coroner ex p. McCurbin 1990 1 WLR 718

Reg, -v- H.M. Coroner for East Kent ex p. Spooner (1989)
88 Cr. App. R.10
(ii) The evidence of Mr. Arthur Butler for Sheffield
City Council was given on Days 36 and 37 (23.1 »19’91 and 24.1.199-

(iii) The evidence of Mr. David Bownes for Sheffield City
Council was given on Days 37 and 38 (24.1.1991 and 25.1.1991).'

      I have also had a letter which I will read out from
Reynolds, Quarter, Chamberlain who are the solicitors rep­
resenting Eastwood and Partners and I will read this letter
as well because it fits in at this stage. It is dated the
18th of March and after the usual headings and so on it
says:
      "Dear Sir,
      Hillsborough Resumed Inguests
      You will recall that we are instructed on behalf
of Eastwood and Partners.
      We have been considering with our clients whether
it is necessary for submissions to be made on their behalf
to you prior to your summing-up of the evidence to the
jury.
      We have had the opportunity of considering the
written submissions to be made on behalf of Sheffield
City Council.
      The submissions which we would seek to make on our
client's behalf to you are the same as those made on behalf
of Sheffield City Council.
      Therefore, in order   to save the time and costs of
the Court from what would   amount to repetition, we adopt
on behalf of our client's   the submissions made on behalf
of Sheffield City Council   insofar as they apply to our
clients.
      We trust that you have no objection to this but if
you have any questions please do not hesitate to contact
us."
      I have not contacted them, but I have no objection
either.
                                                             13


                                       MR. PAYNE



      I have a letter from Mr. Hale. I think I will read
that later when I have had a moment to read it properly.
Mr. Payne?
      MR. PAYNE: Sir, I have already submitted a written
version of the submissions which I am hoping to be able
to make and I said when I put it in that I would be
grateful for, the opportunity to amplify it and moderate
it and that is what I hope to be able to do.
      I have distributed copies to some people but those
who have not got a copy there is one here available now.

      Now sir I have addressed first of all the question
how and it appears that the meaning of the word "how" in
this context directs the Coroner to consider what acts
and omissions are directly responsible for the deaths.

      I have referred at various points in this note
to the text book Jervis and I have given the reference
there which I am sure you are very familiar with. If
you would like me to look at it? Yes. That paragraph
comes from paragraph 15.19. This is in the chapter dealing
with "Witnesses" and at 15.19 at the bottom of the page
the Editors say:
      "In exercising the right to examine a witness
      regard must be had to the inquisitorial nature
      of the proceedings. An Inquest is not a trial."

Then there is a quotation from a judgment of Mr. Justice
Griffiths in the Hammersmith Coroner case and then the
narrative goes on:
      "Indeed it should be noted that the Coroner has
      a positive duty to disallow any question which
      he considers to be not relevant or otherwise
      not a proper question."

I am just reading this to get the context.

      "As for relevance the proceedings in evidence
      must be directed solely to ascertaining who
      the deceased was, how, when and where the
      deceased came by his death and the registration
      particulars."
Of course that is an extract from the Coroners' Rules,
1984 Rule 36. Then the narrative goes on:
      "Neither the Coroner nor the jury must express
      any opinion on any other matters. How the
      deceased came by his death is of course wider
      than merely finding the medical cause of death
                                                            14


                                        MR. PAYNE



      and it is therefore right and proper that the
      Coroner should enquire into acts and omissions
      which are directly responsible for the death."

And then it goes on with the familiar injunction:

      "Although no verdict may be framed so as to
      appear to determine any question of criminal
      liability by named person or civil liability
      generally, the fact that there may be
      subsequent proceedings, criminal or civil,
      should not deter the Coroner from making an
      adequate investigation into the facts so far
      as they are material to the Inquest."

Sir, out of that passage the material words to define the
"how" appear halfway down the paragraph:

      "The Coroner should enquire into acts and
      omissions which are directly responsible for
      the death."




                       Then I go on to deal with
                                                        15

                                                M R ’ PAYNE


     Then I go on to deal with verdict.    Now I have
taken the liberty of identifying what appear to be the
only three available candidates for verdicts and I do not
intend to address my submissions to any other possible
verdict, unless anyone says anything to the contrary.
It appears to us that the available verdicts which fall
for consideration are three in number, namely, number
one, misadventure, also described as accident.    In the
Portsmouth Coroner Ccrse, of which the reference is there,
it is said that there is no practical distinction between
those two words, as you know.    It does not matter
whether it is called misadventure or accident.

     The second possible category is unlawful killing and
the only aspect of that which I have addressed is
involuntary manslaughter.   That will come later in this
submission.
     The third option, if neither of those is proved, is
an open verdict.   Open verdict is dealt with in Jervis
at 16.19.   That paragraph helpfully says:

     "If there is insufficient evidence to record any of
     the other suggested verdicts, an open verdict may be
     recorded.    It should be noted than an open verdict
     is thus only to be used in the last resort if there
     is insufficient evidence to enable the Coroner or
     the Jury to reach one of the other verdicts.
     Furthermore, the fact that there may be uncertainty
     as to other parts of the inquisition, for example,
     as to the precise cause, time or place of death,
     does not authorise recording an open verdict if
     there is sufficient evidence to record now the
     deceased came by his death.    In other words, the
     Coroner or Jury should not fail to reach a positive
     verdict merely because there is some doubt on some
     minor point.    It is therefore wrong if there is
     evidence that the deceased committed suicide to
     return an open verdict on the mere ground that it is
     uncertain whether the balance of his mind was
     disturbed."

I am sorry for reading that last sentence.   However, the
rest of it is quite helpful in indicating that an open
verdict is a last resort.

     Paragraph 3 in ray submissions, I have entitled it
"Burden of Proof."    That ought to be changed to
"Standard of Proof," and the standard is set out there.
It is different for the different verdicts.    For
misadventure, or accident, the standard is the balance of
probabilities and that is to be found in the Gray case at
that reference.    For unlawful killing the standard is
beyond reasonable doubt and that is to be found in the
                                                        16

                                                MR.' PAYNE


Wolverhampton Coroner case and it is also to be found in
Gray.
     Finally, an open verdict.   Now that is quite an
interesting comment, which I have just read in Jervis
about that:
     "An open verdict would be appropriate if neithef of
     those was proved: and that would- iRcludc^ for
     example, if unlawful killing were to be proved on a
     balance of probabilities, but not beyond reasonable
     doubt."
     Paragraph 4 - 1 turn to what has to be proved.    For
misadventure on the balance of probabilities, what has to
be proved is that there was some deliberate, lawful,
human act, which has unexpectedly taken a turn which
leads to death, or an unintended act, and probably an
unintended act does not apply, so for misadventure the
definition seems to be, in our submission, that first
sentence under my sub-heading.   That comes from Jervis
at paragraph 16.15. At 16.15, under the sub-heading
"Accident/Misadventure", the editors say this:

     "No distinction is drawn between accident and
     misadventure in the verdict.    It is sometimes
     suggested that accident connotes something over
     which there is no human control, or an unintended
     act; while misadventure indicates some deliberate
     but lawful human act which has unexpectedly taken a
     turn that leads to death.    Even if this distinction
     exists in logic it is clear that Coroners have not
     observed it in practice and accordingly for
     statistical purposes the verdicts are treated as
     being the same.

So the editor here is looking at the distinction between
accident and misadventure, but helpfully in that context
he gives a definition, which we adopt, of what is meant
by accident or misadventure, and for the purpose of this
case it boils down to that phrase in the middle of that
paragraph, "...misadventure indicates some deliberate but
lawful human act which has unexpectedly taken a turn that
leads to death."

     Sir, that being the definition of misadventure, one
can perhaps hear echoes right through the case which
reflect the phrase that I have just read.

     I go on under 4.2, "What has to be proved", and I
now turn to what has to be proved for unlawful killing,
remembering that it has to be beyond reasonable doubt.
Now these sub-headings are a digest of what appears in
the authorities, so I am going to turn in a moment to
                                                       17

                                                MR. PAYNE


actually look at the authorities, but what follows is
extracted from them. These are the Doints which it
appears to us have to be proved:  (a) a particular
individual had the duty of regarding the health and
welfare of the deceased;  (b) that individual failed to
do in the circumstances what he ought to have done for
the health and welfare of the deceased;  (c) that the
failure was a substantial cause of the deceased's death
and (d) that in acting or failing to act for the benefit
of the deceased's health and welfare, that individual
acted recklessly, where recklessly means an obvious and
serious risk to the health and welfare of the deceased to
which the particular individual, having regard to his
duty, was indifferent or that recognising that risk to be
present he deliberately chose to run the risk by doing
nothing about it, and further where failure to appreciate
that there was such a risk would not by itself be
sufficient to amount to recklessness.

     Now there is a tremendous concentration of concepts
in those words, but it appears to us that the words that
are central and have to be addressed are the word
"reckless," the word, "obvious," and the word,
"indifferent," reckless being the main word and obvious
and indifference being aspects of recklessness.

     Now, sir, to see how one gets to that position, can
I ask you to go briefly through the folder which we have
submitted earlier, to trace how this situation has
arisen?   May I preface this short exercise by saying
that at the conclusion of ray submission I am going to ask
you, sir, to look at the directions of Mr. Justice Turner
in the Zeebrugge case in which, as will be seen, he
refers to aspects of these authorities that I am now
going to ask you to look at so that the purpose of the
present exercise is just to lay out the field on which
Mr. Justice Turner then marched for his Judgment.

     Sir, if you have the blue folder.The first
authority is at blue divider card number   2. This is the
case of Andrews and the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Sir, you will of course know already that a number of
these references have already been touched on by
Mr. Maxwell in his submissions, so I apologise for
repetition.   I intend to keep it brief and to the point.
Andrews, a very early dangerous driving case in 1937, but
the relevant passages which are then echoed down the
years are in the Judgment of Lord Atkin which begins for
this purpose at page 45. and sir, perhaps you will find
at the top of page 45, April 22nd, Lord Atkin", and the
relevant passage is about half way down   thepage:

     "Of all crimes manslaughter appears  toafford most
     difficulties of definition, for it concerns homicide
                                                        18

                                                 MR. PAYNE


    in so many and so varying conditions.      From the
    early days, when any homicide involved penalty, the
    law has gradually evolved 'through successive
    differentiations and integrations' until it
    recognises murder on the one hand, based mainly,
    through no exclusively, on an intention to kill, and
    manslaughter on the other hand, based mainly, though
    no exclusively, on the absence of intention to kill
    but with- the* presence* ©# a® e lement of
    'unlawfulness which is the elusive factor.       In the
    present case it is only necessary to consider
    manslaughter from the point of view of an
    unintentional killing caused by negligence, that is,
    the omission of a duty to take care.

    I do not propose to discuss the development of this
    branch of the subject as treated in the successive
    treatises of Coke, Hale, Foster and East, and in the
    judgments of the Courts to be found either in
    directions to juries by individual Judges, or in the
    more considered pronouncements of the body of Judges
    which preceded the formal Court of Crow Cases
    Reserved."

I am going to skip a big passage here, directing my
submissions to what appears to be material, and go to the
bottom of page 47, where he having said what he is not
going to refer to, and then referring to authority he
reaches these conclusions:

    "The principle to be observed is that cases of
    manslaughter in driving motor-cars are but instances
    of a general rule applicable to all charges of
    homicide by negligence.   Simple lack of care such
    as will constitute civil liability is nx>t enough.
    For purposes of the criminal law there are degrees
    of negligence, and a very high degree of negligence
    is required to be proved before the felony is
    established.   Probably of all the epithets that can
    be applied 'reckless' most nearly covers the case.
    It is difficult to visualise a case of death caused
    by 'reckless' driving in the connotation of that
    term in ordinary speech which would not justify a
    conviction of manslaughter.   But it is probably not
    all-embracing, for 'reckless' suggests an
    indifference to risk, whereas the accused may have
    appreciated the risk and intended to avoid it and
    yet shown such a high degree of negligence in the
    means adopted to avoid the risk as would justify a
    conviction."

Now that is a passage which has subsequently found its
way into Lawrence, or largely found its way into
Lawrence, and may I ask you to go on ilow to divider card
                                                         19

                                                  MR'. PAYNE


number 3 - Caldwell - just to touch briefly, and this is
a precursor, of course, to Lawrence, to touch briefly on
what Lord Diplock said at page 967.   At "a" he says:

     "In my opinion, a person charged with an offence
     under S 1(1) of the 1971 Act is ’reckless as to
     whether or not any property would be destroyed or
     damaged’ if (1) he does ar act which in fact creates
     an obvious risk that property will be destroyed or
     damaged and (2) when he does the act he either has
     not given any thought to the possibility of there
     being any such risk or has recognised that there was
     some risk involved and has nonetheless gone on to do
     it.   That would be a proper direction to the
     jury;..

Now with that passage, which is of historical interest
only now, I go on to Lawrence, which is the next divider
card, number 4, and straight to the direction which has
subsequently been said is to be the one which is to be
used in cases of manslaughter, which is at the last page
of the Judgment which is the fifth A.4 page in the
Lawrence photocopy, in which the other Lords of Appeal
say they agree with the Judgment.   On the left hand page
he says:

     "I turn now to the mens rea..."   Now this is a
passage which Mr. Maxwell has copied out in the course of
his submission, so I enquire, sir, whether you would like
me to read it out?   The relevant passage goes from e
down to j.




        THE CORONER:    No, it is not necessary
                                                       20

                                                 MR. PAYNE


    THE CORONER:    No, it is not necessary.

     MR. PAYNE:   You will appreciate, perhaps I can just
pick out the salient points.  He talks about the ordinary
prudent individual, that is the character we have got to
have in mind, and we have got to have the ordinary prudent
individual in mind, in the circumstances and at the time
of the person whose conduct is being "called into
question".

     Sir, I go on then, without taking time on that
direction, to ask you then to look briefly at Seymour,
which is only interesting for the point that Mr. Maxwell,
I think, has already made, although he called it an
illustration, I think, that in Seymour the House of Lords
held that the Lawrence Direction should be given where the
charge is manslaughter, and that appears at page 501D, for
what it is worth - I should not, of course, say that about
the House of Lords.  It is in the course of the judgment
of Lord Fraser, where he rejects a submission that was
made by Counsel that the direction in Lawrence should not
be given in its entirety where the charge is one of
manslaughter, and he says that that submission is not well
founded. He goes on to say:

     "If any modification of the 'Lawrence direction' is
     appropriate in a case where manslaughter alone is
     charged, it would be to add a warning to the jury
     that before convicting of manslaughter they must be
     satisfied that the risk of death being caused by the
     manner of the accused's driving was very high. Such
     a direction will, of course, always be necessary
     where the common law crime and statutory offence are
     charged alternatively, but where ... the common law
     crime is charged alone, it may be unnecessary and
     inappropriate .

So what the House of Lords was saying in Seymour, as you
know, sir, is that the Lawrence direction should be given
in its entirety, possibly plus that further phrase at page
501E in the judgment of Lord Fraser.  Sir, is that
helpful?

     I go on now to Kong Cheuk Kwan which is at divider 6,
and this is just another illustration that the model
direction in Lawrence should be given in cases of
involuntary manslaughter. Sir, I say no more about it, it
is in the folder, and I now go on to the case of Gray
which has got particular application to this case, and is
a modern illustration of the way in which the Lawrence
Direction works and this is towards the back of the bundle
at divider card number 9.
                                                          21

                                                   MR. PAYNE


     Sir, you will be familiar with the facts of      thiscase
which are set out in the headnote.   It is a case where a
man died at a Police Station. The Jury Foreman, in
returning the verdict of unlawful killing, added      the
words, "... as a result of the degree of care given to him
after he was overpowered". There was a mix up about
whether those words were said or not because they were not
recorded. There was an application for a Judicial Review
and the Divisional Court,,having heard the case,. -
                                                  .the
course of the judgment of Lord Justice Watkins gave
directions which are of general application and which are
quite helpful in this case, so I turn to those directions
which are at the sixth page of  the A4 copying - I am sorry
that the numbering has not come out. The reference for
the note is at page 467G-477B, and the paragraph G begins:

     "Other criticisms have also been voiced

and I read this paragraph and then a little way down the
next page:

     "... have also been voiced as to this all important
     direction but I have, I think, said enough to
     indicate that the jury were gravely misdirected and
     cannot have been otherwise than confused by what they
     were told about this branch of the law and, of
     course, by what they had read from the notes which
     were handed n to them."

Now, here come the directions which he frames:

     "This by itself must it seems to me inevitably cause
     the jury's verdict to be quashed. What the jury
     should have been told was that when considering
     manslaughter by neglect they would have to be
     satisfied upon the evidence of these four ingredients
     of the offence."

I just dwell for a moment, "... satisfied upon the
evidence of these four ingredients ...", because this is
something which is very substantially echoed by Mr.
Justice Turner in his Zeebrugge directions. The first
ingredient:

     "(1) a Police Officer had the duty of regarding the
     health and welfare of Mikkelsen. (2) He failed to do
     what in the circumstances he ought to have done for
     the health and welfare of Mikkelsen. (3) That his
     failure was a substantial cause of Mikkelsen's
     death.(4) That in failing to act for the benefit of
     Mikkelsen's health and welfare he acted recklessly.
     It should be explained that to act recklessly means
     that there was an obvious and serious risk to the
     health and welfare of Mikkelsen to which that police
                                                   MR. PAYNE


      officer having regard to his duty was indifferent or,
      recognising that risk to be present, he deliberately
      chose to run the risk by doing nothing about it. It
      should be emphasised, however, that a failure to
      appreciate that there was such a risk would not by
      itself be sufficient to amount to recklessness.

       Further, the jury should have been directed that
      they could* return a verdict .of unlawful killing .only
      if they could attribute those ingredients to a single
      Police officer whom they should on no account name or
      otherwise identify.   In this context the jury should
      consider the position of each officer in turn
      following Mikkelsen's arrest, as to his duty, if any,
      to care for Mikkelsen's health and welfare, and the
      opportunity given to him, having regard to the length
      of time he was with Mikkelsen and other relevant
      circumstances, to discharge it."

I think really I accept that there could be added to the
definition of the person who the Jury must have under
consideration, which is there being identified as the
Police Officer, I think based on Lawrence one could add an
ordinary prudent individual in the position, at the time,
in the circumstances of that Police Officer.

     So that is Gray and I am happy to say that unless
there is any other authority particularly that you would
like me to refer to in the course of this brief review
leading up to the digest of these authorities in the
Spooner and Stanley cases that is all I am going to say
about it, and I go back to my written opening.

     Sir, I am on page 2 and the topics I am dealing with
are what has to be proved for these verdicts. We have
dealt with misadventure; we have dealt with unlawful
killing, and we come to (iii):

     For an open verdict what has to be proved is either
that misadventure has not been proved on the balance of
probabilities, or that unlawful killing has not been
proved beyond reasonable doubt, so that if the evidence
falls short of the standard of proof in those cases then
one gets to the stage of open verdict.

      THE CORONER:   You have lost me.   Which page are we
on?

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I am on page 2, which I hope is
numbered at the top, and about one third of the way down.

      THE CORONER:   Yes, I have got it, (iii).
                                                    MR. PAYNE


     MR. PAYNE:   For an open verdict either misadventure
has not been proved on the balance of probabilities, or
unlawful killing has not been proved beyond reasonable
doubt. Sir, that is a point I have made already and it
does not help to repeat it, and there is an extract from
Jarvis but I think it is self explanatory so it is not
very helpful to spend any more time on it.

     I n o w go o n ,to what really is the main burden of this
submission to you, having looked at the authorities and
the background and I hope set out what a r e .the relevant
criteria. What follows in the subsequent passages amounts
to a submission to you that there is no case to answer on
unlawful killing against anyone, and accordingly that that
verdict ought not to be left to the Jury.

     THE CORONER:   I think that is an appropriate time to
pause for quarter of an hour for a cup of coffee, and then
we will get onto that.

                     (Short Adjournment)

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I had got to the stage, half-way
down page 2, to the paragraph which is headed number 5,
"Questions for the Jury". Actually, as a matter of
accuracy I would be grateful if the word "Jury” could be
changed to "Court". Sir, just before the adjournment I
mentioned that this paragraph and the next paragraphs, 6
and 7, are all, taken together, a submission of no case to
answer on unlawful killing, and that is to say no case
against anyone, including the Police, and accordingly that
the appropriate direction at this stage to be given to the
Jury is that the Jury should not consider returning such a
verdict.

     In order to address this it is necessary to see what
the criteria are for such a submission and our respectful
submission is that they are to be found in the case of the
Queen and Galbraith which is reported in the Criminal
Appeal Reports and the Weekly Law Reports.  I hope you
have a copy?

     THE CORONER:     I have.

     MR. PAYNE:     Do you have it in the Weekly Law
Reports?

     THE CORONER:   In fact, you supplied it. I think it
must the the Weekly Law Reports, July 10th, 1981, Court of
Appeal.

     MR. PAYNE:   Thank you very much.  Now, this is a
decision of the Court of Appeal in which the judgment was
given by the Lord Chief Justice.  It is the judgment of
                                                  MR. PAYNE


the Court, the Court consisting of the Lord Chief Justice
and Mr. Justice Pain and Mr. Justice Stuart-Smith. This
is the authority which is cited in Archbold as being the
authority in which the previous decisions are wrapped up,
and so we take it that this does lay down the guidelines
upon which such a submission should be made, and the
guidelines appear at page 1042B.  I don't think the facts
of the case are of great assistance, but the Lord Chief
Justice addresses the question here at B,as follows:

     "How then should the judge approach a submission of
     'no case'?  (1) If there is no evidence that the
     crime alleged has been committed by the defendant,
     there is no difficulty. The judge will of course
     stop the case.  (2) The difficulty arises where there
     is some evidence but it is of a tenuous character,
     for example because of inherent weakness or vagueness
     or because it is inconsistent with other evidence.
     (a) Where the judge comes to the conclusion that the
     prosecution evidence, taken at its highest, is such
     that a jury properly directed could not properly
     convict upon it, it is his duty, upon a submission
     being made, to stop the case,  (b) Where however the
     prosecution case is such that its strength or
     weakness depends on the view to be taken of a
     witness's reliability, or other matters which are
     generally speaking within the province of the jury
     and where on one possible view of the facts there is
     evidence upon which a jury could properly       come to the
     conclusion that the defendant   is guilty, then the
     judge should allow the matter   to be tried     by the
     jury.  It follows that we think the second of the two
     schools of thought is to be preferred.

     There will of course, as always in this branch of the
     law, be borderline cases. They can safely be left to
     the discretion of the judge."

With those guidelines in mind we have attempted to address
the question of the possibility of an unlawful killing
verdict being returned, and we have addressed it in the
context of the case as a whole and then particularly in
the context, of course, of the Police. . That exercise is
certainly not made any easier by the fact that because of
the nature of this jurisdiction there is no indictment and
no pleadings and no charge, so that in a sense one has to
identify one's own charge in order   to say that there is no
case to answer on it. Doing that,    in order to      get into
that, our submission is that the starting point of the
case has to be causation. One has to look to see what
aspects of the case are capable of being causative and
then under that umbrella one can then start to approach
the question of whether any individual could be found to
                                                          25

                                                  MR. PAYNE


be guilty of unlawful killing within the definition set
out in the authorities that I referred to earlier on.

     Approaching it in that way we submit that the first
question for the Court is to set out a list of things
which are capable of being causative and then, and this
will be, we submit, an exercise for the Coroner to address
to the Jury, a list of things which are capable of being
causative, with the direction that the Jury should decide
on the balance of probabilities which out of those things
in fact were a direct cause, and then having thus narrowed
the field the Court then goes on to enquire under such
causes into whether the criteria are met for unlawful
killing. We hope we have grasped the nettle firmly there
by addressing it in that way. That certainly seems to be
appropriate.

     In that context then, at page 4 in these submissions,
we have set out a list of the things which we suggest are
capable of being causes. We don't say that this list is
exhaustive but these are things which are capable of being
causes which come to mind, and in determining whether each
of these is in fact capable of being causes, we suggest
that it would be appropriate for the Court, that is first
the Coroner and subsequently if it goes to the Jury, the
Jury, to apply the "but for'' test to each of these things,
and to see how it works, and also to ask themselves in
relation to each of these suggested causes whether it
amounts to a direct cause under the "how" test.

     Now, in looking at this list of things which are
capable of being causes we are mindful, sir, of the Rule
40 which prohibits addresses to the Coroner on questions
of fact, and we are also mindful of your indication
yesterday that you would not allow reference to the
schedules, which are listed in this list of items which
are capable of being causes. I may say, all that the
schedules do is to give a list of the witnesses and a
reference to the day and the page and the part of their
evidence where the relevant piece of evidence can be
found. That is all the schedules consist of, there is no
argument in them but merely a reference to the witness, so
all one then does is go to the evidence to find out how it
bears upon the suggested cause, but I bear in mind your
indication given yesterday and it won't be troublesome
until one comes to deal directly with the question of the
Police, and then I will address further argument to you.

    THE CORONER:    Yes.




                            MR. PAYNE:   I now intend
                                                               26

                                                         MR. PAYNE


I now intend running down this list of things which, in my
submission, are capable of being causes and therefore
appropriate to be left to the Jury whether they in fact were
causes applying in each case the 'but for' test.

1.     Fans arriving 'late' in unprecedented numbers.

Late is in inverted commas because the use of the word 'late'
sounds pejorative but it is not intended to be because there
cannot be a criticism of people arriving at a ground at a
particular time before the kick-off. It is a statement of
fact that fans in unprecedented numbers did arrive shortly
before the kick-off. It is not blaming anybody for that but
it is merely stating as a fact that it occurred and that
fact, in our submission, is capable of being a cause of the
disaster. We adopt here respectfully what is reported
recently to have been said by Lord Justice Taylor in the
extract from the Times newspaper which, sir, you were handed
at one point during the Inquest when Lord Justice Taylor was
having given an interview to the Times newspaper in which he
particularly referred, using the word 'late', to the late
arrival of large numbers of fans as being a how of the
disaster. Of course, it does not matter what he said but we
adopt that point as certainly being relevant and capable of
being a cause.
2.     Fans drinking exceptional amounts of   alcohol.

I cannot address you on the facts.   The evidence is there and
I say no more about that.
3.     Fans refusing to co-operatewith Police or Stewards.

We refer to the evidence and may I say if I were permitted to
refer to these schedules. Schedule 1 has a list of 27
witnesses. Schedule 2 has a list of 25 witnesses. Schedule
3 has 25 witnesses.
4.     Fans pushing and shoving.

In each case I have omitted to apply the 'but for' test and
so I go back to do that. Apply ’but for' fans arriving
'late' in unprecedented numbers the disaster would not have
occurred. We submit that the test works. If that had not
happened then the disaster would not have happened. Item 2,
fans drinking exceptional amounts of alcohol, we submit that
if you apply the 'but for' test on the balance of
probabilities that works as well, but for that the disaster
would not have happened. Item 3, ferns refusing to co-operate
with Police or Stewards, but for that the disaster would not
have happened and we sure referring there both to the refusal
to co-operate both outside the turnstiles and inside when the
signals were being given. I recognise there that I am
                                                               27

                                                       MR. PAYNE

drifting into fact which I am not   allowed to do. Fans
pushing and shoving, but for fans   pushing and shoving both
outside and inside the ground the   disaster would not have
occurred. There are 37 witnesses    in that schedule.

5.    Fans arriving without tickets.

A question mark about that when one applies the 'but for'
test. We put that forward as something which is capable of
being a cause but it is probably not as strong as the ones
that have gone before it.
6.    Club providing inadequate information on tickets.

Apply the 'but for' test and that is probably not a strong
causative item.

7.     Club failing to provide adequate signposting outside
       and inside.

Apply the 'but for' test and one can see that that could be a
cause. I am not going to give the particular numbers but
each one of these schedules has got a significant number of
witnesses.

8.     Club failing to provide adequate turnstile approaches
       and adequate numbers of turnstiles.

It may be unfair to attribute this to the Club because this
is a matter of the historical development of the site in a
built up urban area and on that point we adopt again the
recent comments by Lord Justice Taylor as our own submission,
namely that this is how, or one of the hows that the disaster
occurred, because of the location of the stadium and but for
that Lord Justice Taylor seems to think that that is a
significant how the disaster occurred. That is not anybody's
fault but it is a cause.

9.     Club, Officer Working Party, City Council or Engineers
       failing to work out and certify capacity of pens.

Now but for that failure our submission is that the disaster
would not have occurred, if there had been a certified
capacity for each pen, because it follows.

10.    Club, Officer Working Party, City Council or Engineer
       failing to provide system to count or control numbers.

I say without going into the facts that this is something
that was explored in evidence, that once you have got a
certified capacity of individual pens then you must have a
system to count and control the numbers and thereby to keep
those in charge aware of what the numbers are and had there
                                                      MR. PAYNE


been such a system then the disaster would not have occurred.
But for the absence of cm updated certificate and but for the
absence of a system of counting and controlling numbers in
the new pens the disaster would not have occurred. Those
omissions are capable of being causes.

12.   Fans causing need for Police to open Gate C.

This is capable of being put in various ways. The way it is
put here is fans causing need for Police to open Gate C. It
could equally be put, Police opening Gate C, depending on how
one looks at the circumstances and the facts but the opening
of Gate C is capable of being a cause of the disaster. What,
of course, caused the need to open Gate C in the first place
is also a direct cause of the disaster and so that is another
way of putting it but it is certainly a cause.

13.    Police leaving tunnel doors open and/or failing to
       block the tunnel.

That is capable of being a cause.

14.   Police being slow to recognise overcrowding.

That is capable of being a cause. That one is doubtful.    I
have said several are doubtful.   It may be that that came too
late and by the time that one has to address the question of
recognition of overcrowding it would not have made any
difference.  It may be that that is not a cause but it
certainly requires consideration.

15.   Club and Engineer failing to ensure that barrier 124A
      was of adequate strength.

That is capable of being a cause. That relates to the
evidence of Dr. Nicholson and the tests that were performed
and the examination, you will remember, of the adequacy or
otherwise of the testing and whether it conformed with the
guidance in the Green Guide. If there are two ways of
interpreting the Green Guide then the one which is most in
favour of safety ought to be adopted which it was not. So
that is capable of being a cause.

16.   Club, Officer Working Party and Engineer removing
      barrier 144.

That is capable of being a cause.

17.   Club, Officer Working Party and Engineer   failing to
      provide a safe means of escape.

One could perhaps put Fire Service in there as well and that
clearly is capable of being a cause. Apply the 'but for*
                                                              29

                                                       MR- PAYNE


test to that and it certainly works. Apply the 'but for*
test to all the foregoing and our submission is that they all
work. But for any of these matters the disaster would not
have occurred.

18.    Fear of Stewards to try to impede crowd through
       Gate- C»

I think it is arguable. That is not one of the stronger
causes. It is a factor which has to be noticed but probably
that does not qualify as a cause.

I am reminded that I have missed 11 on the way down.

11.    Club, Police, Officer Working Party and Engineer
       adopting system of 'finding your own level'.

That is capable of being a cause.

This list then which I have now run down is a digest of four
months of work of the Inquest and just because it is taken
shortly we hope it is not treated lightly because each of
these items with the slight reservation which I have
introduced in the case of a few of them, each is capable o£
being a cause. We are not allowed to address arguments to
you and it      will be for theJury to decide whether any ofthem
in fact is       a causebut oursubmission is that      it is not
difficult to see that a significant number of these items are
likely to attract the interest of the Jury as in fact being
causes. One remembers then - and I hope this is not a
comment on fact as it is not really - that one remembers the
evidence of Dr. Nicholson who at one point, I think when he
was being examined by Mrs. McBrien, said that it is when one
has a whole succession of accidents which come together on an
occasion like this that one has the disaster. Exactly right
we would submit and on analysis of these causes without which
the disaster would not have happened it can be seen that tKat
is how the disaster occurred.

In fact if one runs down this list again, and I am not going
to be tedious about it but I invite you to consider it, sir,
if one runs down the list again and applies the 'but for' and
takes out most of these items then the disaster would not
have occurred. For example, if one takes out No. 1, ferns
eurriving 'late* in unprecedented numbers, emd say that that
did not happen, let us look at it another way emd say that
they had arrived as they did in 1988, for example, no
disaster. That makes Item No. 1 a direct cause emd one cem
apply that test to each of these items of causation emd if
one takes it out then the disaster will not happen. That is
another way in fact of examining whether these are causes
although I agree I am trespassing here into argument emd so I
stop at that point.
                                                           30

                                                     MR. PAYNE



Having done that exercise, the purpose of which is to
concentrate one's mind if possible on what     questions haveto
be answered by the Jury, and starting then     from the point of
causation, I then go on page two of these written submissions
to suggest some tests which can be applied to each of these
causes to see whether unlawful killing will work for any of
them. My suggestion here is that the test      should be applied
to each of the causes and not picking out any one in
particular but to each of the ones that one does in fact find
was a cause. The suggested tests axe drawn from the
authorities which we looked at.

First of all, beyond reasonable doubt at the time and in the
particular circumstances was there a serious risk of injury,
which risk would be obvious to an ordinary prudent individual
in the position of the person concerned, and one can apply
that to any one of the causes to see whether such a risk
would be obvious to the person concerned, to an ordinary
prudent individual in the position of the person concerned.
Secondly, if the answer to that is yes, then you have to
asked, beyond reasonable doubt, was that individual
indifferent to the risk? emd thirdly, if yes, beyond
reasonable doubt was the act or omission of that individual a
substantial cause of the disaster.  If you get a yes to all
those questions then you will get a verdict of unlawful
killing.

If you get a yes to emy of them on the balemce of
probabilities you will get em open verdict because unlawful
killing will not have been proved emd if you get no to emy of
them then the verdict will be accidental death or open
verdict; accident being that some deliberate humem act has
unexpectedly taken a turn which leads to death. Finally then
one asks that question which I have put down there just at
the beginning of page three, on the balemce of probabilities
was there em expected turn of events which did lead to the
disaster? If the emswer to that is yes, then the verdict is
accident.

The next two paragraphs, 6 emd 7, are particular topics which
have to be addressed which we submit are very importemt not
to lose sight of in addressing each of the causes emd
applying the unlawful killing test to each cause. They seem
to be essential to what the Jury have to consider.  Item 6 is
relevant time and circumstances emd it is very important not
to lose sight when addressing each cause of that aspect emd
we submit that appropriate directions under that head include
these four points. Firstly, as to whether hindsight should
be excluded emd one has to constemtly remind oneself of that.
Secondly, that the emergency outside the turnstile - and this
is em argument restricted to the interests of the Police -
should be taken into account in deciding whether emyone was
                                                           31
                                                     MR. PAYNE


at fault as a result of trying to deal with it. So that is a
context case submission, that one cannot judge actions in
relation to inside the ground without bearing in the
forefront of one's mind that what was taking place inside the
ground was immediately following - in fact it was concurrent
with an emergency which was being dealt with outside the
ground - and so that time and circumstances have got to be
kept firmly in mind.




                                       /(c).
                                                          32


                                       MR. PAYNE



       (c) on the question of whether anyone were in­
different, relevant circumstances include that there was
a potential disaster outside the turnstiles which occupied
the attention of the Police, and our submission about that
speaks for itself. Perhaps I might just amplify it for a
moment.
       One must not lose sight of the fact that although
everyone knows now and the whole Inquest has concentrated
of course on the disaster which took place in the pens,
to those involved at the time, their minds as is quite
plain on the evidence which I have touched briefly upon,
their minds were concentrated on what undoubtedly was
perceived to be a potential disaster and death outside
the ground, so that one has to constantly remind oneself
of the circumstances that the people were actually
dealing with at tHe time, excluding the hindsight of what
one knows happened, and lastly that the time for decisions
was very short? so if one in fact is considering the
question of unlawful killing during the course of the
operation at the ground, then one is looking at the space
of not more than ten minutes within which the crime, if
that is the case, was committed, and one must not lose
sight of the circumstances which existed at the time as
well as the brevity of time available for decision.

      Those are our submissions as to appropriate
directions under "RELEVANT TIME AND CIRCUMSTANCES".

      Turning to the question of "WHAT IS OBVIOUS?"
our submission is that there are four particular matters
which must be kept in mind in dealing with the word
"obvious" and the directions include first of all that
hindsight should be excluded again? secondly that obvious
means obvious in the circumstances and at the time to a
particular and I add to the written words a particular
relevant individual, relevant meaning a person, an
ordinary prudent individual in the position of the person
whose conduct is being criticised, so that is what one
has to address oneself to. That is to say when asking:
"What is the evidence about obvious?" which I am going
to spend some time on in a moment, it is not helpful to
ask what was obvious, for example, to people in the pen
because that misses the point of what one is addressing
here, i.e. whether the potential disaster were obvious
to the ordinary prudent individual in the position of
the person whose conduct is called into question, so that
is what one must look at, the position and his situation.

      One remembers early on in the case Mr. King was
asking the question of a number of witnesses who were
in the pen:  "Suppose someone had tapped you on the
shoulder and said a lot more people are about to come
in" or words to that effect "what would you have said?"
                                                                 33


                                             MR. PAYNE



and the person in the pen answered:  "Well I would have
been unhappy about it" and at one point since that became
a repetitive question I wanted to embark on what in our
submission is a much more relevant and realistic question,
which is to put into the mind of the individual not ;just
his circumstances at the time in the pen but to put into
his mind the circumstances which were in fact being
dealt with by the person whose conduct is called into
question and here one means the people in the Police Box.

      Then one has to put into the person who is being
used as a test bed, one has to put into his mind that you
are dealing with a major crisis in which people sJ - ^ e s
are threatened outside the ground and that one s whole
concentration is upon the need to relieve that threatcmd
that the only way one can do it is by breaking all
rules which havebe e n laid over several years many years
in the development of the Operational Order and the plan
for policing of the ground, one has to ^reJk
and one has a very short time in which to do it and one
has to make that decision and in doing so o n e        thinks that
one has then relieved the threat to people s lives outside
the turnstiles, so one has to build into the q“est*?*\ hir- n-
those points before one can then start a d d r e s s i n g whether it
is obvious. Therefore it is unhelpful and not relevant
to the question of whether it was obvious to the person
whose conduct is called into question to ask only part
of the question of a person who is only involved in part
of it in the pen, so that is our submission about that.

      The third point under what is obvious, which we
submit is relevant, is that the evidence of fans, bal1-boys
and B.B.C. staff is relevant to whether the crushing was
in fact obvious-to the people whose conduct is called
into question, fans meaning fans outside Pens 3 and 4,
so you will have in mind the witnesses and I can t *e*er
to the facts, but there is a big body of evidence of fans
who were outside those pens so that that is relevant
because they are looking into the pens from the outside,
likewise the ball-boys, likewise B.B.C. commentators, so
that their viewpoint as to what in fact was obvious is
relevant and appropriate to be taken into account and
there is a body of evidence on that point.
       The fourth point on what is obvious is that there
 is no evidence before the Court - and I am now approaching
 the nub of the no case submission - there is no evidence
 before the Court in our submission that the risk of
 crushing was obvious to anyone in authority, i.e. in
 the position of the people whose conduct is called into
 question, before it was too late, and most of the
 evidence is to the contrary.
                                                           34


                                       MR. PAYNE



      Now this of course is at the centre of the case
and it is at this point that our submission is that
in order to determine whether there is a case to answer
it is necessary to look at the evidence and I submit
it is appropriate that I should be permitted to refer
to one of the schedules restricted to this question of
whether there is evidence that it was obvious to a person
in question that there was a serious risk of injury and
the question of whether that individual-were indifferent
to the serious risk, so unless I am stopped or you
indicate that it is improper for me to do so, I intend
to refer to Schedule 17. I have not at the moment put
any of the schedules in. perhaps I can extract it from
this bundle and distribute copies of Schedule 17.

      THE CORONER: I may say I have not seen it, it
is very difficult to comment on it, but I do accept that
you have to make some reference to the facts otherwise
you can't develop your argument.

      MR. PAYNE: May I ask you sir to add to this
schedule a further in manuscript, please, some further
names which ought to have appeared but don't, with
the reference to the places where their evidence appeared.

      The names are: Creaser, Day 13, 62C — 63D;
Sykes, Day 14, 7E-F; Horsfield, Day 14, 92E;
Purdy, Day 14, 43D - 44C; Marshall, Day 29, 41G - 42E.

       I am going to ask you to look briefly at the
evidence just to remind oneself certainly unless you
indicate sir that you have all this evidence firmly
in mind, there are 17 witnesses here who deal with this
topic, and in order to make it clear what I am doing may
I just read out the last paragraph I have got on this
written submission under 7B. What this is leading to
is this:
      "The evidence that the risk of overcrowding
      was 1obvious1 is tenuous ...."

I would submit absent. If it can be found then it is
tenuous but our submission is that it is missing.

      ".... and is inconsistent with most of the
      evidence ...."
which is collected here in Schedule 17. Our submission
therefore is that the jury could not properly find
•unlawful killing' because the obvious and indifference
ingredients are missing from the evidence and accordingly
that verdict should be excluded from the jury's
consideration.
                                                             35

                                           MR. PAYNE



      Sir, I don't know whether you have the transcripts
to hand?
      THE CORONER:     I have not got them with me, no.

      MR. PAYNE:     Perhaps I can summarise the effect of
this evidence.
      MR. KING: Sir, could you perhaps give a little
guidance.  I don't object to my learned friend seeking
to do this from his point of view, but if it is to be
the procedure to be adopted I am bound to give notice,
and I do, that I have a number of schedules under various
headings which I would regard are important to the
assessment of risk and I would want to draw your attention
to them and I would go through each of the witnesses
which have been identified and identify their evidence.
That will take a long time sir.




                      THE CORONER:   I don't want
                                                       36

                                                MR. PAYNE


     THE CORONER:    I do not want to do that and I do not
think that would be appropriate and that is the one thing
I want to avoid, because I think it is a breach of
rule 40.    I think the way to do it is not to refer
specifically to the evidence in the transcripts because
that is, in a sense, my task when it comes to the
summing-up.    I am not saying I will do it in your form,
or yours, or anybody else's, I will do it my way, but I
think it probably is right if you look at
R. .v. Galbraith, the case which you referred me to, if
you were to say to me that taken at its highest, and ^
give, if you like, one "for instance" at its highest,   I
submit X, Y, Z," or whatever it might be, and in that way
I think you would be able to express your submission with
a little bit of meat, but without...

     MR. PAYNE: May I try to do it, and I understand the
point about not referring to evidence...

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Catchpole just wants to say
something.
     MR. CATCHPOLE: To be of some assistance to my
learned friend, Mr. Payne.   I cannot actually see the
vice of my learned friend referring you to the basis on
which he makes his submission.   I do not think it would
be appropriate for him to go through it in detail, but
actually saying, "This is the evidence on which I base
this submission.   I am not going to take you through it
but if you choose to look at it when you are going
through your mind, all well and good, just to help you
when you are formulating, whether you agree with the
submission that is being made in your overall review of
the evidence."
     The vice in going through the evidence as listed is
that it then becomes possibly an argument as to what
evidence is to be preferred, but it must be of some
assistance to you to know at least the passages which are
in the mind of Counsel, otherwise you are left, sir,
trying to divine the basis on which the submission is
made without - and maybe unnecessarily lengthening the
task you have - there may well be passages that when you
go through the evidence in toto, as you may already have
done, that makes any of these submissions wholly
inappropriate, but as long as you know the basis on which
the barristers are making their submissions, it can only
be of assistance to you.

     I must say in reference to my own position I had
intended - I must say not in this sort of detail - but
there are, for example, questions which may be raised as
to whether the club could have the appropriate mens rea
for this offence.   I would certainly intend to say in
                                                      37

                                                MR. PAYNE


respect of certain matters that there is no evidence that
X, or that this is unchallenged evidence, but not to go
through the evidence as such, though state a proposition,
and then leave it up to you, sir, to see whether you
agree with it, but not actually enter into any debate and
to give such references that may be helpful to you in
finding how one arrives at that proposition.

     MR. KING: Sir, I don't mind what is adopted, the
procedures, just so that I know.   If I might submit,
sir, what would be proper would be for any of us to
identify what we regarded as a relevant issue, and a
relevant fact which the Jury would have to conclude
existed in order to be lawful for them to return certain
verdicts.   To submit for those who wished that there is
no evidence on that fact, if they wish to submit that,
and for those of us who say to the contrary, to say there
is evidence of that and to identify the names of the
witnesses who we would say gave rise to that fact.

     If we can go that far I can simply, orally, give the
heading of the issue and give the list of the witnesses,
without...

     THE CORONER:   In other words, what you are saying
is you certainly do not object to the schedule because
that does not do anything other than list the names and
with an indicator where Mr. Payne feels the matter is
dealt with.   I must say that having seen the schedule
that is my inclination, that the schedule is drawn, I
could not see how I can really object to that.

     MR. KING:   For example, sir, an issue of fact in
the first instance would be whether the pens had a lot of
people in them, just as broadly as that for the moment.
If it were said that there is no evidence there were a
lot of people in it, certainly at a given time I am in a
position and vould, when I address you, just list the
witnesses who go to that issue and that would be a matter
for you, sir, on the submission of no case.   To that
extent I would submit we have to take a middle line.

     THE CORONER:   I think we have got to be very
careful because it is a difficult problem.   I can see
the dilemma for everybody, including myself, in the rule.
The rule - I don't know why it is there, presumably there
is a reason, but it does not make life any easier.

     MR. PAYNE: On the particular point mentioned by
Mr. King I would not have dreamt of addressing you on the
question of how many people were in the pens at a
particular time.   That is clearly a question of fact.
I am confining my submissions - I have accepted your
ruling of yesterday about not putting in the other
                                                       38

                                                MR. PAYNE


schedules and not referring to them, but this question of
what is obvious, and in particular what is the evidence
as to what was obvious and whether anyone were
indifferent, that is at the centre of the case.   It is
the basis on which the Zeebrugge decision was made and
our submission is that it is relevant to at least have in
mind the passages of evidence where the witnesses deal
with it.
     May I’ then proceed on this basis, that this schedule
which I have put in identifies the places where we have
recorded through the evidence that relevant witnesses
have particularly had their mind directed to this
question of what was obvious and these are the passages
where they deal with it.    Now you will see that the
witnesses concerned come from - if one runs one's eye
down the list - the club, the Police, the Fire Service,
the engineer and the local authority.    All those
witnesses at these places recorded have had their minds
particularly directed to the question of whether before
the disaster they ever expected that overcrowding of this
nature could occur in pens 3 and 4, and whether it were
obvious to them at any time, that there was a risk that
such overcrowding would take place.

     There are two stages at which one can look at it.
First of all, historically, as to which the Fire Service,
the club, the engineer and the Police in the planning
stage all gave evidence.    You will remember the body of
evidence.   They were all asked questions along the same
lines and the united body of evidence was to the effect
that they all thought that the system of "find your own
level" was safe.    They did not expect that any such
disaster could occur in any circumstances.    They thoucht
that the pens could safely be evacuated in an emergency.
It was not obvious to them that a disaster of this nature
could happen.    Now they are absolutely unanimous about
that, so that in the planning and contemplation stage, in
my submission that completely rules out any question of a
verdict of unlawful killing because there is no evidence
that it was obvious to anyone at any stage of the
planning that such a thing could take place.    That is
the historical perspective.

     Now if that is right, then on the question of
unlawful killing one comes down only to consideration of
the operation itself and then one is looking at the space
of, at the most, half an hour, and probably about ten
minutes.   One is asking the question whether beyond
reasonable doubt any individual is proved to have been
indifferent to an obvious risk of injury within that very
short time, in the circumstances, at the time, dealing
with the crisis as he was.
                                                       39

                                                 MR. PAYNE


      That, in my submission, is probably the correct
analysis.    Therefore, the evidence as to what was
obvious deals with (a) the historical perspective, ruling
out "obvious";   and (b) the crisis at the time, also from
the point of view of all those involved ruling out
"obvious", and certainly ruling out "indifference".
That is what this evidence before you on schedule 17
does.

     Then one asks the question: where is the evidence
to prove beyond reasonable doubt, so that the Jury can
return the verdict in fact that some individual was
indifferent to an obvious risk, when this whole body of
evidence is to the contrary and there is nothing in
support of the potential verdict?   That is our
submission.

     Our submission is that it is a very strong case,
that there is no evidence upon which the Jury could
properly return a verdict of unlawful killing.   Sir,
that is the purpose of this schedule and I hope that is
helpful.

     What we intend to do is to go on to give an
illustration by reference to the Spooner and Stanley
cases of how this has recently been seen to work in
practice.   I do not know whether you would treat the
rulings of Mr. Justice Turner in those cases as
authorities, but we would submit that they are
authorities and at the very least they do provide strong
guidance as to how this court should approach the
situation if the situation is comparable and if the
considerations are seen to be comparable.   Our
submission is that they are and it provides most
persuasive guidance as to the course which should be
taken here.

     Sir, I intend now to refer to those reports.   There
are three reports altogether.    There is the report of
the Divisional Court decision, which came part way
through the Inquest, and then there are two parts of the
report of the decision of Mr. Justice Turner, first where
he gave his decision in the absence of the Jury,
following argument, and secondly, the direction which he
gave to the Jury to dismiss the case.

     I start by asking you to look at the report of the
Divisional Court case which is called the Queen against
Spooner, 1989, 88 Criminal Appeal Reports, and I am going
to ask you to look at page 13.   This is at the front of
the folder.   This is the Zeebrugge case, of course.    I
only ask you to look at the Criminal Appeal report, just
to remind oneself of the circumstances in which that case
was proceeding and they are quite usefully set out at
                                                         40

                                                   MR. PAYNE


page 13 in the report, which is about the fourth page of
the A.4 photocopies.   Perhaps I might be permitted to
read that out.   Starting at the top of the page:

     The report then goes into very considerable
     detail.

This is part of the Judgment which was being given by
Lord Justice Bingham and he is referring to the Sheen
Report of the Inquiry which had previously taken place,
so that the history of the case as is known, is not
dissimilar from what happened here:

     "The report then goes into very considerable detail
     and in the course of the present hearing three
     points are relied on as being particularly relevant.
     First, it is pointed out that the company and its
     representatives failed to give serious consideration
     to a proposal that lights should be fitted on the
     bridge of the vessel which would inform the Master
     whether the bow doors and, for that matter, the
     stern doors were closed or not.   Such a warning
     system, if duly heeded by the Master, would have
     prevented this disaster.   This was a suggestion
     which was made but seems unhappily to have been the
     subject of facetious comment. 1

May I just pause there and say that in considering
whether this case in fact provides any useful guidance as
to what ought to happen here in the Hillsborough case,
our submission is that it is not fanciful to say there is
an element of analogy between the warning light and
closing the tunnel doors and the analogy is that in each
case if it had been done it would have prevented the
disaster.   The difference is that in Zeebrugge the
warning system had actually been suggested and had been
drawn to the attention of the management and had been the
subject of fecetious comment, whereas as we know here,
although there is some evidence - it is contradictory and
ephemeral - but there is some evidence about closing the
door, the evidence is that it was never drawn to the
attention of the management.   It was done on the
individual initiative of a few Police Officers who gave
contradictory evidence about it.   Sir, you have that
point in mind, and the difference and the similarity
between the two cases.




      In order to make
                                                        41

                                                 MR. PAYNE


     In order to make Zeebrugge the same as Hillsborough,
it would be necessary that the warning system, although it
had been thought of, had never been mentioned to the
management, but actually in Zeebrugge it was mentioned to
management. Then he goes on:

    "Secondly, attention is drawn to the failure of the
    company and its representatives to report and collate
    information relating to previous incidents, when
    vessels had sailed with their doors open. It appears
    that there were five or six such incidents between
    October 1983 and February 1987. Had knowledge of
    these repeated incidents been appreciated it should
    have alerted the officers of the company to the risk
    of disaster, but it appears that there was no person
    within the company who ever knew of all the
    incidents."

     Now, just considering whether Zeebrugge is helpful to
Hillsborough, what one has got in Zeebrugge is previous
incidents, five or six of them over the four year period
prior to the disaster, when apparently identical
circumstances had in fact occurred.  Compare that with
Hillsborough, where on all sides it is agreed that this
was an unprecedented event which has certainly happened,
or anything like it, before, never been in contemplation,
whereas in Zeebrugge apparently the same thing had, in
fact, happened before.

     Then the report goes on:

     "Thirdly, attention is drawn to the lack of any
     proper system within the company to ensure that the
     vessels were operated in accordance with the highest
     standards of safety.  It is rightly urged upon us
     that where the result of an unsafe system is liable
     to be so grave, the onus on a company to ensure safe
     operation is correspondingly high.

     At the very end of his report, Sheen J. answered the
     questions posed for the investigation by the
     Secretary of State. Question 3 was in these terms:
     'Was the capsize of the 'Herald of Free Enterprise'
     caused or contributed to by the fault of any person
     or persons and, if so, whom and in what respect?'
     The answer given to that question was:  'Yes, by the
     faults of the following', and three individuals are
     listed."

Then this is the fourth category of person who was at
fault, and he says:

     "Then: '4. Townsend Car Ferries Limited at all
     levels from the Board of Directors through the
                                                   MR. PAYNE


     managers of the Marine Department down to the Junior
     Superintendents [were at fault]. As to the respects
     in which each of the above-named was guilty of
     causative fault, see Report.'"

So that is the finding of the Tribunal of Inquiry,
causative fault against three directors and the company,
says Tribunal of Inquiry. That is the only purpose for
which I refer to Spooner, just to give one a f k v o u c of
the background of the case.

     Now I come on to the criminal proceedings, and two
parts of the decision of Mr. Justice Turner which in my
submission are helpful. This case is called the Queen
against Stanley and Others. Sir, I hope you have a
transcript of the report and I hope I will be forgiven for
reading out quite a large wadge of these reports because
in my submission it is self evident that they are helpful
in deciding what is the appropriate thing here. The first
wadge appears at page 14G of the transcript of Day 20:

     "Out of respect to the judgment of the Court of
     Appeal in Seymour, and the persuasive effect of the
     opinion of the Privy Council in Kong Cheuk Kwat, it
     is my judgment that the concept of gross negligence
     in cases of manslaughter is no longer apposite.   I
     think I should rephrase that. That the use of the
     words 'gross negligence' in cases of manslaughter is
     no longer apposite.  I am minded therefore not to
     leave the jury with gross negligence as an
     alternative basis for their verdict in this case.

     This leaves for present consideration the application
     of the first limb in the Caldwell/Lawrence direction,
     that any one of the defendants, of the three to seven
     on this indictment ..."

- and here is the indictment -

     "'Gave no thought to the possibility of there being
     an obvious and serious risk that in consequence of
     the failures respectively alleged against them, the
     Herald of Free Enterprise would sail with open
     doors'.  It is to be accepted, for present purposes
     only, that such a sailing had or was likely to have
     the consequences alleged in the indictment."

So causation was taken for granted. May I just pause
there to observe that there was no problem about causation
in the Herald of Free Enterprise. There was no argument
about it at all: the ship sailed with the doors open.
Compare that with Hillsborough where you have, we submit,
and I hope seeing the list and having it already in mind
as I know you have, there are a large collection of causes
                                                          43

                                                   MR. PAYNE


which came together per Dr. Nicholson to cause, we say,
the disaster, so in that sense Zeebrugge is a much
stronger case than Hillsborough - there is no problem
about causation, I mean. Going on at D:

     "That is to   say, that at this stage, I have heard no
     argument on   the issue of causation, although
     indications   have been given that such indeed will be
     raised at a   more appropriate moment.

    The prosecution contend that it should have been
    apparent to ordinary prudent people in the several
    positions of the third to seventh defendants, that
    there was a risk of an open door sailing in the
    absence of precautions having been taken as have been
    variously alleged against them.

     What each defendant ought to have known follows the
     test of negligence.  Insofar as Captains Lewry and
     Kirby were concerned, it was said that if they had
     not been enured to the system, if that be the correct
     way to describe it, they would, as reasonably prudent
     masters, have perceived the obviousness of the risk.
     The obvious risk, it was said, comprehends their
     failure reasonably to foresee what may happen.

    It is at this stage relevant to consider what is the
    evidence already led and that which is available to
    the prosecution on the question of the obviousness of
    the risk. Captains Hartwell, Lodge and Rutherford
    have all testified that unless and until evidence of
    any individual failure of what they had supposed was
    an adequate system came to their attention, it had
    not occurred to them that any risk existed, let alone
    that it was an obvious one."

Just considering the help that one gets in Hillsborough
from that, Schedule 17, we submit, is helpful because this
is very much parallel to what is being said here.

    "All three readily conceded that once there was
    evidence of failure, there were a number of
    precautions, some one or more of which appear in the
    particulars in the indictment, that could and should
    have been taken to obviate that risk.

     There are, in addition, other ships masters whose
     evidence is yet to be led, notably Captains Blower,
     de Ste. Croix and Martin, all of whom were or are
     employed by Townsend Car Ferries and now the eighth
     defendants. Neither the statements nor depositions
     from these witnesses will advance the prosecution
     case on this issue.
                                                       44

                                                MR. PAYNE


    There are, in addition, witnesses from other shipping
    lines; masters who may speak as to the practice
    adopted on various of their ships. I do not
    understand that the statements of any of these
    witnesses condescend to criticism of the system
    employed by the defendants in this case as one which
    created an obvious and serious risk, except to the
    extent that any legitimate deduction may be made from
    the fact that they took precautions other than those
    employed by any of these defendants."

Sir, you have in mind as I am reading this out that what
the Judge is directing his mind to is the no evidence to
criticise what was done, no evidence, inferences, yes, but
not evidence, that is what he has got in mind, and
inferences not applicable to the ordinary prudent
individual in the circumstances of the person whose
conduct is called into question. A person standing
outside it, with hindsight might say this, that, and they
might draw their own inferences, but that is not the test,
and I have said enough to indicate and I am sure you have
in mind that we are looking at the time, the circumstances
and the person concerned.  Sorry to have digressed like
that. I am at G on page 16:

    "Mr. Solley has given early notice that he will
    object to the admissibility of such evidence.
    Without pre-judging the result of that objection, it
    would be inappropriate for me to suppose that that
    objection would necessarily be successful.  So that,
    if the evidence is admitted, 1 will consider it as 1
    have read it, but say that I am quite unable to see
    how it can advance the prosecution case as to
    obviousness of the risk.  It would be evidence merely
    of different practices adopted by others, and so
    would leave the point for consideration up in the
    air.

     Mr. Kentridge helpfully provided me with written
     submissions which he supported with oral argument.
     At the outset he addressed himself to the meaning of
     'obvious'.  In so doing, he was following the lead
     given by Lord Diplock in Lawrence and Caldwell to the
     effect that we should all be wary of applying terms
     of art to English words, the meanings of which are
     well-known. Although Lord Diplock would disavow the
     use of terminology like 'objective' and 'subjective',
     counsel and judge alike in the criminal courts are
     familiar with those terms. The first part of the
     Lawrence/Caldwell test is readily identifiable as
     being an objective one, and hence the existence of
     'obvious and serious risk' must initially be judged
     on direct evidence, or upon evidence from which an
     inference to that effect may properly be drawn.
                                                 MR. PAYNE


     The mere f&ct that in the indictment the prosecution
     have identified a number of ways in which the risk of
     an open door sailing may be reduced or eliminated,
     can, in my judgment, be no substitute for evidence of
     what the hypothetically prudent master or mariner ...

- bracket, superintendent or policeman -

     "or howsoever would have perceived as obvious and
     serious.  I have used the word 'initially' above
     advisedly because if there were to be evidence that
     any of the individual defendants, three to seven,
     knew or knew of matters from which the inference
     should properly be drawn that the relevant risk was
     obvious and serious, then other considerations would
     arguably apply. The word 'obvious', said Mr.
     Kentridge, was not the same as 'reasonably
     foreseeable' and connotes [no] more than a risk which
     was reasonably foreseeable. The meanings suggested
     were perfectly evident', 'stares one in the face',
      immediately apparent'.

     As Mr. Carman developed the submission later, the
     words serious' and 1 obvious' he said, goes to the
     level of what is foreseeable. He argued that the
     proper test was whether or not the risk, and I say of
     (The Herald of Free Enterprise) sailing with her bow
     doors open with the existing system would be
      immediately apparent', and of 'such high degree'
     that it was likely to occur.

     Lord Atkin clearly had in mind both elements in Lord
     Diplock s definition of recklessness .

Now here he deals with Andrews, and I have asked you to
read Andrews, so with your leave I intend to just skip
this part of the judgment.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. PAYNE:   He deals with Andrews. He quotes
extensively from Lord Atkin* Over the page at page 19* in
the middle of part of the judgment of Lord Atkin, the
relevant words beginning at the top line:

      For the purposes of the criminal law, there are
     degrees of negligence and a very high degree of
     negligence is required ... before the felony is
     established."                              3

- that is the passage that I asked you to look at earlier,
and he goes on to quote from the judgment of Lord Atkin,
then on page 19 he moves on to Lawrence and Caldwell,
                                                 MR. PAYNE


quotes from Lord Diplock, which I have asked you to look
at.

    THE CORONER:   You mean page 20?

     MR. PAYNE:   Sorry I meant 20, yes, and then at the
bottom of page 20, having looked at the authorities, which
I hope I may be forgiven for not traversing again, page
20H:

    "From this excursion into the authorities, I now seek
    to encapsulate my reasons for the indicative ruling
    which I have already announced. Thus while
    Lawrence/Caldwell have resulted in a re-definition of
    the ingredients of the common law offence of
    manslaughter and 1 can find no warrant in those cases
    or in Seymour, Kong Cheuk Kwan for the proposition
    inherent, if not expressed in Mr. Jeffreys   ....

- he was for the Prosecution -

    "... submission that this re-definition has in any
    way diminished the fundamental ingredients of the
    common law offence of manslaughter. Emphatically it
    should be reaffirmed that simple negligence at common
    law is not and never has been sufficient to support a
    charge of manslaughter.  I have come to this
    conclusion, despite Mr. Jeffreys’ argument to the
    contrary, which was that, as the consequence of the
    decisions in Caldwell, Lawrence, Seymour and Kong
    Cheuk Kwat, Lord Atkin's description of what was
    comprehended by the word 'reckless' was what most
    nearly covered 'the very high degree of negligence
    ... required to be proved before (manslaughter) is
    established, was what Lord Roskill had achieved in
    his speech and opinion in the last two mentioned
    cases. Mr. Jeffreys went on to propound that it is
    the nature of the breach in any given case that
    differentiates the fault element in manslaughter from
    that involved in simple negligence. Of course, if
    Mr. Jeffreys' submission is correct, first Parliament
    and then the judges have modified the test of
    manslaughter identified by Lord Atkin in that well-
    known passage of his speech in Andrews that I have
    already quoted."




                                   So he is swatting ....
                                                            47

                                                    MR. PAYNE


He is swatting an attempt to undermine Andrews,
Caldwell, Lawrence and he is saying that Lawrence
rules. At G :

    "It should not be overlooked that Lord Atkin
    will have had clearly in mind the principles
    encompassed by the tort of negligence at common
    laws, since Andrews was
    decided   after — Donoghue and Stevenson— "

I am going to miss out the next passage because he is
still discussing the arguments that have gone on and at
the bottom of the next page 22-F:

    "Thus, it is that in my judgment, before a risk
    can properly be said to be obvious and serious,
    there must be some evidence upon which the
    jury, being properly directed, can find that
    the particular defendant failed to observe that
    which was 'obvious and serious', which words
    themselves convey a meaning that the
    defendant's perception of risk was seriously
    deficient when compared to that of a reasonably
    prudent person engaged in the same mind of
    activity as that of the defendant whose conduct
    is being called into question."

May I interpose there that for the purpose of
Hillsborough you need to add, the same kind of activity
in the circumstances at the time dealing with a
threatened disaster outside the turnstiles. When you
are talking about a reasonably prudent person you have
got to put him in the context in which his conduct is
being criticised. He goes on at the bottom of page 22:

   "It is for these reasons that I have already
   given an indicative ruling that the evidence
   which has already been adduced and that which
   may yet be given by Captains Martibn, Blowers
   and de Ste Croix, and by witnesses outside the
   eighth defendant's organisation, assuming
   always that this category should fall short of
   proving that the risk of an open door sailing
   was or should have been obvious to the person
   in a position of a master mariner..."

Dp to this point he has been   dealing with the position
of the captain of the ship.    The rest of this page is
dealing with the shore staff   and the planning stage and
I am just going to read this   briefly down to H:
                                                              48
                                                     MR- PAYNE

    "— but it is necessary for me to go further
    and indicate what is the position in regard to
    Messrs. Alcindor, Develin and Ayers.

    So far as the first and last of these three are
    concerned, the case against them in its crudest
    form is that they were guilty in the
    circumstances as affecting them of failing to
    have regard to an obvious and serious risk by
    not specifying or having installed bridge
    indicator lights as to the state of the doors."

- (per Hillsborough, a system written into the
Operational Order of closing the blue doors):

    "It should be remembered, however, that the
    Prosecution seeks to establish direct knowledge
    of the risk as against Mr. Alcindor, and I do
    not seek to cover taht eventuality; but just as
    in the case of the masters, so too with these
    three defendants who are identified as the
    shore side of the eighth defendant's
    operations. There is no evidence that
    reasonably prudent marine superintendents,
    chief superintendents or naval architects,
    would or should have recognised that the system
    gave rise to an obvious and serious risk of
    open door sailing."

That completes the passages from the indicative ruling
that was given following legal argument and may I ask
you finally - and this is bringing my submission to an
end -to look at the direction which the Judge gave on
the return of the Jury which fortunately is quite brief
and to the point but, in my submission, quite helpful
in considering what the appropriate decision should be
here. I do not know whether you have a copy of that.

     THE CORONER:   No,   not yet.

     MR. PAYNE:    May I distribute copies now? If
anybody else has not got a copy there are some there
which Sergeant Griffiths has. In reading this
direction of Mr. Justice Turner to the Jury may I take
it, without repeating it, that we adopt the reasoning
which is  used here and apply it to the    circumstances of
this case particularly in the light of Schedule 17? At
page 1 under Ruling:

    "Members -of the jury, out of respect to you,
    and the very close attention with which you
    have been following this case, I will repeat to
    you the substance of the rulings to which I
                                                          49

                                                      we
                                                 MR- PA


referred a few moments ago which have led to
the present situation.

I am about to direct you that, as a matter of
law, there is no evidence upon which could
properly convict any of the defendants, Captain
IiPwry^ Captain K xrb y f Alexndox f .Mr» D&vXxn
or Mr. Ayers.

Let me please ~ because of the interest and
assiduity with which you have followed the
evidence in this case - just recap for your
benefit what it was I said to Mr. Jeffreys
yesterday and some of what I said to him as
long ago as the 10th October.

Earlier this year, I heard lengthy submissions
both from Mr. Jeffreys and Mr. Kentridge on
behalf of the corporation, which led to my
making a ruling which was to the effect that,
in certain narrowly defined circumstances, a
corporation could be convicted of the offence
of manslaughter. Those circumstances, I ruled,
were that if a personal defendant - being one
of the defendants 3 to 7, as I am sure you
follow - was convicted of manslaughter arising
out of a casualty, and, in respect of the
conduct which led to his conviction, he could
properly be said to have been acting as the
embodiment of the company, then the company
itself might be convicted. Indeed, I reminded
you of some such words only the day before
yesterday.

What I ruled - and what, as I understand it,
the prosecution have quite properly accepted -
is that there is no question of a coproration
being rendered liable to convictions for
manslaughter by aggregating the faults of a
number of different individuals, whether before
the court or not - because, you follow, there
may have been others in the company who were at
fault in some respects - but whose separate
faults would be insufficient to constitute the
offence of manslaughter; and then going on to
say that, in their totality, they amounted to
such a high degree of fault that the
corporation should be convicted.

As a matter of law, any such argument would of
course have run directly counter to all the
cases that have recently been decided in the
Bouse of Lords.
                                                                50

                                                      m r. f.-^ n e



 He have examined the basis upon which any one
 of the individually named defendants 3 to 7
 might be convicted on the facts of this case of
 the offence of manslaughter.

 This is an exercise   which had been   concerning
 me, as the judge in   charge of this   case, for a
 number of days; and   so it was that   I invited
 all counsel to make   submissions on   law on this
 issue.

 Before any of these defendants, numbered 3 to
 7, could be convicted on the indictment framed
 by the prosecution, it was necessary for the
 prosectuion to prove as against each such
 defendant not just one or more of the failures
 alleged against them in the indictment, but
 that - and this is the nub of the present
 situation - such failures were the result of
 recklessness in each defendant, and in the now
 legally approved sense that they either gave no
 thought to an obvious and serious risk that the
 vessel would sail with her bow doors open, when
 trimmed by the head, and capsize, in
 circumstances unknown to shipboard management,
 or, alternatively, that if thought or
 consideration to that risk was given, each
 defendant, nevertheless, went on to run it.

 The prosecution made it clear, in the course of
 their arguments before me, that their case is
 that none of these defendants gave any thought
 to this risk which the prosecution contended
 was both obvious and serious.

 The prosecution had been made aware of my
 concern about this. Nevertheless, they led
 evidence from a number of Masters and Senior
 Masters employed at the relevant time by the
 company..."

(Police Officers, Schedule 17):

 "...and their predecessors, who have, for a
 number of years, operated the very system which
 the prosecution now criticise. But one or two
 of those Masters, who happen to have
 experienced open-door sailings in very
 particular circumstances, the possibility of
 improvements to this sytem did occur, but, for
 reasons which have emerged in evidence, for one
 reason or another, those concerns were never
    exported from the particular vessel in which
    those incidents occurred— "

- (were never exported by eg Sergeant Biggins to those
responsible for the Operational Order):

    "    I am of course referring you to the Pride
    of Free Enterprise, and our documents 110 to
    1 1 4 "

- this is previous open-door sailings:

    "...So those incidents were never exported
    either to the company, viewed as an aggregate,
    or - and importantly - to other vessels
    operating in the fleet.

    Consequently, to Masters other than those to
    whom I have just been referring the risk that
    has been talked about in this case simply did
    not occur..."

- (Schedule 17):

    "...Specifically, in evidence in this court, to
    none of the Masters - even those who had been
    privy to previous open-door incidents - did the
    possibility of an open-door sailing present
    itself as something which was remotely possible
    in real life   "

- (compare evidence in Hillsborough unanimous to the
same effect):

   "...I can readily appreciate that that evidence
   need not be decisive; and while it is the fact
   that there are other officers whose evidence
   could have been given, in addition to those who
   already have given evidence, the evidence that
   such other officers might yet have given did
   not indicate that to any of them had it
   occurred that an open-door sailing was a
   possibility which nobody on the vessel might
   know about.

   Again, I appreciate, members of the jury, that
   that evidence need not have been decisive, but,
   nevertheless, was obviously a factor which you
   would have had to consider.

   There were, yet to be called, other Chief
   Officers who would have described the problems
   of supervising the bow doors and then
                                                          52

                                                    MR- PAYNE

  proceeding to their Barbour Station on the
  bridge. But in no case, either has or would
  the evidence yet to come have spoken to any
  perception of risk, in the sense that I have
  been discussing with you now for some little
  while.

  Yet again, that need not have been decisive.
  But, on the other hand, when you look at the
  balance of the evidence in taht direction,
  there is no direct evidence available to the
  prosecution - or, indeed, that has been led in
  evidence - that any one of the defendants,
  whose cases I am now talking to you about,
  would themselves, or should themselves, have
  perceived that the risk of an open-door sailing
  was either obvious and/or serious. Nor yet, in
  my judgment, was there any evidence from which
  such an inference might safely be drawn.

  The mere assertion, the mere putting forward of
  allegations of fault - which are more familiar
  in the field of civil litigation which is
  concerned with matters of compensation between
  parties them in the criminal courts - does
  nothing to overcome the lack of evidence which
  I have now been discussing.

 Let me tell you two more things. Sane fifty
 years or more ago, one of the most
 distinguished judges ever to have sat in an
 English court considered this whole question of
 manslaughter and negligence. What he had to
 say was this— "

this is Lord Atkin in Andrew?

 "'Simple lack of care, such as will constitute
 civil liability, is not enough. For the
 purposes of the crim inal law, there are degrees
 of negligence, and a very high degree of
 negligence is required to be proved before the
 felony is established. Probably, of all the
 epithets that can be applied, recklessness most
 nearly covers the case.'

 He then went on to discuss other aspects of the
 case which he was considering.

 I am not going to weary you with the full legal
 ruling which I gave, but we considered all the
 important cases together; and what I ruled on
 the 10th October was that, before a risk can
                                                          53

                                                  MR. PAXNE


   properly said to be obvious and serious, there
   must be some evidence upon which the jury,
   being properly directed, can find that the
   particular defendant failed to observe that it
   was obvious and serious ~ which words,
   themselves, convey the meaning that the
   defendant's perception of risk was seriously
   deficient, when compared to that of a
   reasonably prudent person engaged in the same
   kind of activity as that of the defendant whose
   conduct is being called into question.

   So it was that I concluded what I had to say to
   Mr. Jeffreys yesterday in these words:
   'Accordingly, it is my judgment that if the
   case were to proceed' - and has now, inded,
   proceeded - 'to the close of the evidence for
   the prosecution, I can see no possibility that,
   as a matter of law, I could do other than
   withdraw it from the jury' - on the well
   established, legally correct, basis that the
   evidence already called is such that you, this
   jury, being properly directed by me as to the
   law, could not properly convict any of the
   defendants whose names I have specifically
   referred to at the outset on that evidence."

Then he goes on to direct the Jury to return a verdict
of not guilty and there is sane legal discussion which
does not take it any further.

A comment, we submit, is superfluous in the analogy
with this case. We submit that the Zeebrugge case, if
anything, is much stronger them the present case before
you in that there was evidence of previous incidents
which could be said to have given some warning that
such a disaster could occur whereas here there is no
such evidence and indeed it is ruled out by all the
witnesses on Schedule 17, none of whom ever
contemplated there was a risk of such an event taking
place.  I cannot amplify the submission further.
Unless there is any particular matter I can help you
those are our submissions on the basis of which we
respectfully ask you to withdraw the verdict of
unlawful killing at this stage and to leave them to
consider the alternatives of accident or open verdict,
if it makes any difference. Our submission is that the
appropriate verdict would be accident because of the
coming together of the causes on this occasion as
spotted and correctly stated by Dr. Nicholson.

     THE CORONER: I do not think I will ask you
anything further now but we will rise now, Mr. Isaacs.
                                                          54

                                                  MR. PAYNE


It is five to one and I do not think it is wise to
start. It may well be that when I have others I might
well come back if I think it appropriate. Shall we
then pause at this stage and resume at two o'clock?
May I just ask, at the rate we are going, we are not
going to finish today I think? I am not complaining
about that. All I am asking is, what time do we aim to
finish today?

     MR. ISAACS: Sir, may I try and assist? Having
regard to the submissions in writing that you have
already dealt with, having regard to the very full
submissions made by my learned friend, I have in fact
very little to say. A good deal of the thunder, if it
is thunder, has already been stolen and I can be
relatively brief*  I do not know how long my learned
friends will be but if I said ten or fifteen minutes
that is all I shall probably be in the circumstnaces.

     THE CORONER:   I am not trying to rush anybody. At
the moment I fun really trying to find out hwo
inconvenient it is for you if we go on until say 4.30
this afternoon.

     MR. ISAACS:  I think, speaking on behalf of all of
us, that if we stopped at four o'clock that that would
give more than adequate -time tomorow morning. I
understand you have asked for the Jury to come back at
one o'clock.

     THE CORONER: Yes, it depends what time we finish
tomorrow. If need be I shall start on Thursday but you
are quite right about that. We will stop at four
o'clock.

     MR. ISAACS:  I think there is ample time because
nbow the law has been gone into in great detail and it
is unnecessary for me and my learned friends to recite
it again.

     THE CORONER:    Very well, two o'clock.

                    LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
                                                       55   .
                                         MR. ISAACS



      MR. ISAACS: Sir, nothing in writing but I hope,
as I have said earlier, to be brief.

      First of all I adopt the submissions on the law
made by Counsel on behalf of Sheffield City Council
at paragraphs 1-11 of his written submissions and those
made in relation to unlawful killing by my learned
friend M r . Payne. indeed as I said eaxlier, to a. vexy
large extent Mr. Payne covered the ground which I would
wish to cover on behalf of Mr. Duckenfield.

      I do   however say this in relation to the law and
I say this   in the context of the written submissions
made by my   learned friend Mr. Maxwell and if I could
make these   comments by reference to his submissions.

      As to paragraph 6, and that is at page 3,
paragraph 6, sub-paragraph (iii) where he deals with
the question of causation and foreseeability.

      Sir, you will recall that he suggests in sub-
paragraph (iii) that where there is a break in the chain
of causation then the causal relationship comes to an
end and he says in sub-paragraph (iii) that that would
apply where the conduct of the person under consideration
was performed prior to the 15th April 1989.

      My submission is this: that foreseeability test
as applied to any act or omission which can break the
chain of causation is as relevant to conduct which takes
place on the  15th April 1989 as to that which took place
prior to the  15th April1989.
      I make   that submission  now and    asto how it affects
Mr. Duckenfield I shall deal with in just a moment, so
that is a gloss, if I may put it that way, on Mr. Maxwell's
submission.
      Secondly, I submit, it is a matter that has been
touched upon by Mr. Payne, that it is necessary, not just
appropriate but indeed essential to stress that when
considering the actus reus of recklessness that one has
to have regard to the circumstances which existed at the
relevant time when considering when the jury have to
consider whether there was created the obvious risk which
is referred to in the authorities, and in those circum­
stances it is vitally important and I stress as firmly
as I can what has been said by Mr. Payne, hindsight has
no part to play in this at all.

       Sir,- I am leaving the examples which have already
 been touched upon. I appreciate that it would be wearisome
 to this Court for me to go over ad nauseam those matters
 which have already been dealt with with skill by my
 learned friend.
                                                        56


                                        MR. ISAACS



      I do however ask you sir to add this to what is
set out at page 9 of Mr. Maxwell's submissions when he
deals with, if I could say so advisedly, his model
direction, and that is when he says some eight lines ups

      "You have to be satisfied upon the question
      of recklessness that he acted in such a manner
      as to create an obvious and serious risk of
      causing physical harm to some other person
      who might happen to be using the terraces at
      the time."

Sir in my submission, and this is said with support from
the Crown against Seymour, that the obvious risk is not
merely of causing some physical harm to those on the
terraces or perhaps more specifically in Pens 3 and 4,
but the risk of causing death, and I say so by reference
not only to the passage in the speech of Lord Fraser at
page 501 in the Crown against Seymour to which my learned
friend Mr. Payne has already referred, but more particularly
to what is said by Lord Roskill in his speech at page 508
letters C to D. Sir, I remind you that it was with
Lord Roskill's speech that the other Law Lords agreed,
not with Lord Fraser's, so insofar as Lord Roskill made
a statement of his view as to the appropriate direction
then it is his view which represents, in my respectful
submission the law, and he said this at letter C:

      "I would therefore answer the certified question
      as follows:

      'Where manslaughter is charged and the circum­
      stances are that the victim was killed as a
      result of the reckless driving of the defendant
      on a public highway, the trial Judge should
      give the jury the direction suggested in the
      Crown against Lawrence, but it is appropriate
      also to point out that in order to constitute
      the offence of manslaughter the risk of death
      being caused by the manner of the defendant's
      driving must be very high.'"

One can understand, if I may say so with respect, the
reason for that.

      Originally Caldwell and Lawrence dealt with the
question of recklessness, the concept of recklessness
insofar as it affectedstatutory offences* first of all
of causing criminal damage and then of effectively
reckless driving, there the risk that would have to be
obvious would be a risk that would be necessary to be
proved so far as the statutory offence was concerned,
damage on the one hand and damage or personal injury on
the other in relation to reckless driving, but here
                                                           57


                                       MR. ISAACS



one is concerned with involuntary manslaughter so that
the act which is complained of or the omission that is
complained of by the person whose conduct is called into
question is not in its beginning unlawful and so when one
has to have regard to manslaughter it is essential that
one looks to the obvious risk of causing that which the
offence itself prohibits, in other words the causing of
death.
      So using the speech of Lord Roskill as support for that
submission it is my submission that the obvious and
serious risk which has to be found to have been apparent
to the person whose conduct is called into question is
that of death as opposed to merely some physical harm.

      My third submission is this and this deals with
a matter which is set out at page 10 of Mr. Maxwell’s
submission, this is in the first paragraph, three lines
down:
      "In determining the quality of his act you
      apply the standards of the ordinary reasonable
      person who happened to be in the same circum­
      stances as X. You of course take into account
      all the evidence including his explanation

Then he goes further to deal in the last paragraph on that
page:
      "in deciding whether or not a risk was obvious
      the Jury should have regard to whether the
      risk would have been obvious to an ordinary
      prudent individual in the relevant circumstances."

Sir, in my submission the test must make clear that the
more unusual the circumstances the more difficult it is
for any juror to reappraise the assessment made by those
who had the decision to make at the time.

      Here, of course, without wishing to trespass on the
question of evidence, the evidence is that for
Mr. Duckenfield the circumstances were highly unusual
that there was a crisis, that events were so far as he
and indeed others in the Control Room were concerned
were unique and I leave it at that.

      My fourth point is this and this againdeals   with
pages 10 and 11 of Mr. Maxwell's submission.

      When considering the conduct of any Police Officer
and in particular of course Mr. Duckenfield, the jury
must consider such conduct from the standard of the
ordinary prudent individual in the circumstances in which
that individual, the one whose conduct was being called
                                                         58


                                        MR. ISAACS



into question, found himself at the time, and the question
must be:  "Would the risk if it existed have been obvious
to him at that time?" and a jury is not, with respect,
in a position to make an assessment as to whether such
an obvious risk existed without the benefit of evidence
and for that submission I rely on the matters that have
already been adverted to by Mr. Payne in his analysis
of the ruling of Mr. Justice Turner in the Zeebrugge
case and I should say at this point, with respect, that
is a ruling which is binding of course on this Court.
There can be no doubt about that.

      The fact that a jury is not in a position to make
an assessment without the benefit of evidence is of
importance in this case because the standards that have
to be applied by a jury are quite different in this
case as they would have been in the Zeebrugge case from
applying the standards of a reasonable motorist of which
a juror can be deemed to have had some experience, so
the circumstances which have to be stressed in this
particular case and in relation to Mr. Duckenfield without
being exhaustive, are his personal circumstances, namely
that he was recently appointed; that he was reliant upon
the experience and expertise of senior Officers; that he
had been told that "find your own level" was the appro-
priatemethod of filling the terrace and one has in
addition to those personal circumstances if 1 could use
the inelegant phrase, the environmental circumstances to
which I have already referred, namely those of crisis,
wholly exceptional events, unique in everybody's
experience where there is a threat to the lives of those
outside the ground unless immediate action is taken.




                    Sir, if I   may I would like to read .
                                                        59
                                              MR. ISAACS


     Sir, if I may, I would like to read from the
submissions made by one of the Counsel in the Zeebrugge
case, my learned friend Mr. Kentridge QC, on behalf of
the ferry company, to Mr. Justice Turner, which in fact
deals with this very point.   I am afraid I don't have a
copy to give you but you will, I hope, get the flavour as
I read it out.   It is a relatively short passage dealing
with the way in which a Jury is to be directed as to the
position in which they must put themselves.

     MR. CATCHPOLE   I apologise for interrupting.   If
my learned friend indicates which Day, I actually have
bound copies of the...

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I am very grateful.   It is Day
19, at page 18. Sir, as with my learned friend
Mr. Payne, I adopt these submissions as my own.
Mr. Justice Turner impliedly accepted the submissions
that were being made, albeit that he did not deal with
them expressly but it is clear from his ruling that he
did.   Mr. Kentridge said:

     "The prudent and reasonable person must be taken to
     have the knowledge which the particular defendant
     has, and no more.   The relevance of it in this case
     is that one of the named defendants had knowledge of
     open door incidents in the sense of sailing, putting
     out to sea, with open doors.   None of them had
     knowledge of that, so the test is that of a prudent
     and reasonable person with the experience and
     expertise of a Master who, however, has no knowledge
     of the ship putting to sea with open doors, and on
     the contrary has knowledge of thousands of sailings
     in which this system has worked perfectly well.*'

May I turn over the page:

     "My Lord, there is one other factor with regard to
     this objective part of the test.   I have said, and
     my learned friend seemed to accept, that the test is
     that of the prudent and reasonable Master
     mariner..

As it is here, sir, the prudent and reasonable Police
Officer in the Control Room:

     "...as I say, having the knowledge that these
     defendants had..."

With the knowledge in this case that Mr. Duckenfield had,
the expertise that he had and the reliance ha was
entitled to place upon his colleagues:
                                                       60

                                                MR. ISAACS


    "...but what follows from that, my Lord, is that in
    considering that matter the jury themselves cannot
    play the part of the prudent and reasonable man as
    they can in other types of case.    In either
    Lawrence or Caldwell - I am afraid I cannot for the
    moment remember which - Lord Diplock said in
    relation to a motoring case that the jury themselves
    supply the test of what would, be obvious to a
    reasonable and prudent motorist.    The juryman or
    jurywoman is the reasonable and prudent person.    My
    learned friend tells me it is in Lawrence's case at
    page 527 at the letter B:   'In deciding whether the
    risk was both obvious and serious they may apply the
    standard of the ordinary prudent motorist as
    represented by themselves.

    My Lord, that cannot be the case here."

Sir, I say to you:  that cannot be the case in this
instance having regard to the circumstances wholly
unique, which take the consideration of whether there was
at the time an obvious risk out of the experience of the
juryman.   Mr. Justice Turner says:

     "I had in mind, and this was why I invited you to
     pause for a moment, that there was a citation from
     Sangha..."
Which is a case referred to eventually in his Judgment:

     "...which bears on this."

Then at the bottom of the page Mr. Kentridge:

     "'The ordinary prudent bystander is not deemed to be
     invested with expert knowledge relating to the
     construction of the property, nor to have the
     benefit of hindsight.'"

That is in fact a direct quote from the case of Sangha.

     Finally on page 20, at D:

     "All the evidence is that a large number of
     competent and skilled Masters and Chief Officers
     throughout the fleet, numbering in all possibly more
     than 50 or 60 people, considered the system safe and
     did not regard it as a risky system.   They used it
     consistently in circumstances where their own safety
     was at risk as much as any other without reason to
     doubt it."

     Now my submission is that observations as to the
evidence that is required in relation to the safety or
                                                           61

                                                    MR. ISAACS


otherwise of a system are just as cogent, ara just as
important and are just as effective when one has regard
to an event, as one has with regard to Mr. Duckenfield
the opening of the gates and the failure, as it is
suggested against him, to give any consequential order to
divert fans from the central tunnel.

     At the botfctom of page, 20 Mr . Kentridge says,:-

     "As it is not like a motoring case, my Lord, the
     jury must be guided by the evidence of those skilled
     in the relevant professional calling, and if it were
     left to a jury to find that a risk which was not
     obvious to 50 or 60 highly qualified officers
     concerned for their own safety as much as their
     passengers' safety, if they were to find in the face
     of that that the risk was an obvious one, I submit
     it would be a perverse finding.   It would be a
     finding which could not stand."

Now we do not have 50 or 60 Master mariners in this case,
nor do we have as many as 50 or 60 Police Officers in
this case, but of the Police Officers who have given
evidence who can speak as to their assessment of the risk
at the vital time in those vital circumstances, and I
shall return to it in a moment, in my submission the
evidence is all one way and that is no such obvious risk
existed in their minds.

     Sir, in the Crown against Stanley and others, the
submission was made by Counsel on behalf of the
Prosecution that notwithstanding there was no evidence,
that is, from any individual who was experienced in these
matters that the risk would be obvious to those with
decisions to make and that all the evidence was that the
risk would not be obvious, it was a matter which was
still one for the Jury to decide.

     The basis of that submission can be seen in the
Judgment.   That is Day 20, of which you have a copy
provided by my learned friend Mr. Payne, at page 2,
letters D to E, where Mr. Justice Turner dealing with the
submissions of Mr. Jeffreys, QC, on behalf of the Crown,
said - this is letters G to H, that what Mr. Jeffreys had
said was:

     "'One then moves on to consider as against other
     defendants, first of all, I agree in the objective
     sense, was there an obvious and serious risk that
     the ship would sail in that condition?   In the
     objective sense, our.answer is yes, there was.
     Look at what happened.   Look at what seems to have
     been the cause of it.   Is there not, we say to the
     jury, with the other incidents such as they are of
                                                        62

                                                MR. ISAACS


     open doors, and was there not on the 6th of March an
     obvious risk of the ship sailing in that
     condition.'"

What Mr. Jeffreys was saying was that despite the lack of
evidence a jury could still be invited to exercise their
judgment to determine whether there was an obvious risk.

     Sir, that submission was, as is quite clear, roundly
rejected.

     As I say, and this is a matter which I touch upon
only briefly, again because of what has been said by
Mr. Payne, there is no difference in principle between
evidence which is sufficient to go before a jury relating
to system and that relating to an event such as is the
subject of the criticism levelled at Mr. Duckenfield,
namely, the decision to give permission for the gates to
be opened and then the failure to give a consequential
order to divert fans from the central tunnel because of
the unique circumstances in which he found himself, in
which the whole of the Control Room found itself and the
highly unique circumstances which pertained to him as an
individual which would be quite outside the experience of
the ordinary juror.

     My next submission is this, dealing with again the
Judgment of Mr. Justice Turner, at page 6, because I have
mentioned Sangha and it is right I should now refer to
the passage in the   Crown againstStanley when
Mr. Justice Turner   refers to it. This is at C:

     "Mr. Jeffreys   referred to apassage in a casecalled
     Sangha which is reported in the All England Reports
     for 1988, volume two, at page 385, and I quote:    'Is
     it proved that an ordinary prudent bystander would
     have perceived an obvious risk that property would
     be damaged and that life would thereby be
     endangered? "'

The offence in Sangha being arson - reckless as to
whether life would be endangered:

    "'The ordinary prudent bystander is not deemed to be
    invested with expert knowledge relating to the
    construction of the property, nor to have the
    benefit of hindsight.   The time at which is
    material is the time when the fire started.'"

So the time which is material in our present case, with
present events, is the time at which the decision came to
be made.   It is vitally important, in my submission, to
distinguish between the risk that would have been obvious
to the reasonably prudent individual - let us call him
                                                               63

                                                      MR. ISAACS


the reasonably prudent Police Officer - and a risk that
should have been apparent because the latter is the test
in negligence as opposed to the appropriate test which is
that much higher in recklessness where the risk has to be
an obvious one.
      The fact there are ways in which the risk to fans in
pg^ig 2 8lnd 4 couXd     b6£n reduc6-d on g 1.1 roxnst&d .is« no^.
substitute for evidence of what the hypothetically
prudent Police Officer would have perceived as obvious
and serious.
     It is for that reason that I submit that the
approach that has been taken from time to time by learned
friend Mr. King, namely, the step by step approach, is
misconceived, one is concentrating there not on the risks
that would have been obvious at the time the decision was
made, in the circumstances in which the decision was
made, the crisis in which the decision was made, but what
any individual knew, in stages, prior to the moment of
the decision, as if there was at the time of the decision
an opportunity for calm reflection when on the evidence
there was not.




           So what is being done
                                                          64

                                                  MR. ISAACS


So what is being done is to remove the consideration of
the obvious risk away from the appropriate time and the
appropriate circumstances to a wholly different time, a
time when there is opportunity for calm reflection.

     Sir, I will not read again the passage already
referred to by my learned friend Mr. Payne, at pages 22
and 23, but I do adopt them as being an appropriate
statement of thfi law xn & c£is£ such &3 tins ^ and whsn oxi6
does, and then one applies the law as set out in all the
submissions that you have heard to date, to Mr.
Duckenfield, one in my submission can come to these
conclusions, and I make this submission to echo that made
by my learned friend Mr. Payne, and of course I can only
make it so far as Mr. Duckenfield is concerned, though the
same does to a degree, I am quite sure, apply to Mr.
Murray and Mr. Goddard, who were in the Control Room at
the relevant time and who on the evidence quite clearly
would have perceived, some would say more than Mr.
Duckenfield having regard to their position within the
Control Room, and who had on their evidence, differing
between Mr. Murray and Mr. Goddard admittedly, but on
their evidence a role which would have involved them in
making a decision to divert fans from the central tunnel,
had they considered that there was an obvious risk to
those in Pens 3 and 4.

     My first point is this, and this relates to causation
and this is_why I made the submission relating to
foreseeability to extend that which is referred to by my
learned friend Mr. Maxwell at page 4 (iii), paragraph 6.
In my submission there is evidence before you which breaks
the chain of causation between Mr. Duckenfield's decision
to give permission for the gate to be opened, remembering
of course that the evidence is that the decision would
probably have beer, made anyway, even without his
permission, but there is in my submission a break in the
chain of causation linking that decision to the deaths,
and that is that on the evidence it was not foreseeable to
Mr. Duckenfield that if the risk did exist, that is the
risk to those in Pens 3 and 4, then having regard to the
expertise, the experience of Mr. Murray and Mr. Goddard,
then no consequential order would be given by either of
them to avert that risk.

     To echo what was said by Mr. Maxwell:

     "... where ... a subsequent and intervening act
     which causes death breaks the chain of causation if
     that intervening act is not foreseeable ...."

then the original decision, that is Mr. Duckenfield*s, is
no longer a direct and sufficient cause. So my submission
is that having regard to the evidence of the chain of
                                                       65

                                                MR. ISAACS


command, important decision by the overall commander, the
bomb evacuation, here the opening of the gate, and the
evidence given by Mr. Mole and by Mr. Murray indeed, in
relation to consequential decisions from other officers,
and other directions consequent upon the important
decision given by other officers, then the change of
causation is broken because it would not be foreseeable so
far as Mr. Duckenfield is concerned that in the event of
there b & m g £t irxsk to thoS£ xn Pens* 3 nmci 4 xvo
consequential order would be given. We know that no order
was given. That is my first point on causation.

     My second point relates to the obviousness of the
risk and what I say is really a repetition of what has
already been said by Mr. Payne, so I shall be short. The
question must be asked, would it be obvious to a
reasonably prudent Police Officer in the position of Mr.
Duckenfield, in the circumstances in which he found
himself, so a man recently appointed, a man reliant upon
experienced advisers, a man facing a crisis, that if there
was such a risk as is being suggested then nothing would
be done by others in the Control Room? And indeed, in my
submission, the presence of others in the Control Room,
and their lack of action which I certainly do not
criticise, but their lack of action is an additional
important factor for, let us say, the Jury to consider
when considering whether the risk would have been obvious
to a person in Mr. Duckenfield's circumstances. He is
entitled to say, "If the obviousness of the risk which is
suggested was not apparent to Mr. Murray or to Mr.
Goddard, Officers with far more experience than I,
Officers who had perhaps a better view than I did, then
how can it be said that it should have been obvious to
me?"

     Indeed, and this is my final point, there is no
evidence that the risk, the obvious risk was apparent to
anybody in that Control Room.  I rely on that evidence
which has already been referred to by Mr. Payne which is
on his last schedule, but particularly on the evidence of
Mr. Murray, Day 67, page 30; Mr. Goddard, Day 70, page
101; and Mr. Bichard, insofar as it deals with the
assessment of the link between the tunnel and Gate C; and
indeed Mr. Marshall; and finally Mr. Mole, though of
course Mr. Marshall and Mr. Mole were not in the position
of those in the Control Box, but Mr. Duckenfield is
entitled to say, "Where is the evidence upon which a Jury
can find that the obvious risk should have been apparent
to me?" He says, "There is no such evidence and indeed
far from the matter being neutral the evidence from Mr.
Murray and Mr. Goddard is to the contrary, that they, two
reasonable competent Police Officers, in perhaps a better
position than I was in, if the Jury is applying any test
then they should take the evidence from there, and the
                                                MR. ISAACS
                                               rtE7 MANNING
evidence there is positive to the effect that in those
circumstances, at that time, with their experience they
did not perceive the risk or any risk, never mind an
obvious risk."

     So, sir, I echo Mr. Payne, I ask you to make what may
be a decision which is unpopular with some, but I know
that ha® never trembled you, and fc© grasp the- n^ttl^ and
to say that in this case there is no evidence upon which a
Jury properly directed could find that those who died at
Hillsborough were unlawfully killed so far as the conduct
of Mr. Duckenfield is concerned.

     MR. MANNING:   They say "Follow that".   It doesn't
get much easier as you go down the line to find new things
to say, and I am sure that there will be no forgiveness
needed from you if I am relatively short.   Indeed I am
minded of a situation which, albeit may not be binding may
at least be persuasive, namely of John Cleese talking down
to Ronnie Corbett and expounding, and Ronnie Corbett
talking to Ronnie Barker and expounding, and Ronnie Barker
saying, "I know my place".

     I say that because you have already heard from at
least one, and possibly, depending upon whose hand or
brain it was from the solicitor's letter, two of Her
Majesty's Counsel, you have heard from senior junior
Counsel, my learned friend Mr. Payne, you have heard from
not senior but a young junior but very learned Counsel, my
friend Mr. Isaacs, and I know my place.

     There is no new law that I seek to put before you
that has not been very ably put, if I may say so,
particularly in the verbal form, by my learned friends
that have spoken before me, and I say that respectfully
lest anybody should think, and indeed I am prepared to
fairly proudly show that I have in fact got almost all of
the authorities, which I had researched independently and
would have drawn to your attention, but knowing my place I
have adopted as my text the words of Mr. Justice Turner to
the Jury, because at the end of the day the lawyers have
capabilities of playing around with words, of looking at
individual words, and even letters in individual words as
to whether they are singular and plural, and making much
of them, and there comes a time when commonsense has to be
applied and it is easier sometimes to see that in the
rather more simple language that Judges, at least on some
occasions, welcome occasions, are prepared to apply.

     So, sir, I look at page 11 of the transcript of Mr.
Justice Turner, when he says to the Jury, as you no doubt
will say:
                                                      . .67

                                               MR. MANNING


     "There have been occasions when you have been out of
     this Court and must have wondered what was going on
     when all these legal submissions were being made,
     which either gave you an extra coffee break or gave
     you an early night when everybody else was still
     here."

and this is the language of the learned Judger which I
agree with my learned friend Mr. Isaacs is binding upon
you, as to the way in which he told the Jury that he had
reached the conclusion that there was no evidence upon
which a Jury properly directed could come to the
conclusion that there could be unlawful killing:

     "... before a risk

- says Mr. Justice Turner -

     "... can properly be said to be obvious and serious
     there must be some evidence

- and that is what we are talking about now. This is the
old scenario that we all know about, the respectful
submission that there is no evidence upon which the case
in this part can go forward, so it is as simple as that -

     "... there must be some evidence upon which the Jury,
     being properly directed, can find that the particular
     defendant ...

 - the individual person, not everybody as a whole,
because we have already parts about aggregation and
whether the sum of the whole can make a bottom line which
then means something which the different parts did not,
but -

     "... the particular defendant failed to observe that
     it was obvious and serious - which words, themselves,
     convey the meaning that the defendant's perception
     •• • •

- **t" apostrophe "s" - in other words the perception of
that individual particular defendant, that his -

     "... perception of risk was seriously deficient ..."

- not compared with the man on the Clapham omnibus, as it
used to be when I was learning the law but -

    "... when compared to that of a reasonably prudent
    person engaged in the same kind of activity


                                There can, of course ....
There can, of course, be absolutely nobody in the whole
of the United Kingdom and possibly in the world, but
certainly in the United Kingdom, who can talk about the
same kind of activity because it was an unprecedented
situation.. It was a. situation in which Officers with,
all of their training were totally unprepared for
because it had never happened before.   It was unique.
It was a threat to life and they were trained to deal
with that.

    If you look at those few lines and the simple words
of Mr. Justice Turner, sir, then I respectfully submit
to you that there is no evidence upon which you can say
that my client, Superintendent Murray, with his
perception of what was happening in those short moments
could possibly be considered in law with all the
definitions of recklessness that you have very properly
had drawn to your attention, be said to have gone to a
standard, a deficiency, which could possibly allow a
Jury, properly and reasonably directed, to come to the
conclusion of unlawful killing.

    That is the submission simply and humbly put before
you. The best speeches in the law books when I was a
student were the ones which said "I concur" and in
respect of those submissions on the law most ably and
eloquently put by my learned friends I concur. I adopt
their views. I accept that without going through it
all again and I ask you to say here that the evidence
is lacking so that you, sir, addressing a Jury could
not leave unlawful killing by Superintendent Murray to
that Jury.

     THE CORONER: I just want to say to you and indeed
to anybody else, the length of the submission and the
fact that lots of things have been said makes no
difference. The Jury are not here anyway. What 1 am
trying to find out is what the legal points are and so
please do not think that merely because somebody has
spoken for X minutes as opposed to a shorter period
makes no difference. What I am interested in are the
points.  I just want to say that to you.

     MR. MANNING: I am very grateful to you, sir. I
was brought up on the principle that to say something
the second time did not make it any better and to say
something a third time probably made it worse because
people got bored.

     THE CORONER: You are probably right. Mr. King, I
am not going to want to sit through until four o'clock
                                                          69

                                                 MR. MANNING
                                                  m - etn <?

without a break at all and it is also very warm in
here. Shall we stop for just ten minutes and start at
three o'clock? It seems a bit early to stop but it
seems a nice and convenient point.

                    (Short Adjournment).,

     MR. KING: May I first indicate the extent to
which I disagree with the statements of law that have
been given so far?

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. KING: Sir, in my submission, the test for
unlawful killing, which is the test of manslaughter, is
that which has been set out in the case of Lawrence as
adopted in Sevmour subject to a question mark which
remains unresolved in law as to whether or not there is
a further category of manslaughter, the type of which
we are considering, namely gross negligence
manslaughter. Sir, I raise this in order to say that
my own professional assessment is that if it ever went
to a higher court the higher court would be unlikely to
rule that gross negligence manslaughter survives in any
form other than that laid down in Lawrence and Sevmour.
1 have to draw to your attention, sir, that there is no
ruling from a higher court to that effect and that is
why it remains in the text books as a question mark
clearly set out if you want the reference, sir, at page
345 of Smith and Hooan as to whether or not this
residual category of gross negligence survives.

    Sir, if I can just cite you one case for the moment
which remains as a set of facts, an example of where
one might have gross negligence manslaughter which
cannot fit into the Lawrence and Sevmour analysis you
will then have that problem.   I am going to do that
which I know Counsel should not do, I am going to leave
the problem with you because I do not concede on behalf
of my clients and cannot concede on the part of my
clients that gross negligence manslaughter does not
exist but I shall address you, having drawn your
attention to this one case, on the basis that we are
dealing with kawrgttCg and Caldwell. If that sounds
like having my cake and eating it, I apologise, sir,
but I have given careful thought as to what the law is
as it now stands, and I have no doubt as the law now
stands, that the question mark still exists.

    The case I want to refer you to, sir, was the case
Of iaak which was in 1967. This is Lamb 1967 2 Queen«s
Bench page 981. Sxr, this was a case first of all
                                                          70

                                                      m,.m?
before the decision in Lawrence and Caldwell. Its
facts can be stated very simply.   It was a case in
which a defendant pointed a revolver in jest with no
intention of doing any harm at all to his friend. Be
believed, and it was accepted that he believed, that if
he fired the trigger there would be no explosion and
there would be no fire.   In fact, unknown to him, when
he pressed the trigger the revolving cylinder revolved
bringing a bullet into the appropriate place for it to
fire. It was not a case in which he knew of the risk
of injury to his friend if he pulled the trigger
because so feu: as he was concerned there was no risk.
Nor could it be really said that he had not given any
thought to the possibility of the risk because his
defence was, "I did apply thought to what I was doing
and I believed” - and there was evidence to support him
- "that it would not fire”. It was not a case of his
ignoring the risk.

    Be was convicted and his conviction was set aside
on appeal.  I need not concern you with the reasoning
in the judgment save to invite you to turn to the very
last page of the judgment and to the paragraph which
begins:

    "The general effect of the summing up was thus
    to withdraw from the jury the defence put
    forward on behalf of the appellant..."

Sir, do you find that?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I have got it.

     MR. KING: It reads as follows, and this is the
judgment of Lord Justice Sachs giving the judgment of
the Court of Appeal:

    "The general effect of the summing up was thus
    to withdraw from the jury the defence put
    forward on behalf of the appellant. When the
    gravamen of a charge is criminal negligence,
    often referred to as recklessness, of an
    accused person the jury have to consider,
    amongst other matters, the state of his mind
    and that includes the question of whether or
    not he thought that that which he was doing was
    safe. In the present case it would, of course,
    have been fully open to a jury, if properly
    directed, to find the accused guilty because
    they considered his view of there being no
    danger was formed in a criminally negligent way
    but he was entitled to a direction that the
    jury should take into account the fact that he
    had undisputedly formed this view and there was
    expert evidence of this being an understandable
    view."

Sir, that is    the citation which is relied on and is
relied on in    the text books you will see and it raises
the question,   that criminal negligence!, gross negligence,
manslaughter    still exists.

    1 know of the citation by Mr. Justice Turner that
he has decided otherwise and 1 say no more about it,
sir, but 1 do not on behalf of those 1 represent say
that 1 am conceding that that is gone. Let me deal
with it, sir, on the basis of the recognised formula
set out in Lawrence and adopted in Sevmour. It has two
elements to it, this formula. First of all, there has
to be an obvious and serious risk that the act or
omission of the person who is called into question may
cause personal injury to another - and I will address
you in a moment on the basis upon which you should
approach your task as to how that hurdle is
approached - and the second stage, which is quite
separate, is whether or not the person whose conduct is
called into question, whose omission is called into
question, knew of that risk or gave no thought to the
possibility of that risk and still went ahead.

    Sir, in Lawrence you will not find in the relevant
passages the words 'indifference to risk'. What you
will find, sir, if I can remind you of the crucial
passages is simply a reference to    either knowing ofthe
risk or not giving thought to the possibility of the
risk. Sir, if you can in your bundle (and I have not
duplicated the bundle of authorities because they are
all the same) go to the relevant passage in Lawrence.
In the Criminal Appeal report which I have it starts at
page 11. It is the well known passage which begins:

    "In my view an appropriate instruction to the
    jury as to what is meant by driving recklessly
    would be, must be satisfied of two things   "

It is worth repeating this passage which is short and
to the point in our present Inquests:

    "In my view, an appropriate instruction to the
    jury on what is meant by driving recklessly
    would be that they must be satisfied of two
    things: first, that the defendant was in fact
    driving the vehicle in such a manner as to
    create an obvious and serious risk of causing
    physical injury to some other person who might
    happen to be using the road or of doing
                                                          72

                                                    MR. KING


   substantial damage to property; and, second,
   that in driving in that manner the defendant
   did so without having given any thought to the
   possibility of there being any such risk or,
   having recognised that there was some risk
   involved, had none the less gone on to take
   it."

Sir, the fact that the word 'indifferent' do not appear
there is, in my submission, significant. Can I cite
now one case which has not yet been put to you to show
how clinically in fact the Courts have applied that
formula? That is the case of Elliott, sir.




                        /Sir, I did ask that..
                                                         73

                                        MR. KING



      Sir, I did ask that Mr. Griffiths hand to you
a copy of that decision.

       Sir, it is important in my submission for two
reasons this decision. One, to go to show that issues
of the indifference of the particular defendant to the
risk is not the appropriate approach. When we come to
the second stage of the test it is whether or not he
either knew or did not give any thought to the possibility
of there being any such risk, which may not be the same
as indifference, and secondly, it is important because
it emphasises the point that when assessing whether a
risk is obvious and serious, the test is not as that
which my learned friends appear to have been suggesting
to you, whether or not it was obvious to the particular
defendant, it is whether or not it was obvious to a
reasonable and prudent person in the position of the
particular defendant and when stress is put for example
on the inexperience or lack of knowledge or particular
extenuating circumstances of a particular individual who
might be pointed to as potentially one whose conduct can
be called into question on these tests, when we are
considering whether or not the risk was obvious that is
irrelevant and sir it strongly comes out in this case
of Elliott, if I may direct you to it.

      Sir, this was a case of a 14 year old girl who
set fire to a shed by pouring white spirit on to the
floor and throwing a match on to it.

      Sir, if I might direct your attention very quickly
to that which the learned Magistrates found as facts
because it shows how it had been argued that what was
relevant was whether or not the risk was obvious to the
particular defendant.

      Sir, at page 1007 at letter j sir you find these
passages:

      ".... the magistrates accepted that they were
      bound to follow the 'model direction1 of
      Lord Diplock which I have read. It was,
      however, argued before them, and again
      before us by counsel for the respondent
      ...." who I might say it was the defendant
      in the case ".... that when in the first
      part of his test. Lord Diplock referred to
      'an act which in fact creates an obvious risk
      that property will be destroyed or damaged',
      he meant a risk which was obvious to the
      particular defendant. This argument was
      accepted by the magistrates and is set out
      by them in the following passages ...."
                                                         74


                                          MR. KING



which is set out in their reasoning.

      It is important perhaps to realise the factual
basis of this sir. It is as follows:

      "That while the ...." and I will call her
      the defendant "___ had realised that the
      contents of the bottle which CQnt3.xne.c3. white
      spirit were possibly inflammable, she had
      not handled it before and had not appreciated
      how explosively it would burn and immediately
      become out of her control, thereby destroying
      the shed and contents and also placing her
      own life at risk."

It was found as a fact by the Magistrates:

      "That the respondent had given no thought
      at the time that she started the fire to
      the possibility of there being a risk that
      the shed and contents would be destroyed
      by her actions. That in the circumstances
      this risk would not have been obvious to
      her or been appreciated by her if she had
      given thought to the matter."

Paragraph K:

      "That in reaching our findings set out
      herein we had due regard to the age and
      understanding of the respondent, her lack
      of experience of dealing with inflammable
      spirit and the fact that she must have been
      tired and exhausted at the time.

      L. That we accepted the interpretation of
      the effect of the decision in the case of
      R v. Caldwell put forward on behalf of the
      defendant.

      M. That in particular we found it implicit
      in the decision in that case that a
      defendant should only be held to have acted
      recklessly by virtue of his failure to give
      any thought to an obvious risk that property
      would be destroyed or damaged, where such
      risk would have been obvious to him if he
      had given any thought to the matter.

      N. Accordingly having regard to our findings
      set out above we found the respondent not
      guilty of the charge and dismissed the
      information."
                                                            75


                                       MR. KING




And the judgment continues:
      "Before us, counsel for the appellant ..." which
      of course is the prosecution ".... has argued
      forcefully that the magistrates were wrong to
      adopt that interpretation of the decision in
      Caldwell. He submits that the phrase 'creates
      an obvious risk' means that the risk is one'which
      must have been obvious to a reasonably prudent
      man, not necessarily to the particular defendant
      if he or she had given thought to it. It follows,
      says counsel, that if the risk is one which would
      have been obvious to a reasonably prudent person,
      once it has also been proved that the particular
      defendant gave no thought to the possibility of
      there being such a risk, it is not a defence that
      because of limited intelligence or exhaustion she
      would not have appreciated the risk even if she
      had thought about it."
Then sir the learned Judge sets out passages of Lord Diplock
in the case of Caldwell which at first glance suggested
that the Court in Caldwell was using the phrase "creates
an obvious risk" as meaning a risk which was obvious to the
particular defendant and he sets out those passages, but
then sir at page 1009 at letter B he says:

      "That the submission of counsel for the appellant
      is correct is to my mind, however, put beyond
      a peradventure by two later decisions of the
      House of Lords."
Then he sets out Lawrence in the passages sir which we have
looked at and I have already drawn your attention to it
and the case of Miller.   Sir, I don’t have to read those
out to you, and he says at letter j:

       "In the light of these last two authorities,
       we are in my judgment bound to hold that the
       word reckless in S.l of the Criminal Damage
       Act 1971 has the meaning ascribed to it by
       counsel for the appellant."

 Sir, Lord Justice Goff's judgment is of significance
 because he deals with the argument, well because there
 is no evidence here that she was indifferent to the risk
 therefore she was entitled to be acquitted and he says
 that is wrong.
       Sir, if I can take you to that judgment. In the
 first passages he is dealing with his own feelings that
 he is bound by authority and precedent and although he
 might want to come to a different conclusion if authority
 says to the contrary then he is bound by it.
                                                            76

                                        MR. KING



He sets out the findings of the Magistrates and pinpoints
the   two findings as torisk at letter e-f which are of
significance, namely:

      ".... she gave no thought at the time when she
      started the fire to the possibility of there
      being a risk that the shed and its contents
      would be destroyed;

      (4) this risk would not have been obvious to
      her or have been appreciated by her if she had
      given thought to the matter.

      I add that these conclusions were reached by
      the magistrates, having regard to the age and
      understanding of the respondent, her lack of
      experience of dealing with inflammable spirit,
      and the fact that she must have been tired and
      exhausted at the time."

He then sets out that which had been said in Caldwell, which
you have already been shown sir, and at 1011, letter b:

      "Now, if that test is applied literally in
      the present case, the conclusion appears
      inevitable that, on the facts found by the
      magistrates, the respondent was reckless
      whether the shed and contents would be
      destroyed; because first she did an act which
      created an obvious risk that the property
      would be destroyed, and second she had not
      given any thought to the possibility of there
      being any such risk.

      Yet, if I next pause (as I have done, in
      accordance with what I conceive to be my
      proper function) and ask myself the question:
      would I, having regard only to the ordinary
      meaning of the word, consider this girl to have
      been, on the facts found, reckless whether
      the shed and contents would be destroyed,
      my answer would, I confess, be in the negative.
      This is not a case where there was a deliberate
      disregard of a known risk of damage or injury
      of a certain type or degree; nor is it a case
      where there was mindless indifference to a risk
      of such damage or injury, as is expressed in
      common speech in the context of motoring
      offences (though not, I think, of arson) as
       'blazing on regardless'; nor is it even a
      case where failure to give thought to the
      possibility of the risk was due to some
      blameworthy cause ...."
                                                           77

                                       MR. KING



      So he then has to ask himself the question at
letter e on that same page sir:

     "I therefore next ask myself the question
     whether I can, consistently with the
     doctrine of precedent, sensibly interpreted,
     legitimately construe or qualify the
     principle stated by Lord Diplock in
     Caldwell so as to accommodate what I
     conceive to be the appropriate result
     on the facts of the present case ----"

He then sets out between letters f-j sir that there had
been much controversy as to what the meaning of the
statement of principle of Lord Diplock had been and at
letter g sir he says this:

      "I find it striking that the justices,
      in reaching their conclusion in the present
      case, have done so (no doubt in response
      to an argument advanced on the respondent's
      behalf) by imposing on Lord Diplock's
      statement of principle a qualification
      similar to one considered by Professor
      Glanville Williams in his article ....
      This is that a defendant should only be
      regarded as having acted recklessly by
      virtue of his failure to give any thought
      to an obvious risk that property would
      be destroyed or damaged, where such risk
      would have been obvious to him if he had
      given any thought to the matter. However,
      having studied Lord Diplock's speech, I
      do not think it would be consistent with
      his reasoning to impose any such
      qualification."

Sir, I do not need to read any further on that page
save on the next page sir, 1012 there is a citation from
a case called Picrq which was dealing with rape and from
that citation you can see there had been an attempt to
introduce a test of whether or not for the purpose of
recklessness in rape the question of whether there
was indifference to the risk.

      Sir, at letters d-e on page 1012 you can see the
citation from the judgment of the Court of Appeal in
the case of Pigg to which the present Judge, Lord Justice
Goff is referring and you will see, sir, that the citation
is this:

      "But, in the end, it seems to us that in the
      light of that decision ...." reference to
      Caldwell and Lawrence ".... as far as rape
                                        MR. KING



     is concerned, a man is reckless if either he
     was indifferent and gave no thought to the
     possibility that the woman might not be
     consenting in circumstances where if any
     thought had been given to the matter it
     would have been obvious that there was a risk


or whether, of course, she knew.

      Now sir at letter e this is the vital sentence
of Lord Justice Goff:
      "Now it cannot be disguised that the addition
      of the words 'was indifferent? and constituted
      a gloss on the definition of recklessness
      proposed by Lord Diplock in Caldwell."

He continues:

      "Furthermpre, if it were legitimate so
      to interpret Lord Diplock's speech in relation
      to a case arising not under S.l of the Sexual
      Offences (Amendment) Act 1976 but under S.l
      of the Criminal Damage Act 1971, the effect
      would be that the second question posed by
      the magistrates in the case now before this
      court would be answered in the affirmative
      and the appeal would be dismissed, because
      there is no finding of fact that the
      respondent in the case before us was
      indifferent to the risk of destruction by
      fire of the shed and its contents. This
      is an approach which I would gladly adopt,
      if I felt that I was free to do so.
      However, I do not consider that it is open
      to this court, in a case arising under the
      very subsection to which Lord Diplock's
      speech was expressly directed, to impose
      this qualification, which I feel would in
      this context constitute too substantial a
      departure from the test proposed by him."

Sir, it is a very clear authority, this case, for the
fact that the question whether or not there was indifference
to the risk on behalf of the person to whom you were
directing attention is not the appropriate test and the
question is simply twofold: whether or not he knew or
gave no thought to the possibility of the given risk,
that risk being one which would have been obvious to
not him but the reasonably prudent man.

      Sir, my other comment on the law as it has been
stated so far to you which flows from this, is that I
                                        MR. KING



am bound to say, sir, that it is difficult to see what
particular authority can be put on the statement in
Gray's case, that is the West London Coroner ex parte
Gray, and you will know it sir but if you perhaps turn
to it if you have it?

      THE CORONER:   I have got it.




                MR. KING:   Where it is said
                                                     MR. KING


     MR. KING:   Where it is said - I have it in the All
England Report, sir, and I am now looking at page 136, it
is the passage which my learned friend Mr. Payne has
already read out to you where he lists the four
ingredients of the offence.   The final sentences of that
paragraph reads:

     "It should be emphasised, however,, that, a, fadJLure to.
     appreciate there was such a risk would not by itself
     be sufficient to amount to recklessness."

I am bound to say, sir, I do not know what that means in
the context of the law as is clearly set out by
Lord Diplock in Lawrence and Caldwell.   It does not add
anything to it and if it meant to depart from it then you
are bound, sir, by what is said in Lawrence and Caldwell.

     THE CORONER:   May I just ask you a question?
Would you agree with me that in Lawrence, Lord Diplock
was trying to distinguish between section 1 offences in
the Road Traffic Act, namely, reckless driving, from
section 3 offences which are driving without due care and
attention?

     MR. KING:      Certainly, sir.

     THE CORONER:      You would agree with that?

     MR. KING:   Certainly, sir, but it is then picked
up, if I can put it that way, and adapted to manslaughter
by the Court in Seymour.   In fact I am now coming
directly on to that and the suggestion by my learned
friend Mr. Isaacs that the effect of Seymour is that when
one is applying the Lawrence test to manslaughter it is
not a question of whether or not there was a risk of
causing personal injury, but that there has to be an
obvious and serious risk of causing death, which I do
take issue with.   I now direct you as to why I take
issue with that.   Can I say, sir, that there is, in law,
no such qualification and the test is simply whether or
not the act or omission creates an obvious and serious
risk of causing personal injury.   That is what I
contend, sir.

     It is in fact dealt with by the Privy Council, sir,
inthe case to which my learned friend Mr. Payne referred
you, the Hong Kong case.   Sir, I know not, the citation
you have it in. mine begins on page 19, which may not be
the same.

     THE CORONER:      No, mine doesn't, but I will find it.

     MR. KING:   Mine is two pages from the end of the
Judgment, a sentence beginning:
                                                            81

                                                     MR. KING


     "Finally, in Seymour, the House of Lords held that
     the appropriate direction in motor manslaughter case
     was the same as that which had been suggested in
     Lawrence..."

     THE CORONER:      Is it at the beginning of a
paragraph?
     MR. KING:   It is in my version, sir, yes.         There
has already been a citation of Lord Diplock from
Caldwell, sir.   Sir, perhaps if you work....

     THE CORONER:      I have found it.

     MR. KING:      The Privy Council says this, sir:

     "Finally, in Seymour, the House of Lords held that
     the appropriate direction in motor manslaughter
     cases was the same as that which had been suggested
     in Lawrence, in cases where only the statutory
     offence had been charged.   Their Lordships think it
     right to add that the words added at the end of the
     answer to the certified question regarding the very
     high degree of the risk of death were added not to
     alter the pre-existing law as to manslaughter by
     recklessness, but only to point to those cases in
     which it still might be thought appropriate to
     charge the common law rather than the statutory
     offence."

It continues:

     "It is plain, as often happens in English criminal
     and civil law, the law applicable to involuntary
     manslaughter has developed on a case by case basis;
     has indeed developed rapidly in recent years since
     the offence of causing death by reckless driving
     appeared in section 50 of the Criminal (inaudible)
     Act 1977."

This is the important passage, sir:

     "Their Lordships are of the view that the present
     state of the relevant law in England and Wales and
     thus in Hong Kong, is clear, the model direction
     suggested in Lawrence and held in Seymour equally
     applicable to cases of motor manslaughter requires
     first, proof that the vehicle was in fact being
     driven in such a manner as to create an obvious and
     serious risk of causing physical injury to another,
     and secondly, that the defendant so drove either
     without having given a thought to the possibility of
     there being such a risk, or having recognised there
     was such a risk and nevertheless took it.   Once
                                                   MR. KING


     that direction is given it is for the jury to decide
     whether or not on their view of the evidence the
     relevant charge has been proved."

Sir, in my submission that is clear authority for the
fact that all that is found in Seymour, talking about
foresight, or obviousness, of death, is simply giving an
iBdication in mator cases, when, tlie REQsecution. siaauld.
choose to charge manslaughter as opposed to an available
statutory charge of causing death by reckless driving.
Certainly it does not alter the law that what the obvious
and serious risk has to be of is of physical injury.

     I am bound to say if it is of any worth in the
argument, sir, there is no textbook authority to support
the view that that has come about, that change in the
law.   Smith and Hogan, Archbold, all commentators,
accept that the test is one of the obvious and serious
risk of personal injury.

     Sir, that is my submission on that aspect of it.

     Therefore, the jury in the present case, and I agree
with my learned friends thus far, and indeed the
submissions to you, first of all have to ask what was the
immediate cause of the deaths, and I agree with that.

     I am bound to say that when they ask that question,
all they then have to do is work backwards to whether
they can identify an act or omission of a person - in the
case of omission, a person who had a duty to act - which
they can identify as having been a substantial cause of
that cause.

     Sir, without trespassing on the evidence, if the
jury - and it must be open to them - if the jury were to
conclude that the cause of the deaths was overcrowding in
pens 3 and A, andif the jury - as must be open to them -
were to conclude that the reason and cause of the
overcrowding in pens 3 and A, the immediate cause, was
the influx of a large group of spectators into those pens
following the opening of concertina gates at about 2.52
and thereafter, and I submit that it must be open to them
on the facts to reach that conclusion and I don't address
you on the evidence of that, sir, save to say if it has
been suggested there is no evidence to support that
conclusion I would address you at length to identify that
evidence.   Having reached that point, then the next
question in logic is: can they identify a person who
caused the opening of the concertina gates and the influx
of those people into the ground?   Not now dealing for
the moment with the obvious risks of that conduct, but
just factually.   In my submission again there is
evidence beyond doubt, and again if it was challenged I
                                                        83

                                                   MR. KING


would address you on it, that you can pinpoint conduct
and omissions, taken together, of individuals who had a
duty to act, which brought about that statement of
affairs.
     Therefore, the jury have to look at, on the
evidence, that conduct and omission.

     Sir, again I submit there is no question about there
not being evidence.   There is clear evidence to the
effect that a decision was given to open the concertina
gates which led to the influx of a large number of people
into the stadium.
     Equally, the evidence is not in dispute that that
influx and that decision was not accompanied by any steps
to divert those spectators.   Therefore the jury, in my
submission are entitled - and it is a question of
evidence which they would consider - but they must be
entitled to have left to them the question whether or not
the decision of the given individual to order the opening
of the gates without taking any measures to divert the
fans was itself an immediate cause of the deaths;
because one goes to that logical chain to which I have
referred you, sir.
     In my submission there is no question but that the
evidence is there on which they are entitled to reach
that conclusion.
     Then one deals with the test of unlawful killing
having regard to that conduct and omission which they are
now directing their minds to.   It is not a case, sir, of
one being entitled to say that because there are so many
different causes, "I shall not invite the jury to apply
the Lawrence/Caldwell test to one cause, w h i c h o n the
evidence clearly has to be left to them as an immediate,
substantial cause of the deaths."

     Sir, in my submission when one reaches, therefore,
the question which I submit is central to the facts which
should be left to the jury of the decision to open the
gates, to order the opening of the gates and then to
allow in the influx of persons without any steps to
divert them, the question which should be left to the
jury is this, and I have done my best to frame that
question as to the obvious and serious risk in the light
of the Caldwell and Lawrence directions: Did the act
and/or omission of the person who they are considering as
regards the act or omission of opening the concertina
gates and allowing in a large influx of persons without
taking any steps to divert those fans from the centre
pens, did .that create an obvious and serious risk of
overcrowding and crushing in the centre pens in the
                                                      84

                                                 MR. KING


Leppings Lane terraces, thereby giving rise to an obvious
and serious risk of physical harm to those already in the
pens and to those who would enter thereafter, unless
steps were taken before the opening of the gates to close
off the entrance to the centre pens, and to divert
spectators who were about to enter the ground through
those concertina gates?

     In my submission, that question has to be answered
by reference to what would have been obvious to the
reasonably prudent person in the position of those who
the jury are looking to at this stage in their reasoning
as being responsible for the decision to open the gates
and the omission to take any steps to divert the fans.

     Sir, in my submission it cannot be disputed and
should clearly be left to the jury that they should take
from the Control Box, on the evidence, first of all
Mr. Duckenfield, and apply the question to him, and a
person in his position.   Then to Mr. Murray, and a
person in his position and then to anybody else in the
Control Box who they consider on the evidence would be
party to the decision to open the gates and the omission
to take any steps to divert the fans.




           Sir, I do not
                                                                  85



                                                     MR. KING


     Sir, I don't - I may say I don't have to - identify
any person in the Control Box, other than saying there
were at least those two who should be considered for the
purpose of this question.      Sir, if you having considered
the evidence consider that it can be left properly to the
Jury in relation to any other member of the Control Box as
being a party to the decision to open the concertina gates
and allow in, this, large, inf lux of people without taking,
steps to divert them, any other individual who had a duty
to act to divert if there was this obvious         and serious
risk, then so be it, sir.        For the purpose   of leavingit
to the Jury, in my submission, it cannot be gainsaid on
the evidence that Mr. Duckenfield was the person who gave
the order to open the gates, and that Mr. Duckenfield was
in a position, if he so chose, to give orders to divert.
Equally on the evidence Mr. Murray was in a position
whereby he could, on his evidence, have given orders or
taken a decision or taken steps to divert. That was his
evidence.

     But, sir, I need only   concern myself,    in my
submission, with saying as   long as there is just one
person who one can identify as having been party to the
decision to open the gates and allow in a large influx of
people, without taking steps to divert them, and having a
duty to act in the circumstances of the obvious and
serious risk which I have sought to identify, then that is
sufficient, sir, for leaving that to the Jury, because
that is one person they can look to. It would be quite
false reasoning to say, because there are a number of
other people who just might fit the same set of facts,
therefore I won't leave any facts to the Jury. That would
be quite false logic, in my submission.

     Equally, when one is asking the question, what was
obvious to a reasonably prudent person in the position of
Mr. Duckenfield, I stress the fact that the Jury have to
apply that, not on the basis of the particular lack of
experience or the particular lack of knowledge, or the
particular inadequacies prayed in aid of Mr. Duckenfield,
they just have to have regard to the ordinary, reasonably
prudent person, in the position of Mr. Duckenfield, in
that Control Box. Of course the Jury are entitled to take
into account the circumstances as they find them to be,
but that is a Jury question, sir, and is not a question
for us to preempt.

     I do venture to suggest that on the basis of factual
reasoning which I have put to you as one which is open to
the Jury on the evidence, that really it comes down to a
relatively simple issue of fact for the Jury in relation
to the first limb of the Lawrence/Caldwell test, that is,
whether or not there was an obvious and serious risk of
personal injury, because another way of approaching the
                                                             86




                                                  MR. KING


question which I have already posed to you, sir, whether
there was an obvious and serious risk of overcrowding and
crushing in the centre pens by virtue of the entry of the
influx of people through the concertina gates unless steps
were taken to divert them, is the simple question for the
Jury, whether or not it was obvious to a reasonably
prudent person in the position of Mr. Duckenfield in the
circumstances, that, at the time he was. considering the
decision to order the opening of the gates, one, the
centre pens were full, approaching fullness, it doesn't
matter what words are used in my submission - it is simply
the question whether or not the centre pens were in such a
state that they could not be expected to take a large
number, substantially more people in them - secondly,
whether it was obvious to a person in the position of Mr.
Duckenfield that those who were about to enter might - and
I say it only has to go as high as this - might enter,
seek to enter, those centre pens.

     Sir, in approaching that question, whether or not it
was obvious to a reasonably prudent person in the position
of Mr. Duckenfield, at that time, one, whether the centre
pens were full in the sense of they could not take any
more people or any substantial numbers, and secondly,
whether or not those who were about to enter might seek to
enter those pens, in my submission the Jury are entitled
to look at the facts which they know are certain facts,
and to draw such inferences as they consider to be
appropriate.

     This is not a case of where we are dealing with an
act or an omission remote from the immediate events
leading to the deaths, that is to say, in the Zeebrugge
case, all the observations of Mr. Justice Turner. We are
dealing with an attempt to prosecute those responsible for
the system which was being operated at the time on the
ship. They were not actually responsible, and no one has
suggested they were responsible, for opening the bow doors
on the day, or responsible for it leaving harbour with the
bow doors open. What was being argued about ....

     THE CORONER:   I think you are wrong, with great
respect, because Mr. Stanley and Mr. Sabel were not
responsible for opening a gate, the exact opposite,
responsible for closing it.

     MR. KING:   I agree, sir, but they were not the
defendants, sir, who were caught by the rulings of Mr.
Justice Turner. They were left in the frame, if I can put
it that way. His observations were directed to the
attempt by the Prosecution to convict those who had been
responsible for the system. Poor Mr. Stanley, even after
the rulings of Mr. Justice Turner, could have still had
his fate decided by the Jury, but the Prosecution decided,
                                                             87




                                                  MR. KING


no doubt fairly, that they were not really out simply to
prosecute one little individual at the bottom of the pile,
and so they did not pursue them.

     But, sir, all the comments and observations of Mr.
Justice Turner are directed to an argument based on
system, but here at this stage of the Jury's reasoning in
the present Inquest, they are simply dealing with a
decision to open concertina gates to allow in a large
influx of fans.  In my submission therefore, in deciding
whether or not it would be obvious to somebody in the
position of Mr. Duckenfield, a reasonably prudent person,
they are entitled to look to the evidence which is
available to them - undoubtedly available to them - first
of all as to the state of the pens at that time, as a
matter of fact. Obviously as a matter of fact, sir, if
the Jury were to conclude that the centre pens at that
relevant time were half empty, there would be no question
of my even continuing this submission but, sir, it is a
question for the Jury, not for us, for them to decide on
the evidence what the state of the pens actually was at
the relevant time and, sir, if necessary, and I won't do
it now at 5-to-4, but if necessary and if it were in
dispute I could and will give you the references to the
series of witnesses which tends to show that at that time
the centre pens were either full, over full, approaching
fullness, but certainly had no room in them for a large
number of people. They are entitled to have regard to the
evidence which is available to them of the means by which
the state of those pens could be observed by those in the
position of Mr. Duckenfield.

     Again it is a question of evidence and it is not a
question of simply accepting the word of those whose
conduct is in question by saying , "Well we did not see it
and we could not see it". That would not be a proper
approach by the Jury, or indeed a proper approach by you,
sir, to withdraw that issue from them merely by reference
to what is asserted by the very person whose conduct is
called into question. The Jury themselves have visited
the Control Box. They have seen photographs, they have
seen videos, they have heard all manner of evidence from
varying people in different parts of the Ground, and they
have to take it together and assess it for themselves, and
it would be wrong for us, you, sir, to withdraw the issue
from them merely because of a conclusion which one of us
might come to. That is not the test, the test is, is
there evidence to leave to the Jury, and I submit, sir,
that is clear evidence which they should take into account
in deciding what was obvious to a person in the position
of Mr. Duckenfield, a reasonably prudent person.

     They should take into account evidence as a matter of
fact as to where the gates were located which were about
                                                             8P



                                                  MR. KING


to be opened, as a matter of fact the evidence as to where
those gates led onto the concourse. Again I won't go
through it, sir, it is not my function at this stage.
They should take into account such evidence as they have,
and there is evidence, of course, to this effect, as to
what would meet anybody coming through any particular
concertina gate in relation to the tunnel, and they are
entitled to ask themselves the questions,, what would a
reasonably prudent person ask himself at the time the
decision to open the gates is being made, as to where
those people are going to go, and the question which that
reasonably prudent person would ask himself as to where
the gates led.

     Those are all matters for the Jury to decide in
resolving the issue, which I say they have to resolve,
whether or not to a reasonably prudent person in the
position, firstly I am dealing with Mr. Duckenfield, that
it would be obvious at the relevant time we are talking
about that, one, the centre pens were full, could not take
too many more people, if any, and secondly, that there was
a risk that the large group of people going through the
particular gate might go towards and find their way on the
centre pens through the tunnel.

     Those are questions which the Jury are eminently in a
position to decide.  I accept, having regard to all the
circumstances which have been prayed in aid along the line
so far, as to why they should conclude one way or the
other, but that is the Jury function. Sir, if it was
necessary for me to point to evidence, which could help
them directly, of someone in the position of Mr.
Duckenfield as a Police Officer in the Control Box, there
is in fact the evidence of Mr. Marshall, in answer to
questions to myself. Of course, he wasn't there on the
day inside but he was on the outside, and he was able to
give his own expert opinion, help, as to what would be
obvious to somebody on the inside.

     I accept, sir, that is only one piece of evidence
which they have to put in the balance, but what we are
dealing with at the moment is a submission that there is
not evidence upon which they can even direct their minds
to this issue and, sir, if you want the reference to Mr.
Marshall, it is Volume 30 of the transcript, starting at
page 8, and going through for these purposes to page 15.
Sir, I am not seeking to usurp the function of the Jury in
making these submissions to you, what I am saying to you
is it would be wholly wrong to withdraw from the Jury the
essential issue which is what would be obvious to a
reasonably prudent person in the position of first Mr.
Duckenfield, then Mr. Murray in the Control Box, in the
circumstances, I accept, which the Jury find prevailed at
the time, but that is a question of the Jury, as to how
                                                    MR. KING


much time   is available, what opportunity was there, what
questions   would be asked, what they knew, what they did
not know,   what they could know, but those are not
questions   which I have to give the answer to, sir.

     What I do say, sir, is it would be wholly wrong to
say on the evidence we have that the Jury cannot conclude
that it would have been obvious to anybody in the position
of Mr. Duckenfield, to take him for the moment, that one,
the centre pens at that relevant time just before he gave
the order were full and could not take any more people,
and secondly that when the gates were opened, which he
knew were about to be opened, the result would be a large
influx of people who would make their way, or might make
their way, that is all there has to be in my submission
for saying there is a duty to act to divert it, might make
their way onto the centre pens down the tunnel.




                                            If the Jury
                                                              - 90

                                                       MR. king

    If the Jury were to conclude that it was obvious then,
    in my submission, someone in the position of Hr.
    Duckenfield could properly be held to be guilty of
B   unlawful killing, his conduct and omission amounting to
    unlawful killing, either on the basis that he knew of
    the risk, and that would be a matter for the Jury
    whether they accepted the evidence on that. Again just
    because he says so does not mean they have to accept
    what he said or alternatively and certainly on the
    evidence there is overwhelming evidence that he did not
    turn his mind to the possibility of that risk because
    we are now at that stage in the test where we are not
    dealing with whether or not it was obvious to him;
    that has already been determined at the first part of
    the stage whether or not it was obvious to a reasonably
    prudent person. All the second stage concerns is
    whether or not he either knew of the risk but continued
    none the less with his decision and failure to divert
    the ferns or simply paid no thought to the risk, to the
    possibility of the risk.

        If the Jury conclude either of those then, in my
    submission, it is open to them to reach the verdict of
    unlawful killing but I do stress again it is not at
    this stage a case of saying that they must reach that
    decision or they must not reach that decision. It is
    one eminently within their province. I will perhaps
    finish on this point, sir, a number of times one of us
    has put to the Jury, was it obvious that people would
    push through, for example? You have very properly
    said, "Wait a minute, it is a matter for the Jury to
    decide first what the facts are" and, of course, that
    is right. All I am seeking to say at this part of the
    submission is that it is very much a Jury question what
    would have been obvious to the reasonably prudent
    person in the case of Mr. Duckenfield or Mr. Murray in
    the Control Box and secondly whether or not they knew
    of the risk or paid no thought to the risk. That is
    probably a convenient time for me to stop.

         THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne.

           MR. PAYNE: Just on one point of fact before you
    rise, sir, in his submissions Mr. King has referred to
    the Zeebrugge case and to the directions and judgment
    of Mr. Justice Turner. He said that Mr. Justice Turner
    was not directing his rulings to anyone concerned with
    the management of the ship or anyone concerned with
    t h e__

         MR. KING: I am sorry, I think you misunderstood
    what I was saying.  I was saying he was not dealing
    with those individuals who had been identified as




H
positively opened the doors or positively - if that
does not sound wrong - failed to ensure they were shut.
In other words, the people in the one or two counts;
in the first count there was Mr. Stanley, who was the
Assistant Bosun, and his alleged breach of duty was his
failure to close the bow doors when leaving her berth.
The second count was against Mr. Sabel, who was the
Chief Officer, who it was said failed to ensure that
the bow doors were secured closed when leaving the
berth and port. A l l the other defendants, including
even the third one, who was of course the Master of the
ship, they were being attacked, if I can put it that
way, by the Prosecution on the grounds that the system
was*so awful that it was obvious to anybody in their
position that there was this risk of that which Nos. 1
and 2 had committed committing it.

     MR. PAYNE: That is correct, what Mr. King says.
The point I wanted to make clear was that one of the
candidates being considered by Mr. Justice Turner was
in fact the Captain, Captain Lewry, who was on the
ship, of course, at the material time.

     MR. KING: Yes, but the distinction I was drawing
was not so much whether he was on the ship but whether
or not, like Mr. Duckenfield, he had ordered the doors
to be opened which no one suggests the Captain did, or
whether he was dealing with somebody who, it is said,
was party to a system which gave rise to a risk that it
might happen which is a very different question.

     MR. ISAACS: Sir, on that point it may be
worthwhile you looking at what is set out at page 14 of
the transcript that deals with Mr. Justice Turner's
remarks to the Jury when, in fact, the Jury have
finished and gone out. There is then some
consideration of the position of Mr. Stanley, a short
submission being made by Mr. Coward on his behalf which
you may have read.

      THE CORONER:   I have not read it.

      MR. ISAACS:    That may well assist and it is page
14.

     THE CORONER: Mr. King, give me an indication of
how much longer you are going to be with your
submissions? I just want to gauge my time, that is
all.

     MR. KING: I do not expect to be much more than
about half an hour at the most.

     THE CORONER:     Mr. Catchpole about how long do you
say you will be?
     MR. CATCHPOLE: It is very difficult to say at the
moment, sir. It really depends on what may be said
tomorrow but I would not think longer than half an
hour, possibly slightly longer, but not very long.

     THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, are you going to make
any legal submissions?

     MRS. McBRIEN: Yes, I am. I do not know how long
I will be. I am going to work on all the information
that I have had.

     THE CORONER: Will you remember what I have said
to you, Mrs. McBrien, that it has  got to be legal
submissions? You have heard the sort of stuff we have
been talking about. You are very welcome to do it but
I am not going to listen to you on the facts.   I am not
going to do it.

     MRS. McBRIEN: Would I be able to use Mr.
Maxwell's submission quite a lot to put my case over?

     THE CORONER: Not to put your case over, Mrs.
McBrien, but to make legal submissions, as indeed Mr.
Isaacs did. He said, "I adopt them" and then adjusted
the submission or amplified it might be the more
correct description but you cannot and I will not
permit you to address me on the facts. It is not for
me to say but if the people sitting round you were just
to have a quick glance at one or two of the items that
you have in mind they may be able to tell you whether
they think it is likely I will listen to that or not.
It may be that you are going to make legal submissions
but it is a very difficult subject this and I have
spent hours and hours trying to understand it. I have
got my concerns.

     MRS. McBRIEN: What I did do last night was go
through the submission made by Mr. Maxwell and I picked
out the very relevant points that I could use.

     THE CORONER: If there is a point then I am more
than happy to hear you. Just because you are not a QC
like Mr. Maxwell, it makes no difference to me. So
long as it is within the rules that is all I am
interested in.

     MRS. McBRIEN: It will be in legal language
because I will use passages that have been used in that
if that is all right. I know it is repetitive and you
said you do not want that.

     THE CORONER: Obviously I do not want that.    That
makes sense, does it not?
     MR S. McBRIEN: To develop my theme and to bring in
what I need to bring in I would need to be a little
repetitive actually.

     THE CORONER: The bit that worries me is the
development of the theme, you see. This is the bit
that worries me and I think we are going to come to a
sticky end over this but we will see.

     MRS. McBRIEN: Before I sit down* I waswondering
is it possible to apply a verdict to an individual
rather than to the whole 95?

     THE CORONER: I will direct the Jury on that but I
can answer that question for you. The Jury, as indeed
Mr. Maxwell has said in his submission to me quite
correctly, has a duty to consider each individual
individually. They can group them but they start off
from the principle that each one is unique. Each
individual is very special and individual to somebody
and so they deal with each individual. They may come
back, of course, with a verdict which would be similar
for some or all, we do not know, because I do not know
what they are going to do yet. None of us know.

     MRS. McBRIEN: The reason I said that is that my
case is actually different as you must know, as I think
everyone has realised. There are certain differences
with the way I have been putting my points over.

     THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, you will not be able
to put differences of that nature to me, I am sorry.
It is a question of fact that. Anyway, we will see
what we do tomorrow. Can I just leave a few questions
with you because I do not see why you should have a
totally quiet evening? Mr. Russell, were you going to
say something?

     MR. RUSSELL: My learned friend, Miss Addleman,
and I were just a little concerned that you were not
even interested as to whether we were going to make a
legal submission to you.

     THE CORONER: No, no. The reason why I did not
turn to you is that I have already made cm assessment
as to how much time you are going to take and I do not
think we cure going to start with the summing up
tomorrow. I have not forgotten you but it would not
have mattered if I had said one minute, half cm hour or
cm hour.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER: There are one or two aspects which
perhaps when you come back again you might like to
think about and assist me. I look at you but I include
everybody, of course, in this. The first point is that
Mr. Maxwell's paragraph 6.3, namely the break in the
link in causation, which I do not have to repeat, but I
am looking at you, Mr. Payne, in a way because I would
be interested to hear what you say in the light of what
you have put to me with regard to causation and the
various possible headings which you suggested to me. I
say that, of course, because not only did Mr. Isaacs
adopt it but he extended it to a certain extent and I
shall be interested to see what further arguments, if
any, can be developed on that front.

    The second point which is a very trivial one is
that Mr. Isaacs said that Mr. Justice Turner's judgment
is binding on me. You may well      be right but I am not
quite sure on what basis you are saying that. If it
was the Divisional Court or the Court of Appeal then I
would agree and I am not suggesting the Crown Court is
a more superior Court to a Coroner's Court but I am not
sure whether they are not on slightly different
strands. Anyway I shall be interested to hear what you
say on that.

    The third point is to do with the point which Mr.
King has raised in relation to Lawrence. Elliott and in
particular ex parte Gray, which       is in fact the most
recent case.   It is a case from the Divisional Court or
the Court of Appeal and it is a case which is
specifically directed at Coroners and specifically
directed as to the type of direction which Coroners
should give.  I think it is only fair to say that my
inclination is to base, assuming that I were to decide
to leave the option to the Jury, my direction on the
law on that case.   I say this because you might want to
think about it further and indeed other people might
want to come back.




                                    /The last point.
                                                           95




      Now the last point, well there are two other
points actually.  I noticed that those who submitted
that the case should be withdrawn, the one case that
nobody referred to was ex parte Higgins which is of
course another Coroners' case which deals to a slight
extent with the question of whether unlawful killing
should be withdrawn.

      There may have been a reason. You may have felt
that the other cases were stronger.  I think in that
particular case, and this is really the point I am
driving at, you will remember it I am sure, this is
the case of the lorry which drove during one of the
strikes and somebody was knocked over, the Coroner
clearly did not feel this was reckless but did not
withdraw it. He was overruled on various other matters,
I have forgotten who the Judge was, made some comment
about him being able to withdraw it.

      It looks to me as if that is an obiter rather
than a binding decision but it is another aspect of
where somebody has applied their mind to this issue
in a coronal context as opposed to a criminal context.

      MR. ISAACS: Can I mention that sir. The only
report £ have got of that particular decision is one
in the 'Justice of the Peace'. I don't know if you have
got a better report?

      THE CORONER: It is in this book in full and you
have got it, I think?

      MR. ISAACS: No, I have not. I borrowed it from
Mr. Maxwell.    Do you think we could take a copy before
we go tonight?

      THE CORONER:   Yes, indeed.

      MR. CATCHPOLE: Sir, on the point you last raised
perhaps you could just amplify. It is probably my
ignorance.

      Is your concern that if you conclude whether in
respect of certain individuals or in totality that there
is no evidence on which a reasonable jury properly
directed could conclude that there was unlawful killing,
that you might not be able to withdraw that verdict,
that is ex parte Higgins, I was not quite sure what
your concern arising out of the case was?

      THE CORONER: Basically my concern is if I read
this case correctly, and that is why I am drawing it
to your attention, my impression is that the Divisional
Court said that a Coroner was perfectly entitled to
withdraw a verdict from the jury if he did not think it
                                                            96




was appropriate, and indeed I think it has tended to
be interpreted as saying that the Coroner must withdraw
if he does not think it is appropriate but my reading
of the case is that that is not in fact what it says,
it merely says he may, if he wishes, and the question I
ask is that different to R. v. Galbraith for instance?

      MR. CATCHPOLE: So in other words it is a question
of whether you have the discretion to withdraw it or
whether it is an obligation on you to withdraw it basically?

     THE CORONER:   That is basically what I am asking.

      Now the last point is this, and I suppose I am just
being inquisitive but I am interested in this.

      In the Privy Council case, the Hong Kong case,
there is one particular passage which interests me which
you may feel that you might want to consider. On my
version it is on page 44. You remember where you drew
my attention to it where it says:  "Finally in SEYMOUR",
can you recollect?

     MR. KING:   Yes.

      THE CORONER: Hell about two paragraphs above that
there is a sentence which reads:

     "Their Lordships emphasise that in this
     passage ...." and he is referring I think
     to Lawrence there ".... Lord Diplock was
     speaking of cm obvious and serious risk
     of causing physical injury created by the
     defendant. He was not there concerned to
     deal with cases where the conduct complained
     of was of a defendant's reaction or lack
     of reaction to such a risk created by another
     person."

Now I would be most interested to know whether this
particular passage has any particular relevance from a
legal point of view to the matters before u&. In fact it
reappears in a slightly different form right at the end,
about ten lines from the end of this judgment. It is
in the middle of a paragraph I am afraid.  It says:

     "Their Lordships did not find it necessary
     to hear counsel for Kong on this issue and
     it would not be right for them to offer
     any detailed comments upon the facts beyond
     observing that the summing-up does not seem
     to have distinguished between an obvious risk
     created by those navigating each hydrofoil
     by their own navigation and the response by
     those on board one hydrofoil to any obvious
     risk created by the navigation of the other."
      It is the same point but put in a slightly different
way. I would be just interested to hear whether you think
there is anything to be said on that. It is not homework,
by the way. It sbunds like it, but it is not.

      Tomorrow then at 10 o'clock if that is okay with
everybody.

          (The Inquests were adjourned until the.
              following morning at 10.00 a.m.)
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)




           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                 STADIUM DISASTER

               ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                        Before

DR. ^TL.    POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

               (Her Majesty's Coro ne r )




                           At

                   The Town Hall,
                     Sheffield.

                           On

                  20th M a r c h , 1991




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




      From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, L t d . ,
           Official Shorthand Writers,
       55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                             INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                                  Page

    SUBMISSION BY MR. KING (Cont)                                   1

    SUBMISSION BY MR. CATCHPOLE

    SUBMISSION BY MRS. McBRIEN

    SUBMISSION BY MR. RUSSELL

    SUBMISSION BY MTSS ADDLEMAN

    SUBMISSION BY MR. HALE

    FURTHER SUBMISSION BY MR. MAXWELL                              57

    FURTHER SUBMISSION BY MR. PAYNE                                58

    FURTHER SUBMISSION BY MR. ISAACS                               68

    FURTHER SUBMISSION BY MR. MANNING                              73

    FURTHER SUBMISSION BY MR. KING                                 74

    FURTHER SUBMISSION BY MR. CATCHPOLE                            81

    FURTHER SUBMISSION BY MRS . McBRIEN                            83

    FURTHER SUBMISSION BY MISS ADDLEMAN                            83

    PROCEDURAL MATTERS                                             84


•                                 -----------------------------
                                                           1




             SEVENTY FOURTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

               WEDNESDAY, 20th MARCH 1991

     MR. KING:   Sir, I know it is a dangerous statement
to open with but I hope to be relatively brief.

     Sir, my main point yesterday was that whatever may be
said about the number of different causes, on the evidence
it must be open to the Jury to say that an immediate and
substantial cause was that which flowed from the decision
to open the concertina gates and the influx of the crowd
into the Ground, and that concentrating primarily on that
conduct and the omission coupled with it to divert fans
from getting into the centre pens, that there was clear
evidence to go before the Jury upon which they had to
direct their attention, first in relation to Mr.
Duckenfield, secondly in respect of Mr. Murray.

     Sir, I need not break down again my submissions as to
how they should approach it, save to emphasise again they
would have to ask whether there was obvious and serious
risk as a result of introducing the crowd into the Ground,
the concourse area, without taking steps to divert, of
overcrowding in the centre pens.  I indicated that that
could be split up really into just two issues:  was it
obvious to a reasonable and prudent person in the position
of the given person the Jury are considering, that, one,
at the given time the centre pens were full, approaching
full, no room for any more people of any substance; and
secondly, that it was obvious that if they did open the
concertina gates there was a risk, and a real risk, that
people would go into those centre pens so as to cause
overcrowding.

     That is the issue for the Jury and I say, sir, that
it is not a question of your withdrawing that, saying, "I
would arrive at a different conclusion".  Obviously all
the circumstances have to be put to the Jury but the facts
are there from which they can draw their proper
conclusions, and we are not dealing with a situation as
those who were the subject of Mr. Justice Turner's learned
words, where we were dealing with a prosecution based on
system, not based on somebody who was actually present,
and participating in the very acts which, on the evidence,
one view is caused the deaths.

     I can see an argument that if one is simply dealing
with an argument based on system that one has to have some
reliable evidence from somebody who knows of that system
and could be expected to comment on the system, that that
gave rise to the given risk, but when dealing with those
who are concerned with the opening of the gates and
allowing the influx into the Ground we are not dealing
                                                    MR. KING


with system, and that was the basic point I was trying to
say, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. KING:    Sir, you asked me to consider those
observations - you did not just ask me, you asked
everybody * in the Hong Kong case, distinguishing between
somebody who creates an obvious risk and somebody who
fails to recognise an obvious risk and then fails to take
steps to avert it.    In my submission, there is no
distinction in the legal principles to be applied and
there is nothing in the suggestion in the case, in my
submission, that there is any difference in the legal
principle of unlawful killing to be applied, save of
course the person who does not create the risk and simply
fails to observe the risk has to be, on the facts of the
case and in the circumstances, under a duty to react to
the risk, and that as I understand it is the only addition
which one would bring in and in fact the Gray case brings
in, when it talks about the person who is allegedly guilty
of manslaughter by neglect has to be under a duty to care
for the health and welfare of the given individual.    As I
understand it, sir, there is no difference in the
principles of the Caldwell/Lawrence recklessness test in
either situation.    Either way one has to say was there an
obvious and serious risk to the reasonably prudent person
in the position of the given defendant?    Did he know of
the risk, the given defendant, and fail to take steps to
avert it? Or alternatively did he not turn his mind to
the possibility of the risk? Either way it is the same
test and the only difference is whether or not there was a
duty.   I don't think anybody would suggest on the evidence
that Mr. Duckenfield and Mr. Murray were in a duty
situation.

     THE CORONER:   Were not in a duty situation?

     MR. KING:   Were --- no one would suggest that Mr.
Duckenfield on the evidence allegedly created a risk but
also was under a duty to avert the risk.

     THE CORONER:     I see, yes.

     MR. KING:   No one would suggest that someone in the
position of Mr. Duckenfield, or indeed I think on the
evidence Mr. Murray, could not say, "Even though I saw the
risk and even though I did not turn my mind to it, I was
entitled to have blindfolds on and ignore it because I was
not in the hierarchy sufficiently senior to concern myself
with it", if I can put it that way.

     I don't need   for my purposes, in saying that there is
evidence to go to   the Jury on the issue ofunlawful
                                                           3

                                                    MR. KING


   killing at this stage of the factual events, to identify
   to you any other person who in my submission might fall
   into the category of someone who had a duty to act.  I say
   that, sir, because it is not only not necessary, the Jury
   must not bring back a verdict identifying any given
   individual.  What is the case though, sir, and I accept
   this as a matter of law, in order to bring back a verdict
v* of unlawful killing they must have had in their mind a
 1 given individual and they must be able to say that that
   given individual's conduct or omission, on the tests we
   have analysed, amounted to unlawful killing.

       Sir, I also accept as a matter of law the principle
  of novus actus, if I can put it that way, interveniens
  on the issue of causation.  Of course, before the Jury can
  consider whether or not a given piece of conduct or a
  given omission amounted to unlawful killing for the
  purposes of this Inquest, it has to have amounted to a
  substantial cause of the deaths, and if in fact it did not
  amount to a cause of the deaths, either because
  commonsense says so just looking at the facts, or because
  it cannot be said properly that the deaths flowed from
  that conduct because of the intervention of a subsequent
  act of another which broke the chain of causation because
  it was totally unforeseeable, then I would accept totally
  as a matter of law that that cause could not be a relevant
  cause.

       I have concentrated, I don't mean this blithely, my
  fire, if I can put it that way, on the decision to open
  the gates and the influx of the crowd into the Ground,
  because in my submission to you there can be no question
  but that there is evidence there that that was the cause.




                       One can argue about other causes
                                                           4

                                                    MR. KING


     One can argue about other causes which preceded
those events and,one can see the thrust of the argument
of the Sheffield City Council, for example, that
whatever their faults may have been it could not be a
cause of the deaths for the purposes of unlawful
killing because of the intervening act and the decision
to, open the gates and introduce an influx of people
into the ground.   Sir, I can understand that principle
totally.
    I am not going to be in a position to be able to
say, "I will answer the question for you, sir" because
that is not my function, if I can put it that way, but
in concentrating as I have on what I have, sir, it may
be obvious where I consider the J u r y ’s primary
consideration should be but that is not to usurp your
function.

    Can I say that on the evidence there could be no
question of withdrawing the issue from the Jury by
virtue of arguments as to intervening events after this
decision to open the gates and to allow the crowd in
because on the evidence it must be open to the Jury to
say that everything which flowed thereafter was
entirely foreseeable? It is not for me to argue the
case, sir, but it must be open to the Jury to say tJbiat
if you allow in a large group of people through gates
into a concourse with the assumption that they have
established in advance it was obvious they would make
their way into the centre pens, that overcrowding would
occur, there would be pushing, there would be shoving,
all sorts of consequences which flow there from.   That
is just the natural flow of introducing a large number
of people but at the end of the day that is a matter
for the Jury.  It is certainly not a matter for you,
sir, to make a ruling upon.

    Certainly the argument of my learned friend, Mr.
Isaacs, falls at the first analysis of it because there
is no suggestion here that there was an intervening act
on the part of other members of the Control Box, be it
Mr. Murray, be it Mr. Goddard, or what have you.  It is
simply the case that each and every one of them failed
to take steps to divert, to block off the tunnel, what
you will.  There is no question on the evidence that
Mr. Duckenfield's duty would cease merely because an
argument can be constructed which I need not go into
that someone else had a duty to observe and to divert.
He had a continuing duty and on the evidence it could
not positively be said to the contrary.

    It is not a question of intervening acts.  It is a
question of coincident acts and, of course, one option
                                                             5

                                                      MR. KING


   open to a Jury on the facts is to say that more than
   one person whom they can identify, their conduct or
7T omission amounts to unlawful killing but, sir, I do not
   have to concern myself with that as long as there is
   one person to whom they can direct their attention.

      Sir, the consequence of what I have said to you is
  that the submissions which my learned friend, Mr.
  Payne, has made to you and, for example, his Schedule
  17 submissions if I can call it that, they are all
  directed to evidence not of the obviousness of the risk
  of overcrowding in the centre pens consequent upon the
  opening of the concertina gates and the allowing in of
  a large influx of people, that is the issue which I
  have directed myself to in addressing you.  All that
  evidence is directed allegedly to the issue of the risk
  of overcrowding in the terraces by virtue of the
  general system which was being employed on the day.

      I can argue the point, if necessary, but will not
  because I do not go into the evidence as to whether or
  not that evidence is to the effect as alleged by my
  learned friend.  I would certainly submit it is not all
  one way and if one looks at each individual witness in
  that schedule, in particular the evidence of Mr. Lock,
  Mr. Seamen and Mr. Eastwood, there is very clear
  evidence there that their expert opinion was that the
  system they expected to be operating on the day which
  would have the safety element to protect people from
  overcrowding would have certain characteristics which
  patently were not present on the day as operated by the
  Mr. Mole plan.  It is not for me to direct you to that
  evidence, sir, unless you want me to because I cannot
  comment on the facts.

       THE CORONER:  Yes, I understand.   It is difficult
  for everybody, including me.

       MR. KING:  Indeed.   It is not right to say that
  the evidence which is contained in those witnesses in
  Schedule 17 all indicate that it would not be obvious
  to the reasonable and prudent person in the position
  say of Mr. Mole drawing up his plan that there was not
  a risk of overcrowding on his plan because the
  witnesses which my learned friend prays in aid includes
  Mr. Seamen, includes Mr. Lock, includes Dr. Eastwood,
  both of whom gave very clear evidence that for safety
  purposes they would expect a certain amount of control
  on the radial fences.   They disagreed.  One said that
  he would expect manning on the radial gates.   Certainly
  all of them suggested you would have to have' a system
  whereby even at a Semi Final you would block off the
  pens when they were merely comfortably full and you
                                                          6

                                                   MR. KING


would have an active system in operation.  Certainly
their evidence was that you would have to have people
stewarding, somebody in the capacity of a steward, on
the concourse directing people to the side pens.

    I do not want to go into the argument of it, sir.
I just want to point out it is not right to say that
evidence is all one way on the issue of whether the
system as Mr. Mole employed on the day amounted to an
obvious and serious risk of overcrowding to a
reasonable and prudent person.   I do emphasise, sir,
that if the Jury are directed to unlawful killing by
system, I accept that you have to have regard to the
principle of subsequent intervening act, and that must
be right.  I have accepted that.   To that extent the
evidence certainly divides itself into two separate
categories in that respect; the facts and matters
relating to the opening of the gates and the allowing
of the influx of people into the ground and the other
matters prior to that time.

    Certainly, sir, if you came to the conclusion that
there was evidence that the system was a cause then I
do not accept that there is not evidence to go to the
Jury that it would not be obvious to a reasonably
prudent person who the Jury have in mind who was
responsible for the system, that it carried with it the
risk of overcrowding.  I say there is evidence of that
but that is a separate issue, sir.

    It must also be the law, and I accept it, that one
just cannot have a system in the air.  One has to
identify a given individual who one has in mind for the
system and that must be right in law too. Again it is
difficult for me because if I suggest one candidate
there may be other candidates but certainly one
candidate, if one was viewing the system as the cause
on the day, it would be Mr. Mole because it was his
plan.  That would be sufficient if the system was one
which could be a cause.

    When one looks, sir, at all the other potential
acts which my learned friend, Mr. Payne, points to, if
one assumes they do not fail at the hurdle of the
intervening act, then one still has to identify the
person.  I have not addressed you, for example,
specifically on Mr. Greenwood and I know that my
learned friend, Mr. Russell will.  Again he was not
responsible for the opening of the gates and the
allowing in of the influx of people which I say the
concentration should primarily be on in the context of
what I am observing.
                                                          7

                                                   MR. KING


    The same principles will apply to him though, that
is to say, was he guilty of conduct or an omission?
Was he under a duty to act which created, to a
reasonably prudent person in his position, an obvious
and serious risk of overcrowding on the terraces which
he failed to avert?

    The arguments which he may raise as to his conduct
by reason of the intervening act are arguments that I
will not go into but they are there and I can see them
there.  I would not want to mislead you into believing
that I am inviting you to approach all the potential
persons whose conduct or omissions can be called into
question in the same light because I am not.

    The danger of in fact viewing them all in the same
light is because one can see the weakness in respect of
one of them and one says, "There must be weakness in
respect of all of them" and that patently is not so
when one is dealing with the issue of those responsible
in the Control Box for the opening of the gates and
allowing the influx of people in.




                                 /Sir, I do not
                                                         8


                                    MR. KING




      Sir, I don't believe there is much at the moment,
I say "at the moment" because you indicated you might
like to come back, but can I emphasise again sir that if
necessary I can identify to you and it has been analysed
on my behalf, evidence directed to the state of the pens
at a given time; the position the witnesses were;
evidence as to the view from the Police Control Box, not
merely by reference to those who were in it. on the day
but those who had had experience of it on previous
occasions which must not be forgotten the evidence, all
that; evidence as to the numbers; the Serials; the steps
which were available on the evidence to those who wished
to divert; steps as to the efficacy of those measures
and so forth, all matters for the jury at the end of the
day in my submission and I won't go into them unless you
were to say to me:   "Mr. King, point to me the evidence
upon which the jury could consider those issues?" but in
my submission the evidence is patently there.

      Sir, was there any other matter of law which you
were concerned about which you raised yesterday?

      As regards the case of Higgins I must say I don't
see any difficulty in the case of Higgins.  If you sir
are of the view that there is evidence properly to go
before the jury but that you yourself, I can say this
because the jury aren’t here, would not reach a parti­
cular verdict, that is no reason for not leaving it
to the jury and merely because the Coroner in Higgins
himself did not like the verdict or did not want the
verdict, is no reason to withdraw it from the jury.

      If however at the end of the day, for example
because of the evidence of a supervening act which you
concluded was not open to the jury to interfere with as
a finding, then it would not be proper to leave it to
the jury and I must say I don't think anybody is in
disagreement.

      My submission is as regards those responsible for
the opening of the gates and the influx of the people
into the ground, for the reasons I have stated there
is clear evidence for the jury to consider and make
their minds up and you - I am not suggesting you would ■
but you should not usurp sir the function of the jury
by withdrawing that from them.

       Most of the arguments we have heard along the
line are really arguments for the jury to consider.
For example ray learned friend Mr. Isaacs said at one
point:   "Well the jury should have to consider
Mr. Duckenfield in certain circumstances", the circum­
stances of an emergency and so forth.
                                      MR. KING



      I d o n ’t deny they are entitled to look to all the
circumstances but that is a jury point not a legal point,
sir, so that is how I would leave the position at the
moment.

      THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed.

      May I just say, it applies actually both to you and
to Mr. Payne.  From my personal point of view I would have
found it exceedingly helpful to have (a) had your schedules
and (b) your work as well because I am quite certain that
a lot of effort and work has gone into it, but I think it
would be wrong of me in view of the rule to accept it, but
that is not to say that I d o n ’t recognise that (a) a lot
of work has been done and (b) that In fact I probably
would find it well certainly very interesting and I nave
no doubt also very useful because it would help iiie to if
you like cross-check against work which I have done on
the matter, but I d o n ’t think it is wise to embark on it.
It annoys me because I know you have got it and I would
like it but I am not going to take it.

      MR. KING:   So be it sir.

      MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, can I start by, I d o n ’t think
I am qualifying what my learned friend Mr. King has just
said to you, but certainly in my submission, I don't think
this is controversial, you are the arbiter of whether
there is sufficient evidence for a reasonable, i.e.
hypothetical reasonable jury properly directed to conclude
beyond reasonable doubt there was unlawful killing, wi.
to that extent you are required to exercise at lcJat iioao
judgment in respect of the arguments advanced by
learned friends up and down the line.

      I can also agree with my learned friend Mr. Ki*»y
in relation to ex parte Higgins.  I don't see any
difficulty with that case.  If you conclude in r e j e c t of
any individual or in respect of all principal players,
if I can put it that way, that there is no evidence
sufficient for a reasonable jury properly directed to
conclude beyond reasonable doubt there was unlawful
killing you must withdraw it either in respect of an
individual or in respect of everyone.  That is uncontroversial.

      My submissions are confined largely to the question
of whether unlawful killing can be properly left in
respect of Sheffield Wednesday and it is my submission
that there is no evidence on which a reasonable jury
properly directed could come to the conclusion that
Sheffield Wednesday were guilty of unlawful killing.

      To a certain extent very largely I adopt the
submissions that have been made as to the law by my
                                                             10


                                       MR. KING




learned friends Mr. Maxwell, Mr. Payne and Mr. Isaacs,
and so hopefully I can take it fairly shortly.

      Certainly that is so that the standard of proof is
uncontroversial, it must be beyond reasonable doubt and
I also agree, I think everyone is agreed the type of
unlawful killing that is to be considered is only that
of involuntary manslaughter or reckless manslaughter and
I go as far as to say, unlike my learned friend Ml'. King,
that the concept of gross negligence should not be left
as a basis for any verdict.

      If I need to refer you to it, sir I think you have
already seen the passage in Stanley in the ruling of
Mr. Justice Turner.  I can give you the page reference,
it is page 14 F-H.

      THE CORONER:   I have seen it.

      MR. CATCHPOLE:  That is certainly so - whatever
the qualifications my learned friend suggested and the
comments that he made in relation to Stanley as to the
system — that is certainly so when one is considering
the Club because of course if a criticism is to be made
it is of a system or lack of one the Club employed, so
Stanley is directly on the point.

      There is one matter that has not been raised except
obliquely by my learned friend Mr. Maxwell and that is
the concept of corporate manslaughter.  I accept, but I
must preface it by saying only for the purposes of this
submission in the event that it might go higher and might
have a different view, that a corporation can be found
guilty of manslaughter but the only basis for that finding
is, as was properly set out by my learned friend
Mr. Maxwell, that the actus reus and mens rea have to
be identified in the person who is the embodiment of the
company.

      I tan take you to the authorities.  Again I don't
think that is controversial.  One can't aggregate the
acts of other people into that individual, and again for
the purposes of this submission only, I would accept
that Mr. Mackrell is the embodiment of Sheffield Wednesday
and take it from there.

      Again I agree with the elements that are required
to establish reckless manslaughter which have been set
out by my learned friends and I will run through them
very briefly again.

      It must be proved beyond reasonable doubt that a
particular individual had a duty regarding the health
                                                            11


                                     MR. CATCHPOLE




and welfare of the deceased.  I d o n ’t think that is in
dispute in respect of any of the principal players here.

       (b) by some act or omission that individual failed
to do what he ought to have done for the health and
welfare of the deceased;

      (c) that but for the failure of that, individual
the death of the deceased would not have occurred;

      (d) that the failure was a substantial cause of
the death of the deceased.

      Finally I come to the one that has exercised some
debate up until now:

      (e) that there was no intervening act which caused
the death of the deceased subsequent to the failure.

       If there is such an intervening act it is my strong
submission that chain of causation will be broken.   If
you need authority for that I say it is a standard principle.
I can direct you sir to Smith and Hogan.   There is a debate
I am sure you have seen on page 316, but also in relation
to a discussion of murder that applies here.   I have got
the C ORONERSHIP on Knapman and there is a little debate
on it at paragraph 22.39 and I can read the first paragraph.
It goes on.   It says:

      "A murder is not committed when a person
      does a deliberate act which by the inter­
      position of an unforeseen event unwittingly
      leads to the death of another."

So again I don't think there can be much room for debate.

      I am heartened to hear that ray learned friend
Mr. King did not seek to challenge that.   I think it is
a fairly well established principle of law and I also
with respect adopt what my learned friend Mr. Isaacs
has said in that it is not only events that occurred
before the 15th of April, and one can see why Mr. Maxwell
put that in the context of Sheffield City Council
because of course they weren't there on the 15th of April,
but ary intervening act is sufficient to break the chain
of causation, assuming the relevant criteria are
established.




                      Turning to the mental element
                                               MR. CATCHPOLE


     Turning to the mental element, I am quite content
simply to say that Lawrence applies in this case.          I
would, however, take you back to the ruling of
Mr. Justice Turner.      I know Mr. Payne went through it in
some detail but there are some elements I would like to
re-emphasise and perhaps put' a slightly different slant
on.   Again I preface it by saying that whatever comments
my learned friend Mr. King”made in relation to Turner, do
not apply wn,ew o<
                 H”e^ is considerin*g‘the club-,- o>r, indsed,
Mr. Mole s system that was employed on the day, because
tnis is a case about system.

      Sir, if we start off at page 17.   It is really
letters G to II.   This is setting out the submissions of
ftr. Kentriage:

     "The word ’obvious’, said Mr. Kentridge, was not the
     same as ’reasonably foreseeable’ and connotes more
     than a risk wnich was reasonably foreseeable.   The
     meanings suggested were ’perfectly evident’, ’stares
     one in the face’, ’immediately apparent’."

Then if one goes to page 19, sir, F to H, half way
through the paragraph:

     "In my judgment Lord Diplock who was, I respectfully
     think, a master of the English language, did not use
     the words ’obvious and serious’ as synonyms to
     describe a risk which was reasonably foreseeable."

In that passage, in ray submission, he picks up on the
submissions made by Mr. Kentridge quite plainly.    VJe
have seen the passage where he emphasises that mere
negligence was not enough.    That obviously follows on.
Then just to re-emphasise a passage on page 22, from
F to H:

     "Thus, it is that in my judgment, before a risk can
     properly be said to be obvious and serious, there
     must be some evidence upon which the jury, being
     properly directed, can find that the particular
     defendant failed to observe that which was 'obvious
     and serious', which words themselves convey a
     meaning that the defendant's perception of risk was
     seriously deficient when compared to that of a
     reasonably prudent person engaged in the same kind
     of activity as that of the defendant whose conduct
     is being called into question."

Having said, obviously, hindsight must be excluded, that,
with respect, sir, does lead to the position that before
the terms "obvious and serious" can be satisfied there
has to be a risk, which was not only merely reasonably
foreseeable.   It goes far beyond that, that one was -
                                                         13

                                            MR. CATCHPOLE


and I had used the words "so plain" to a reasonably
prudent person in the circumstances of the particular
individual in question, that if that particular
individual had failed to perceive it he would be
described as having a perception that was seriously
deficient, but one can use the epithets that
Mr. Kentridge used, that would stare that reasonably
prudent person in the face, or that it was immediately
apparent.   They are, very strong, words.

     I don't believe my learned friend was challenging
it, indeed my note certainly suggests he wasn't, when he
referred to the case of Elliott.   Certainly in my
submission Elliott can be summed up briefly by saying
that wnen one is considering the position of a reasonably
prudent person, one puts them into the position and in
the circumstances that the individual in question found
himself - you exclude hindsight - it puts him with all
the factors available to him to see.   However, you do
not take account of any particular - Mr. Russell, I know,
has used the word idiosyncrasy - in the individual
himself.   In Elliott we had a girl with a very low 10
and one could not then put in a reasonably prudent person
with a very low 10.    If you exclude that would then put
the reasonably prudent person into the position that the
individual in question found himself.

     In that case one is then left that in order to find
the club responsible, in terms that there was an obvious
and serious risk, one has to put in a reasonably prudent
club secretary into the circumstances that Mr. Mackrell
found himself and also to find that there is evidence
there was a risk that-was so plain that it would have
been immediately apparent or stared him in the face.

     I do not think Mr. King sought to challenge that.

     Can I turn specifically to the club in relation to
causation?   We have mention from my learned friend
Mr. Payne and I think from my learned friend Mr. Isaacs
that one of the difficulties of the jurisdiction
certainly on this side of the bench is actually that no
criticism comes up front either by way of an indictment
or pleadings so one is inventing one's own criticism of
oneself, if that's right.

     It is fair to say that limited criticisms were made
in cross-examination of the arrangements outside Leppings
Lane turnstiles in relation to the signs, the turnstiles
and the tickets.

     I am not going to argue or enter into tne debate
because that would not be proper, but assuming any of the
limited criticisms that were made have any merit, which I
                                                       14

                                            MR. CATCHPOLE


do not accept, there is no evidence that any jury,
whether reasonable or not, could come to the conclusion
that that caused the crushing outside the turnstiles.
It may be that it might lead to some build-up, but
crushing is a completely different thing and there is
simply no evidence to suggest that anyone foresaw
crushing or the emergency event outside those turnstiles
on that day.    It is wholly unprecedented and all the
evidence is, that way.

     Equally there is no evidence on which a reasonable
jury could conclude that the events outside che
turnstiles at two-thirty up to three o'clock, caused the
death of the deceased inside the ground.    It certainly
would not have been foreseeable and that leads on to the
intervening act point.    There is no evidence at all that
any reasonable person, prudent person, in the position of
Hr. Mackrell or any other officer of the club could have
expected or foreseen - and I am using that word in
contradistinction to the mental element - that an exit
gate would be opened at a time, and I add in, '’as close
to kick-off," to permit a large number of fans to be
introduced en masse into an area of the ground that was
already full, in particular when the club itself was not
told of that decision and no steps are taken to divert
them away.   All the evidence is that was wholly
unforeseeable as far as any person was concerned, and I
would certainly say any reasonably prudent person in the
position of Mr. Mackrell.    There was no history of it at
all.

     Once one accepts that, any - if there is any -
causation started off outside the ground by the
arrangements or the system or the tickets or whatever,
that must be wholly broken once that decision is taken.

     Equally, if one moves inside the ground, that
argument applies really mutatis mutandis, because the
arrangements that were in place were for an ordinary,
normal turnstile entry.   Once the decision is taken to
open Gate C in the manner I have described, then that
supervenes and becomes an intervening act in relation to
those arrangements that have been made.   If evidence
needs to be said to support the proposition that it
overrode any system that was in place, that evidence came
both from Mr. Mole and Mr. Duckenfield.   I can give you
the references.   It was unchallenged, and indeed I would
say with respect, it was perfectly patent that that
decision overrode any system.

     Again, as far as causation is concerned, I say if
there is anything for which the club can be criticised,
then there was an intervening act on the day of which
they were unaware and could not reasonably have been
                                                      . 15

                                            MR. CATCHPOLE


expected to have foreseen, which broke any chain of
causation which can be attributed to the cluo.

     It may also be said, and this might be slightly
over-egging the pudding, that given the opening of Gate C
in those circumstances was wnolly unforeseeable, if
criticism is being made of the club, and I am not sure
that it was actually raised, if criticism is being made
that there was a failure to have in place arrangements to
deal with that exceptional entry of people, I would say
that that does not even amount to a failure in the terms
described, a failure of breach of duty, because it
requires the club to undertake a crystal ball exercise
and anticipate something that is wholly unforeseen,
whether reasonably or not, by any person, and then to
expect it to make arrangements to deal with that
possibility.

     I even go so far as to say there was no breach of
duty, so causation fails on that limb as well.




          In those circumstances I submit
                                                        '16

                                            MR. CATCHPOLE


In those circumstances I* submit that there is no act or
omission by the Club which a reasonable Jury properly
directed could possibly conclude was a cause, or even a
substantial cause, of the deaths of the deceased.

     One then really turns, even if that is not right, to
could any reasonable Jury possibly conclude that there was
evidence to establish mens re a . Again, when I use the
ward "Club", I insvs to use thG word 1 n uBlstioii ■to Mir •
Mackrell, and again I make the submission that no
reasonable Jury could come to the conclusion that on the
evidence a reasonably prudent person in Mr. Mackrell's
position would have perceived that there was an obvious
and serious risk of overcrowding or of physical injury or
death by overcrowding on those terraces as a result of any
act or omission of his.

     Again I go back to what could or could not be
foreseen, and I again use the distinction as to the events
outside the turnstiles, no evidence suggests that the
crushing could be foreseen by anyone, and that is against
the background when for two years all the evidence is that
the arrangements at that end of the Ground were
successful.  There is again, taking the argument I
advanced slightly earlier, further, there is no evidence
even if that build up and crushing could have been
foreseen that that gave rise to an obvious and serious
risk inside the Ground, because then one is back to the
intervening act, and I think my learned friend Mr. King
has quite rightly focussed on the intervening act, because
one of the things one has to establish in deciding what
was or what was not a substantial cause is not whether
there was a general risk of physical injury for whatever
reason on the terraces, but could it have been foreseen
that an act would lead to a particular train of events,
which would lead to the possibility of overcrowding and
physical injury?   In this case again I say there is
absolutely no evidence which could possibly suggest that
anyone in the position of Mr. Mackrell, up to and
including the 15th April, could perceive that there was an
obvious and serious risk that Gate C would be opened to
permit the entry of a large number of fans in an
uncontrolled fashion without either the Club being told,
or without steps being taken by those who make that
decision to ensure that the fans are diverted.

     So as far as any of the events that occurred on the
day, I say there is simply no evidence that one could pin
on a reasonably prudent man in Mr. Mackrell's position to
show that he would have perceived such a plain risk, or a
risk that was immediately apparent.   It runs wholly
contrary to everything we have heard.
                                                        *17

                                           MR. CATCHPOLE


     There has been a brief reference to the system that
was employed on the day, and again I am not sure how much
criticism, if any, was made of the Club in relation to
that system.  Certainly I do not think it came very thick
and fast and was not put to Mr. Mackrell ....

     MR. KING:   Can I say, sir, far from it.   I make my
position clear, that the evidence of Mackrell, Lock,
Seamen* I would submit indicated a> different system they -
were expecting from the system which was employed on the
day, and that is why I submitted to you, sir, that if
system was a cause there was evidence - it is not for me
to say which way a Jury would go - but there was evidence
that a reasonably prudent person of the expertise dealing
with plans would know that the system on the day had the
risk of overcrowding inherent in it, because of the fact
that Mackrell, Lock, Seamen, Eastwood, were expecting a
different system in certain respects.   If that helps my
learned friend ....

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   It is very helpful.  I have got a
series of factors which I would have put to you as there
being a lack of evidence for a person in the position of
Mr. Mackrell, but I think it is now plain it simply has
not been put to Mr. Mackrell that he should have perceived
there was an obvious and serious risk, and as such I don't
think there is any evidence, with respect, that could
establish any mens rea against Mr. Mackrell/the Club, in
relation to the system if that system is to be found at
fault, and I make no argument about that.

     So in the round, whether it is the opening of Gate C
or the system itself, there is simply no evidence on which
any reasonable Jury could come to the conclusion that a
reasonably prudent person in the position of Mr. Mackrell
would have perceived the obvious and serious risk to which
I have referred and in the manner in which I have defined
it. As such, with respect, there should not be left to
this Jury the verdict in respect of Sheffield Wednesday of
unlawful killing, and they should be directed as my
learned friend Mr. Maxwell has suggested in relation to
the Sheffield City Council.

     Unless I can assist you, sir - as I say, I have got a
number of factors for the circumstances but I don't think
in the light of that intervention that I need to go
through them, and I have been much shorter than I
anticipated.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   My submission is relating to the
Inquest into the death of my son John McBrien at
Hillsborough Football Stadium on 15th April, 1989.
                                                         *18
                                                 MRS McBRIEN


     Thank you for giving me the opportunity to make a
legal submission on behalf of my family, as I am only a
lay person.  Also, I am grateful that I have had the
opportunity to study the submissions made by Mr. Richard
Maxwell, QC, on behalf of Sheffield City Council.  I wish
to utilise a large amount of those submissions as they
relate to the law in general to develop my theme and put
my case.
     My submission relates only to the possibility' erf ttTe
Jury being directed to consider a verdict of unlawful
killing.  For the purpose of this Inquest a verdict of
unlawful killing would be justified if the Jury was
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that some person or
persons whom the Jury must under no account name or
identify, had brought about the death of John McBrien, as
a result of committing the offence of manslaughter.

     If the Jury are to be directed to consider a verdict
of unlawful killing, on the basis that John McBrien died
as a consequence of manslaughter, then the Jury must be
warned in terms that they are being directed to consider
whether a criminal'offence of manslaughter had been
committed.  They must be given the appropriate direction
as to the standard of proof for manslaughter, and the
appropriate direction is the simple one, that they should
be satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt, or as is
sometimes said satisfied so that they are sure that all
the necessary elements of the offence are proved, and that
the verdict of unlawful killing must not be returned
unless they are satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt that
such elements are proved.

     The question is whether the Jury should be directed
to consider a verdict of unlawful killing based on
reckless manslaughter.  That is to say to consider whether
the Jury are satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that some
person or persons whom they must under no account name has
brought about the death of John McBrien as a result of
recklessness.  If the Jury are to consider whether some
specific individual committed the offence of reckless
manslaughter then the Jury have to consider firstly
whether that person by his conduct, that is some act or
omission to act where there was a duty to act, was a
substantial cause of the death of John McBrien.

     In order to prove causation the following matters
must be established:  (1) that but for the conduct of the
person under consideration the death of John McBrien would
not have occurred; (2) that although the conduct of the
person under consideration need not be the sole or the
main cause of death, it must be a substantial cause.
                                                        .19

                                                MRS McBRIEN


     The Jury's function is to establish how John McBrien
came by his death and they are concerned to find out what
circumstances are directly responsible for his death, that
the events occurring at the Ground on 15th April, 1989,
from 2.30 p.m. onwards were foreseeable.  The events
referred to are the sudden introduction of a large number
of fans en masse into an area of the terraces which was
already crowded and full.  Prior to the opening of the
exit gate, Gate C, at 2.52 p.m. approximately 52,000 fans
had been safely accommodated within the Stadium that d&y
and had been admitted by turnstile entry.  The admittance
of the remaining 2,000 or so fans should have continued by
the same safe method of turnstile entry, and not in the
form of a sudden in rush by the opening of an exit gate.
The breaking of the rules that day to enable fans to enter
the Stadium ....

      THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, you were doing very
well, exceedingly well, but you are now beginning, in fact
not beginning you are well into an address on the facts.
I did warn you twice because I know how difficult it is,
blit I am not going to let you address me on the facts.  It
is not proper or fair to 94 other youngsters, or indeed
older people, because 94 other people have also died and
they are just as precious to their families as John is to
you.   It is quite improper that I should allow you to
break all the rules, if I don't let Mr. King break them.

     I don't know what is coming next but at the moment
you are telling me facts.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I was going to lead up to the point
of the alternative of opening the gates, that there was an
alternative.

     THE CORONER:   No, that is an address on the facts.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Might I   suggest perhaps we could
rise for our coffee break and   meanwhile Mr. King and
myself will have a quick look   over Mrs. McBrien s
submission and see whether we   can be of any assistance.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.  Please understand, Mrs.
McBrien, I am in a terrible difficulty over this.  I don't
want to muzzle you, if that is the right word, but on the
other hand I have also got to stick within the rules.
That is very kind of you, Mr. Catchpole, and a good idea.
Shall we have 20 minutes?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, I think almost all of it does
relate to the law though.

     THE CORONER:   If Mr. Catchpole and Mr. King are
happy to look at it ....
                                                         .20

                                               MRS McBRIEN


     MRS. McBRIEN:   I would not like the theme that I
have changed in any way.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I can promise Mrs. McBrien I would
not dream of attempting to alter the theme.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, let's make this quite
clear.  What Mr. Catchpole and Mr. King, or indeed anybody
is gping to say to you, is not binding.  You can say,   Get
lost".  You can even say, '1 don't want you to look at
it", but if you have an offer of help then you must
consider it and either accept it or reject it as you wish,
but you must also bear in mind that when I come back after
my coffee break if I am not satisfied that you are dealing
with law I am going to stop you.

                    (Short Adjournment)
                                                 MRS. MCBRIEN


     MR. CATCHPOLE:    I have had the opportunity, sir,
of briefly looking through Mrs. McBrien's submission.
She was in fact right to say that the vast majority of
it does relate to the law.    There are passages relating
to the fact which, as written, sounds like a speech but
I think, as I have tried to explain, they are actually
intended to illustrate Mrs. McBrien's theme that there
is evidence th 6 Jtiry could properly consider in
reaching a verdict rather than addressing you on the
facts.  They are not very long passages.

     THE CORONER:  I take it though, from those of you
who have looked at it, you are not going to jump and
complain if I listen?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   It is only me that has looked at
it, sir.

     MR. KING:  I suggested an approach by which we
could solve the problem and I left it to my learned
friend, Mr. Catchpole, to continue only because on
reflection, given my particular position I did not feel
I ought to go any further because I did not want any
conflict arising out of my position.

     THE CORONER:  I look to you then, Mr. Catchpole.
I have heard what you say. Mrs. McBrien, carry on.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  Sir, there is just a little to put
in a different way that I was referring to before.

     THE CORONER:  I have heard what- Mr. Catchpole has
said and I am reassured.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  It is the law.  I have read the
submission of Mr. Hale and I have listened carefully to
the submissions of Mr. Isaacs and my submission is that
there is evidence on which a reasonable Jury, properly
directed, could conclude that John McBrien was
unlawfully killed.

    There is evidence to suggest that the opening of
Gate C was the cause, or substantial cause, of the
death of John McBrien.  For example, some 50,000 fans
were already in the stadium and there was the
uncontrolled entry through Gate C at 2.52.  In
addition, there was the evidence of Dr. Nicholson about
the increase in the rate of flow into the ground.

    The second matter to be considered is the mental
element involved in reckless manslaughter.  The Jury
should be directed to consider whether the doer of the
act acted recklessly in so far as before doing the act
he either failed to give any thought to the possibility
of there being any such risk to the fans within the
stadium, or, having recognised that there was such a
risk, he nevertheless went on to do it anyway.

    This can be compared with driving a motor vehicle
on the highway.  The example I give is that we have
evidence that about 52,000 had entered or been driven
into the stadium by 2.52 by the safe speed limit, that
is, turnstile entry.  That had been observed at the
time but at 2.52 the speed limit was exceeded
considerably, that is, the rate of flow of fans was
dramatically increased.  That was a reckless act.   That
was driving at excessive speeds causing injuries and
deaths.

    The Jury must be satisfied that the defendant was
in fact driving the vehicle, that is the mass of
people, in such a manner as to create an obvious and
serious risk of causing physical injury to some other
person, namely John McBrien, who was using the road,
namely the Hillsborough Football Stadium, at the time.
In driving in that manner the defendant did so without
having given any thought to the possibility of there
being any such risk or, having recognised that there
was some risk involved, had none the less gone on to
take it.

    It is for the Jury to decide whether the risk
created by the manner in which the vehicle was being
driven was both obvious' and serious and in deciding
that they might apply the standard of the ordinary,
prudent motorist as represented by themselves.   If
satisfied that an obvious and serious risk was created
by the manner of the defendant's driving, the Jury are
entitled to infer that he was in one or other states of
mind required to constitute the offence and will
probably do so, but regard must be given to any
explanation he gives as to his state of mind which may
displace the inference.

    The second question you have to decide, was the
driving that caused those injuries reckless?  If so,
then it is manslaughter.  To amount to reckless driving
mere negligence is not enough.  His conduct must go
beyond the question of compensation between citizens
and amount to criminal conduct requiring punishment.
You have to be satisfied upon the question of
recklessness that he drove in such a manner as to
create an obvious and serious risk of causing physical
harm to some other person who might be using the road
at the time.
                                                          23

                                               MRS. McBRIEN


    Once you are satisfied that the manner of his
driving was such as to create an obvious and serious
risk of causing physical harm to a person using the
road at the time you also have to be satisfied that
driving in that manner he did so without having given
any thought to the possibility of there being such a
risk or, alternatively, having recognised that there
was some risk none the less went on to take it.   Ift
other words, he was reckless.  He reckoned not of the
consequences.

    In determining the quality of his driving, you
apply the standards of the ordinary, reasonable
motorist.  You, of course, take into account all the
evidence including his explanation.   If you are
satisfied so as to be sure that the first question is
proved, that is to say, the act of X was a substantial
cause of the death of John McBrien then the second
question you have to decide is, was the act that caused
his death reckless?  If so, then it is manslaughter.
    His conduct must go beyond the question of
compensation between citizens and amount to criminal^
conduct requiring punishment.  You have to be satisfied
upon the question of recklessness that he acted in such
a manner as to create an obvious and serious risk of
causing physical harm to John McBrien who happened to
be using the Leppings Lane terrace at the time.   You
also have to be satisfied that acting in that manner he
did so without having given any thought to the
possibility of there being any such risk or,
alternatively, having recognised that there was some
risk involved none the less.went on to take it.   In
other words, he was reckless.   He reckoned not of the
consequences.

    In determining the quality of his act you apply the
standards of the ordinary reasonable person who
happened to be in the same circumstances as X. You, of
course, take into account all the evidence including
his explanation.

    In order to constitute the offence of manslaughter,
the risk of death being caused must be very high and
such a remark should be made to the Jury here.  There
is evidence on which a reasonable Jury could conclude
that there was a real possibility of a sudden inrush of
fans using the central tunnel as that was the direct
means of access to the Leppings Lane terrace.  It was
also known that the terrace had a high perimeter fence
at the front and radial fences dividing the terrace
into pens, and having radial gates that could become
obscured.
                                                           24-2:

                                                MRS. McBRIEN


    Where manslaughter is charged and the circumstances
are that John McBrien was killed as a result of the
reckless driving of the defendant on a public highway,
that is Hillsborough Football Stadium the Judge should
give the Jury the appropriate direction but in order to
constitute the offence of manslaughter the risk of
death being caused by the manner of the defendant■s
driving must be very high.

    In deciding whether or not the risk was obvious the
Jury should have regard to whether the risk would have
been obvious to an ordinary, prudent individual in the
relevant circumstances.   The Jury should be told that
they may take into account what any witness has told
them was obvious or not to that witness as a risk.   The
witness1s perception of the risk can provide an
indication of whether or not the risk was obvious to an
ordinary prudent person and especially so if the Jury
conclude that the witness in question was such an
ordinary, prudent person.

    For this purpose, witness includes a person whose
conduct has been called into question at the Inquest
and the Jury can take into account an explanation by
such a person.  The Jury should only be directed to
consider a verdict of unlawful killing based upon
reckless manslaughter if the Coroner concludes, as a
matter of law, that there is a case fit to be left to
the Jury and whether the Coroner concludes, as a matter
of law, that a reasonable Jury, properly directed,
might bring in such a verdict.

    The death of each deceased must be considered
individually.  Before the Jury may be invited to
consider a verdict of unlawful killing in respect of
John McBrien the Coroner must direct himself as to
whether or not there is a prima facie case so far as
John McBrien is concerned.  A verdict in the case of
each deceased is required and if unlawful killing is to
be left to the Jury it must be considered by the Jury
in relation to each of the deceased.

    The Jury should be directed that if, having
considered the circumstances of death affecting each of
the individual deceased, they are satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that some or all of them may be
considered as a group of persons whose death was caused
as a result of reckless manslaughter committed by some
specific individual or individuals, who must under no
account be named or identified, then similar verdicts
may be returned in the case of each member of such
group.  There will, therefore, be 95 verdicts but some
or all may be in similar terms.
                                                       26


                                      MRS. MCBRIEN



      However, the jury must be directed that it is
improper to consider unlawful killing in relation to the
95 deceased as a whole or to any group of the deceased
without first considering the individual circumstances
of the death of each particular deceased.

      The jury must be warned that no short cut is
available to their, permitting them to proceed on the
presumption that t h e y a r e entitled'to^ consider th«
circumstances of death of the 95 deceased as a whole
or of any group of the deceased as a group unless some
cause is shown why they should not do so.

      That would reverse the order in which relevant
consideration should be dealt with.

      They are concerned with the Inquest relating to
the death of John McBrien at the Hillsborough Football
Stadium disaster as an individual case.

      There is no presumption that a verdict in common
form is applicable to the 95 deceased persons.  Only
after careful consideration of each individual case can
the jury establish what verdict is appropriate.

      The jury must be directed that they can return a
verdict of unlawful killing only if they can attribute
the ingredients of the relevant offence, reckless
manslaughter to some individual person or persons
whom they should on no account name or otherwise
identify.
      In this context the jury should consider the position
of each single person who may be a candidate taking each
such person in turn and coming to a conclusion.

      In this context the jury must be warned that
whatever person is being considered, and be that person
a corporation or a natural human being, the ingredients
of manslaughter must be established by proving the
necessary mental element and criminal conduct of man­
slaughter against it or him by evidence properly to
be relied on against it or him and a case against any
person cannot be fortified by evidence against another
person.  No aggregation of criminal culpability is
permitted.

       If unlawful killing is to be left to the jury
 as a possible verdict then the Coroner should indicate
 to the jury that they must deal with that issue first
 and that they should approach therefore initially the
 question whether or not they are satisfied so that they
 are sure beyond a reasonable doubt thht the verdict
 of unlawful killing may be returned in respect of
 John McBrien.
                                                                 27


                                         MRS• McBRIEN



      The jury have heard a variety of different persons
and such criticisms have been voiced wholly or mainly
in cross-examination.

      Representation of certain persons whose conduct
was likely to be called into question has been permitted.

      The case of any such person whose conduct has been
called into q u estion then unless & rsssoEiflisl© j>uxy pxop.ej.Ay;
directed could conclude that such person committed the
offence of manslaughter against any or all or some of the
deceased, the jury must be directed in terms either:

      (1) To exclude that person from their consideration
of the issue whether or not they are satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the verdict of unlawful killing is
appropriate; or
       (2) To consider such a verdict only in the case
of some other person or persons who should be named in
the direction but not of course in the verdict and not
to consider such a verdict in the case of any other
person.
       The reasons for discriminating in this way are:

      (a) For reasons of justice and humanity there
should be no question of any risk arising that a verdict
of unlawful killing where the jury are forbidden to name
any culprit might be understood in the context of the
evidence to refer to one or more of those persons whose
conduct was called into question at the Inquest, but in
respect of whom no reasonable jury properly directed
could conclude that such person had committed the offence
of manslaughter.

      Such a risk does arise where there have been
criticisms of and suggestions express or implied of
negligence against a variety of persons and all the more
as where the verdict of unlawful killing involves a finding
of recklessness which the jury and the public may be at
risk of confusing with negligence.  There must be no risk
of those who are innocent of criminal culpability of being
caught up with any whom the jury may regard as criminally
responsible.

       (b) The converse of (a) is also true, namely that
 in the case of a person whose conduct the jury are rightly
 scrutinising to see whether they are satisfied so as to
 be sure that such conduct is criminal, any allegations
 against or criticism of any other person might give rise
 to prejudice.  Such a case does arise where the jury may
 be tempted to aggregate fault.
                                                             28


                                              MRS. MCBRIEN




       (c)       Without discrimination and exclusion of persons
who ought not to be regarded as candidates in terras of
criminal culpability there is a risk that the jury may
be confused by an unnecessarily and erroneously wide choice
of candidates.
      That concludes my submission.

      THE CORONER':   Than'k^yo'tay- Mrs-*-

      MISS ADDLEMAN:  Sir, can I say that in due course
what I will seek to do is to adopt many of the submissions,
indeed if not all the submissions made by my learned friend
Mr. Russell.  Perhaps I will then have some amplification
to make.
      I am in your hands, sir, but we feel down this end
that Mr. Russell should go first.
      THE CORONER:    I will be very happy to hear Mr. Russell
before I hear you.
      MR. RUSSELL: Sir, I have sought to prepare a
skeleton argument of my submissions and you will see casting
your eye over it that it covers many of the points w m c h
I will be able to pass over very quickly indeed because I
don't see any point in rehearsing submissions which have
been made concisely and forcefully by those further up
the 1ine.
      Sir, perhaps the quickest way is to move through
this skeleton pausing to elaborate matters where either
you require further guidance of what I am trying to say
or where I feel the point is not covered sufficiently
in the skeleton.
      The intention of these submissions is made clear first
of all. The sole concern of these submissions is to
establish that Mr. Greenwood is not a person in respect
of whom the jury should be permitted to consider returning
a verdict of unlawful killing and is made with this
proviso, that it is not concerned with the positions of
other persons whether human or corporate.

       Sir, the first point that I come to is the importance
 of excluding ineligible persons and two authorities are
 referred to in the skeleton, ex. parte Gray and the case
 that is referred to in that case within the body of the
 judgment, that of ex parte Thompson.

       Sir, I don't think it is necessary to read out the
 whole of the judgment in ex parte Gray. You are familiar
 with it and have shown yourself to be familiar with it,
 but you will recall in ex parte Gray what Mr. Alan Jones
                                                       29


                                     MR. RUSSELL




maintained had happened and the basis upon which he made
his criticism, was that the effect of the direction given
to the jury in ex parte Gray was to create a blunderbuss
effect where the opportunity for returning an unlawful
killing verdict was a shot which went off in all directions
striking Police involved indiscriminately.

      Sir, the reference to that, certainly in the Weekly
Law Reports is at 1028 at E.

      THE CORONER:   Yes, I remember that.

      MR. RUSSELL:  I am sure you are familiar with that
passage, but it follows from that, indeed it is said in
terms by Lord Justice Watkins that the jury's task is to
consider each Police Officer in turn rather than employ ^
the weapon that was described by Mr. Jones as a "blunderouss .

      In that case of course there were eight Police
Officers who could conceivably have had anything to do
with the death of the deceased and in those circumstances
it was a possible and feasible task for the jury to consider
each of those Officers in turn a'nd apply the proper test
for unlawful killing which is articulated by Lord Justice
Watkins in that case, but the essential difference between
ex parte Gray and these Inquests is that compared to a
cast of eight in the weeks that have brought us to these
submissions we have heard from a cast of hundreds, of
people from all walks of life be they Policemen, Club
Officers, Engineers, supporters, members of Local Government,
members of the Fire Service, each of which from one source
or another there has been criticism, but it does not help
the jury's task to be simply referred to the evidence and
given the appropriate direction as to the circumstances
in which they can return an unlawful killing, if they are
left with a morass of people from whom to choose.

      Sir, perhaps the position is made starkly clear
in the reference to ex parte Thompson that occurs in
ex parte Gray. As you will see it appears on page 1025
of the Weekly Law Reports, I apologise for not using
the Queen's Bench Reports, it is the fourth page of the
judgment of Lord Justice Watkins.   Lord Justice Watkins
said this:
       "I think it right to preface consideration of
       the excellent submissions which we have
       listened to by reciting the words used by
       the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Lane, in
       R. v South London Coroner, ex parte Thompson,
       in giving the judgment of the Court in which
       I was a member, he said:   'The Coroner's
       task in a case such as this is a formidable
       one and no one would dispute that.   It is
                                                          30


                                    MR. RUSSELL




     quite apart from the difficulties which^inevitably
     arise when feelings are running nigh ano the
     spectators are emotionally involved and vocal.
     Once again it should not be forgotten that an
     inquest is a fact finding exercise and not
     a method of apportioning guilt. The procedure
     and rules of evidence which are suitable for
     one are unsuitable for the other.  In an inquest
     it should never be forgotten that there are no
     parties, there is no indictment, there is no
     prosecution, there is no defence, there is no
     trial, simply an attempt to establish facts.
     It is an inquisitorial process, a process of
     investigation quite unlike a criminal trial
     where the prosecutor accuses and the accused
     defends, the judge holding the balance or the^
     ring, whichever metaphor one chooses to use.'"

Sir, insofar as one can draw an analogy or a contrast with
criminal cases so one can with civil cases.

      Of course in a civil case one has means whereby the
issues are limited and the attention of the tribunal is
directed to a narrow compass which is very properly a narrow
compass and one has pleadings where the issues are set out
and one has other legal documents whereby a party who is
putting forward a case is tied down by further and better
particulars or by the administration of interrogatories.
I am sure this is a familiar process to you.




                          At a criminal trial
                                                                 31

                                                       MR. RUSSELL


     At a criminal trial the jury is not left with an
account of all the events that have happened that gave
rise to the event with which they are concerned and then
a direction as to what the appropriate mental process
should be for them before they could return a verdict of,
let us sa y , manslaughter.   Indeed, in this case the jury
needs help* out of tne morass of. ,.a*lJL trie cxrcmn.st.an.ces and...
that help must inevitably come from you and the deeper
the mire the more robust, in my submission, you must be
in helping the jury identify what are the proper verdicts
and, certainly as far as my client is concerned, wno are
the proper persons.     Putting it another way, who are
ineligible persons for them to consider?

     If it is a robust task - I choose that word reading
what is said by Lord Justice Parker i n t h e case to wnich
you referred us last night, ex parte Higgins.      Tint is a
case which was wholly different from that which we are
considering.   Sir, it is page 243 of that book.      It is
a simple case arising out of the Mapping dispute, v.*hen
the deceased had been killed by the driving of a lorry.
In that case Counsel for the deceased and Counsel for the
applicant - they were separately represented - sourint to
identify in the evidence at the stage of the judicial
review, scintilli of unlawful killing, wnich would have
entitled the jury, so it was submitted, to come to the
conclusion that the proper verdict was unlawful killing,
notwithstanding the inadequacies of the direction tnat
were furnished to the jury by the Coroner.

     Indeed at page 245, appear these two short
paragraphs:

      "Mr. Coghlan for the coroner submitted tn.*>i
      nevertheless there was evidence upon wnicn .t jury
      properly directed could have come to tne conclusion
      that a verdict of unlawful killing was the wrooer
      verdict.   In this he was supported by Mr. C'Connor.
      Both of them referred us to all such passages of the
      evidence as they were able to suggest miiht ar.iount
      to sufficient evidence to justify such a verdict.

      I am wnolly unable to accept that the evidence could
      conceivably amount to justification in law for any
      such verdict.   For myself I gain the distinct
      impression that the coroner was of the same view but
      for some reason or other did not withdraw that
      verdict from the purview of the jury."

     Perhaps there it envisages what is the duty on the
coroner in such circumstances; , a duty, in my submission,
to be robust, to withdraw verdicts which should not be
left to a jury on the basis which has already been
articulated higher up.   Equally importantly, to withdraw
                                                          32

                                                MR. RUSSELL


from the jury's purview those people who are ineligible
because the evidence against them-is insufficient or none
existent for a reasonable jury, accepting such evidence
there is, concluding, having been properly directed, that
the appropriate verdict is unlawful killing.

     LnLais, .six,*,- L am. fortified hyr the observation in
the commentary by the editor of the Casebook on Coroners,
page 247, beginning on the third line of the commentary:

     "Moreover, Lord Justice Parker considered that the
     evidence could not have amounted in law to a verdict
     of 'unlawful killing' and the verdict ought to have
     been withdrawn from the purview of the jury.   The
     Coroner must withdraw from the jury, as a matter of
     law, those formal verdicts which cannot possibly be
     supported by the evidence."

The next paragraph, again it is a short one and is
perhaps relevant:

     "Occasionally Coroners have left some most unlikely
     verdicts to a jury, if only to give the jury a
     choice.   One can imagine the discomfiture of a
     Coroner who, after perhaps a long and exhaustive
     inquiry, is obliged to inform the jury that as a
     matter of law there is only one conclusion to be
     considered and effectively having to direct them to
     return it."

I do not think the last sentence is relevant.

     Sir, last night you invited us to consider whether
in the light of what was said in ex parte Higgins, there
was a duty upon yourself to take certain action in
respect of verdicts, and I presume you are also enquiring
particular persons, or a discretion.   Sir, I wonder
whether it is helpful in these circumstances to talk
about a discretion.   Uhat there clearly is, and here
again there is an analogy with the criminal law in the
case of Galbraith, is a duty upon you, sir, to form a
judgment and that is a judgment which you must form
having regard to the length of the inquiry that has taken
place and in that I have used the word "robust" before, I
use it again, it follows that the longer the inquiry the
larger the conceivable cast of people whose conduct has
been criticised by one or more people over the weeks that
have preceded this, the more robust you should be.

     Returning, sir, if I may to the skeleton, I perhaps
put it in more simple terms here.  The Coroner has a duty
to withdraw from the jury's consideration those persons
where there is no evidence, or only tenuous evidence on
wnich, even if such evidence were accepted, a reasonable
                                                          33

                                                 MR. RUSSELL


jury, properly directed, could conclude that they
unlawfully killed any of the deceased.

       Sir, that is an analogy with the case of Galbraith
and I use the word "analogy advisedly, bearing in mind
what is also said and the sentiments that are expressed
by,..the Divi&iaiml Cou r t,in the case of ex parte Hig&ins.

     Sir, it follows that one can derive from the case of
Spooner, as I go on to say, that the Coroner's duty is to
exclude ineligible persons, and it is a duty that should
be discharged robustly, especially when dealing with
causation, to which I come below, and the elements of
manslaughter.

     Sir, you have been referred to the case of ex parte
Spooner and I am sure you are familiar with the brief
passage on page 17 of Lord Justice Bingham's Judgment.
The penultimate paragraph of his Judgment:

     "It is his duty to guide the jury to a correct
     verdict, but nis responsibility is to conduct a fact
     finding exercise, not to apportion blame and not to
     decide civil liability.   In a case such as this the
     chain of causation may be of infinite length.   The
     Coroner had to break it somewhere to keep his
     inquiry within tolerable bounds.   He broke it at
     what I judge to be a reasonable and sustainable
     point, particularly bearing in mind the exhaustive
     Public Inquiry which had already been conducted by
     Mr. Justice Sheen."

     Sir, perhaps that is further comfort for a Coroner
who recognises that he has a duty to form a judgment and
perhaps should be encouraged to do so robustly.

     Returning to the skeleton, a person should not be
left for the jury to consider in respect of a verdict of
unlawful killing unless, I submit, there is sufficient
and proper evidence on which a reasonable jury, properly
directed, could conclude that that person killed
unlawfully one or more of the deceased.

     Sir, I respectfully adopt what my learned friend
Mr. Maxwell says on pages 15 and 16 of his submissions as
to the reasons why it is important only to leave within
the purview of the jury those people who are proper
persons.   Sir, tfiis can be expressed on one of two
bases, as he does in the alternative on page 15 of his
submissions, either that you should seek to include for
the purposes of the jury only those people for whom you
feel that there is sufficient evidence upon which they
could reach a verdict of unlawful killing or,
alternatively, negatively, that you should exclude all
                                                        34

                                               MR. RUSSELL


those people or all those classes of people by reference
to occupation, job, position, location, time, or
whatever, those people who should not be eligible persons
for the jury to consider in respect of a verdict of
unlawful killing.

     THE CORONER:,   Can I just stop you for one minute?
It is paragraph 12, because we want to follow when we
read tne transcript.

     MR. RUSSELL:       Sir, it is page 15.   It is the
second s u b - paragraph under the numbered paragraph 12 ,
beginning, "In the case of any such person..." and the
passage which I adopt is that that ends at the end of
paragraph 12 towards the foot of page 16, ending with the
words, "...erroneously wide choice of candidates."

     Sir, the next two sections I think I can move over
very quickly.   I do not seek to depart from the
suggestion by Mr. Maxwell that the only version of
unlawful killing with which we are concerned is reckless
manslaughter and those above me have dealt well with what
is the relevant standard of proof and I think that is
clear and I would not seek to repeat what has already
been said.

     Moving on to the second page, the approach I would
invite you to take in respect of unlawful k i l l i n g i n
respect of Mr. Greenwood, because remember the original
intention I articulated at the beginning of these
submissions, and the question I pose is this:      were the
deaths of any of the deceased caused by a reckless act by
Mr. Greenwood, or an omission to act on his part when
under a duty to act?   Afterwards I refer to an omission,
I am meaning an omission to do an act on his part when he
was under a duty to act, but for conciseness I have only
called it an omission.

     For reasons I shall develop later on, nothing short
of recklessness will suffice and it is no longer
appropriate to talk in terms of negligence with some sort
of adjective stuck in front of it.

     Sir, I then proceed to unlawful killing itself.
The first and vital hurdle is one of causation.   Sir,
this has been touched upon by my learned friends further
up the chain.   I need not dwell on it.  I can perhaps
move through some sentiments quite quickly.   It is
possible, in my submission, to unravel time and
circumstances leading up to the deaths, to produce a
catalogue of all the features which have been mentioned
in connection with the disaster, but, I submit, it is
important to distinguish a cause or causes of the deaths
                                                               35

                                                     MR. RUSSELL


from the tessellation of events which constitute the
background to the disaster.

      Sir, in making that I do not seek to denigrate from
what my learned Mr. Payne has done in providing a list of
factors w.nich he says are capable of being causes.            It
j_s j   course, 3 cjviesti ion in the la*s.t' reso^t^^. subject to
your direction, to the jury to identify the cause, the
causes, the "how".       Certainly while it might be possible
to identify approximate cause or causes of how the deaths
occurred, it is important to remember that certain
factors might play in a part in the sequelae to the
events created by those cause or causes, which themselves
remain relevant.

     That sounds gobbledegoolc - I apologise if it came
across as gobbledegook - but take the example of the
creation of the radial fences, or the installation and
size of the radial gates at the back of the radial
fences, one can, for the sake of argument, postulate that
the cause of the deaths is the opening of Gate C, or the
manner of the entry into Gate C into the central pens by
those people, but the fact of the erection in the past
before the accident occurred, before two previous semi­
finals had taken place, their presence and their position
and their form of construction are, of course, relevant
factors which colour what happens after the cause which
is identified by the jury, subject to your direction, was
the proximate cause of the disaster.

     Sir, it is important, returning to the skeleton, to
identify the features and events and the acts and the
omissions, but only identify those which are substantial,
effective and direct.

     Sir, you have already been addressed upon what might
be the "but for" test.   An equal, legal way of
discussing that is to identify what is a .causa causans, a
cause causing what has happened.

     However, sir, it is important as I proceed' to
recognise breaks in the chain of causation and the
effects of such breaks.   Now I am speaking here solely
from the position of Mr. Greenwood and one can postulate,
for example, a break in the chain of causation, and I
have added a little to what appears on the skeleton.
For example, the consequences of opening Gate C and the
fact of the entry of a large number of supporters intent
on seeing the match, into the most popular area of
terracing very short before or at kick-off, in
circumstances wholly unprecedented, unexpected and
unforeseeable, which takes place to the ignorance of
Mr. Greenwood.
                                              MR. RUSSELL


     It is important that I add those words because when
one is concerned with what acts or omissions by
Mr. Greenwood might nave caused the deaths it is
important that his ignorance of what was happening, of
wnich tne evidence is unanimous, is, of course, very
material.




        My conclusion under
                                                        *37
                                                MR. RUSSELL


My conclusion under causation for unlawful killing is that
no reasonable Jury, I submit, properly directed could
conclude that any act or omission by Mr. Greenwood was a
direct, substantial and effective cause of the death of
any of the deceased.

     Sir, moving on to the next page, to the elements of
manslaughter, again this can be taken shortly because of
what has already gone before. ’ The only- way perhaps in
which I would differ from my learned friend Mr. Maxwell s
exposition of the law is to invite you or to remind you of
the two elements that exist to manslaughter.    Sometimes
the mental element of manslaughter is all wrapped up as
being both the subjective and the objective element, but
in my submission when the offence is analysed it still
does fall into the traditional categories of an,actus
reus, the deed which was done, and the mens re a , the mind
with which that act or omission was done.

     The definition that I offer of actus reus is an act
(or omission, where there is a duty on that person to act)
which creates a risk, serious and obvious to a reasonable
and prudent person (in the same position as that person)
that physical injury will be caused to another person by
that act (or omission).

     Sir, there has been some dispute, or some argument
between my learned friend Mr. Isaacs and my learned friend
Mr. King as to whether death is more appropriate a word to
use instead of personal injury.  I would respectfully
support my learned friend Mr. King and disagree with my^
learned friend Mr. Isaacs for this reason, not only is it
my understanding that is what it is, but it would be
surprising if one considers what is the requisite need for
murder which, of course, does not have to include an
intent that death will follow, but a conviction for murder
can, of course, stand when there is no more than an
intention to commit grievous bodily harm, or inflict
grievous bodily harm.  Indeed, it would be turning the
criminal law on its head to say that there must be an
intention or an anticipation of death for manslaughter,
and only grievous bodily harm for murder.  Perhaps it is a
matter of semantics for these purposes but I would submit,
as my learned friend Mr. King says, physical injury,
physical harm, would be the appropriate word and not
death.

     Sir, to mens r e a , when that person does that act (or
omits to do it) he has not given any thought to the
possibility of there being such a risk or has gone on to
take it, having recognised it, and the three cases of
Caldwell, Lawrence and Seymour I need not refer you to.
The only feature that I would remark upon which is no
doubt something you have already observed is that the
                                                              38

                                                    MR. RUSSELL


Judge who gave the decision in ex parte Gray , Lord Justice
Watkins, in articulating what is the appropriate
ingredients for an unlawful killing direction, was the
Court of Appeal Judge who gave a leading judgment in the
Court of Appeal in the case of Seymour which was
subsequently cited with approval, not only by Lord Roskill
in the House of Lords in Seymour, but subsequently by Mr.
Justice Turner in the case against Stanley. If you are
concerned' about'•'''whether11there are tw©» routes^ owe
affecting inquests and one affecting the criminal courts
in terms of manslaughter, you can identify a cornerstone
in the mind of Lord Justice Watkins, who was the Judge in
both ex parte Gray and in the Court of Appeal in Seymour.

     Sir, then I set out a reference from ex parte Gray,
namely his observation that a failure to appreciate such a
risk is not by itself sufficient to amount to
recklessness.  Sir, this was something which my learned
friend Mr. King yesterday confessed that he was a little
confused by.  I would perhaps invite him and you to read
that sentence, underlining mentally the words "by itself",
and surely what Lord Justice Watkins is saying there is
that for recklessness it is not sufficient just to have
the mental element, namely whether or not the risk was
appreciated by the person whose conduct is called into
question.  One must also have the a c t u sr e u s , which is the
objective element of the offence of manslaughter requiring
consideration of what a reasonably prudent person in the
position of the person whose conduct is called into
question would have been.

     Sir, finally on this section I would submit that no
epithet applied to negligence can be a synonym for
recklessness, and the authority referred to is Kong Cheuk
Kwan v. The Queen, which is a report that you have already
had before you.  In my submission the effect of what is
said by Lord Justice Roskill is to lay to rest in effect
if not in name that there continues to be a creature which
is manslaughter by gross negligence, and that appears on
page 26 of the opinion expressed by Lord Roskill,
beginning about six lines down, with a reference to Lord
Atkin in Andrews:

     "Though Lord Atkin in his speech in Andrews v .
     Director of Public Prosecutions ... did not
     disapprove of what was there said, he clearly thought
     ... that it was better to use the word "reckless"
     rather than to add to the word "negligence" various
     possible vituperative epithets.  Their Lordships
     respectfully agree.  Indeed they further respectfully
     agree with the comment made by Watkins LJ. in
     delivering the judgment of the Court of Appeal ... in
     Seymour ...."
                                                       '39

                                               MR. RUSSELL


and then the extract from Lord Justice Watkins is set out:

    '"We have to say that the law as it stands compels us
    to reject Mr. Connell's persuasive submissions and to
    hold that the judge's directions were correct,
    although we are of the view that it is no longer
    necessary of helpful to make reference to
    compensation and negligence.  The Lawrence direction
    on recklessness is comprehensive and of general
    application to all offences, including manslaughter
    involving the driving of motor vehicles recklessly
    and should be given to juries without in any way
    being diluted.  Whether a driver at the material time
    was conscious of the risk he was running or gave no
    thought to its existence, is a matter which affects
    punishment for which purposes the judge will have to
    decide, if he can, giving the benefit of doubt to the
    convicted person, in which state of mind  that person
    had driven at the material time.'"

The other words that I rely upon in saying that it is no
longer apposite to talk in terms of negligence with any
epithet applied to it is from the judgment of Mr. Justice
Turner and, sir, you have had that read to you, I think,
more than once and I just refer you to it rather than read
it again.

     So the crucial words in the actus reus of
manslaughter, in particular as far as Mr. Greenwood is
concerned, is the phrase "serious and obvious", and I
trespass upon your patience to dwell upon it a little
further, because I would like to point out certain aspects
of that phrase which although they may repeat in
particular what has already been said by my learned friend
Mr. Catchpole, they are important to bear in mind of quite
to what extent "serious and obvious" brings the criminal
law into a different category from what are otherwise
familiar concepts from civil law.

     The first point I would like to make is this, that
"serious" and "obvious" are not synonymous.   It is perhaps
a matter of commonsense but the two words are used and not
one or the other, and the direction that is approved
includes both.  "Serious", in my submission, goes to the
likelihood of the occurrence of an event for which a
synonym might be "very likely".  "Obvious" goes to the
apparent-ness of that event happening, i.e. "very
apparent", and synonyms for "obvious ' which I admit I have
simply cribbed from submissions made by Mr. Kentridge in
the case of Stanley, and as my learned friend has already
recited, might include "perfectly evident" or "stares you
in the face .
                                               MR. RUSSELL


     Second, "serious and obvious" means much more than
what is reasonably foreseeable and it is important to
distinguish between what someone might appreciate could
happen, what a reasonable person might think was going to
happen, and what was a risk serious and obvious to happen
and the authority that I refer to there is the case of
Shepherd from the 1981 Appeal Cases, 394.  Sir, that is a
case which I don't think you have had, have you?

     THE CORONER:   No, I have not.   That is the one case
I have not had.
     MR. RUSSELL:   Can I hand up a copy?   The importance
of Shepherd is perhaps difficult to grasp immediately but
I do refer to it for this reason.   First and foremost it
was a judgment of Lord Diplock in the year before the
cases of Caldwell and Lawrence.   It concerned the death of
a child, it was alleged by the wilful neglect of his
parents contrary to Section 1 of the Children and Young
Persons Act 1933, and it included in the course of Lord
Diplock's speech an examination of what is necessary to
establish wilfulness.  Sir, while that might not appear to
be at first glance relevant to what is said here, what
Lord Diplock does is distinguish the idea of reasonable
foreseeability to concepts of criminal recklessness.   At
page 401G the form of direction which the judge used for
the jury at the trial is set out and was this:

     "Would a reasonable parent, with knowledge of the
     facts that were known to the accused, appreciate that
     failure to have the child examined was likely to     ^
     cause him unnecessary suffering or injury to health?

and Lord Diplock's preferred direction is set out at page
408F.  You will see a passage there inset and I can begin
part of the way down:

     "... the jury must be satisfied (1) that the child
     did in fact need medical aid at the time at which the
     parent is charged with failing to provide it (the
     actus reus) and (2) either that the parent was aware
     at that time that the child's health might be at risk
     if it were not provided with medical aid, or that the
     parent's unawareness of this fact was due to his not
     caring whether his child's health were at risk or not
     (the mens rea)".

But what is important for the purposes of this submission
from that case is the observation that Lord Diplock made
about the difference between civil standards and criminal
standards, especially when one is dealing with a matter
which he equated really to recklessness, and I invite you
to turn to page 404:
                                                         41

                                                MR. RUSSELL


   "The concept of the reasonable man as providing
   the standard by which the liability of real
   persons for their actual conduct is to be
   determined is a concept of civil law,
   particularly in relation to the tort of
   negligence; the obtrusion into criminal law of
   conforoifey;witht the. notional conduct of the
   reasonable man as relevant to criminal
   liability, though not unknown (eg in relation
   to provocation sufficient to reduce murder to
   manslaughter) is exceptional, and should not
   lightly be extended— "

There is then reference to the cornerstone case as far
as this is concerned of Andrews. If I can ask you to
move down to letter G on the same page:

    "So much for ’wilfully’ in the context of a
    positive act.   To 'neglect' a child is to omit
    to act, to fail to provide adequately for its
    needs; and, in the context of section 1 of the
    Children and Young Persons Act 1933, its
    physical needs rather than its spiritual,
    educational, moral or emotional needs.    These
    are dealt with by other legislation.    For
    reasons already given the use of the verb
     'neglect' cannot, in my view, of itself import
    into the criminal law the civil law concept of
    negligence.   The actus reus in a case of wilful
    neglect is simply a failure, for whatever
    reason, to provide the child whenever it in
    fact needs medical aid with the medical aid it
    needs.   Such a failure as it seems to me could
    not properly be described as 'wilful' unless
    the parent either (1 ) had directed his mind to
    the question whether there was some risk
     (thought it might fall far short, of a
    probability) that the child's health might
    suffer unless he were examined by a doctor and
    provided with such curative treatment as the
    examination might reveal as necessary, and had
    made a conscious decision, for whatever reason,
    to refrain from arranging for such medical
    examination; or (2 ) had so refrained because he
    did not care whether the child might be in need
    of medical treatment or not.

    As regards the second state of mind, this
    imports the concept of recklessness which is a
    common concept in mens rea in criminal law.  It
    is not to be confused with negligence in the
    civil law of t o r t — "
                                                             42

                                                     MR. RUSSELL


- there is there a reference to Andrgws:

    "...In speaking of the first state of mind I
    have referred to the present knowledge of the
    existence of some risk of injury to health
    rather than a probability.       The section speaks
    of an act or., omission that is 'likely' to cause
    unnecessary suffering or injury to health.
    This word is imprecise.     It is capable of
    covering a whole range of possibilities from
     'i t 's on the cards' to 'i t 's more probable than
    n o t ’, but having regard to the ordinary
    p aren t ’s lack of skill in diagnosis and to the
    very real consequences which may result from
    failure to provide a child with timely medical
    attention, it should in my view be understood
    as excluding only what would fairly be
    described as highly unlikely."

    The third observation I wish to make about 'serious
and obvious’ is that what is serious and obvious - and
perhaps this is again no more than understanding the
English language - it means much more than conduct
which is inefficient or defective or open to criticism.
A much stronger case, in my submission, is required
before one gets off the ground with a case of
recklessness.

    The fourth matter is the question of serious and
obvious to whom? We have heard from passages read out
from Lord Diplock's speech in Lawrence - and they could
have been speeches taken from Caldwell or geympyr as
well - that in motor cases the Jury will include
motorists and is entitled to draw upon its collective
experience but there is a clear distinction drawn by
Mr. Justice Turner in Stanley, and equally to be drawn
in this case certainly so far as Mr. Greenwood and
please remember all these submissions are made in
respect of his position.

    If the conduct of a person doing a particular
activity in a civil case is to be judged by comparisons
to the conduct of a reasonably prudent person engaged
in the same activity ~ and I give examples of a
solicitor, doctor, accountant and so on - a fortiori, in
a criminal case what is alleged would have appeared as
a serious and obvious risk must be compared to the
perception of the risk by a reasonably prudent person
engaged in the same activity and in the same
circumstances.  That is no more than a paraphrase of
what Mr. Justice Turner says in Stanley and I do not
think there is a need to refer to those words again.
They are in your mind and they have been recited to you
                                                           43

                                                  MR. RUSSELL


by others. It is important that his concern in that
case was for the view of " and these are the
occupations he names although there are probably others
- Marine Superintendents, Chief Superxntendents, Naval
Architects and indeed, if he had thought about it, xt
would have included ships’ captains.

    In Mr. Greenwood's case one is concerned wit h the
reasonably prudent Superintendent doing the job of
Ground Commander as it was percexved by the South
Yorkshire Police, equipped with the information that
Mr. Greenwood had and in the precise cxrcumstances in
which Mr. Greenwood found himself.  In the course of
his submissions, sir, my learned friend, Mr. Kxng,
sought to draw a distinction between the necessxty
expressed by Mr. Justice Turner in g t a n l g s to fxnd
people doing the job, or doing the same 3 0 b of the
person whose conduct is called into questxon, whxch he
did not seek to depart from and the acts or omxssxons
of certain persons on the day of the Hillsborough
disaster.
    I make no comment about that because I am limiting
my remarks to Mr. Greenwood but what I would say about
Mr. Greenwood is that no distinction can be drawn xn
his case because he is, is he not, in the same posxtxon
as Captain Lewry was as the person in charge or the
ship who doubtless put to sea ignorant of the fact he
was doing so with the doors open.

    If it can be accepted that one does not need
evidence of what a reasonably prudent person doing the
same job of other people might be where those people
are actual actors in a cause or causes immediately
approximate to the disaster. Where one is seekxng to
establish what a reasonably prudent Mr. Greenwood
should have done in his position then one does need
evidence from someone who fills the notional positxon
of a reasonably prudent Ground Commander as a
Superintendent adopting the plan developed by the South
Yorkshire Police at that time in those circumstances
which pertained on the 15th April.

     In this respect the standard of proof is critical
 because how can a Jury, even properly directed, be
 satisfied so that they are sure or alternatively beyond
 reasonable doubt as to what would be a risk, obvious
 and serious, to a reasonably prudent Ground Commander
 in Mr. Greenwood’s position if they had not had that
 evidence to consider to compare with the actions, if
 they had been able to perceive them, as either recited
 by other witnesses, as recited by Mr. Greenwood himself
                                                            44

                                                  MR. RUSSELL


or as appear front the wealth of appearances that he
makes both on the video and in the still photographs.

    Fifthly, concerning 'serious and obvious’, serious
and obvious to a proper person, that follows on from
the fourth matter above, in the same circumstances and
here, so far as M r . Greenwood is concerned, one can
consider the position in two time frames.    I have
suggested for the sake of ease and convenience before 3
pm and after 3 pm.    I am not seeking by this
distinction to suggest that there is some novus actus,
that if anyone could have heard it on that day someone
had rung a gong and said, "We are now into time frame
B" but it is important when considering the
circumstances which prevail and the circumstances
against which Mr. Greenwood’s conduct should be judged.

    Before 3 pm one has the instances that I refer to
of the atmosphere, the alternative calls that there
might have been on his attention, the communication
structure and the experience of the previous years.
Those are circumstances, of course, which have to be
taken into account by the postulated reasonably prudent
Ground Commander.  He has got to put himself through
the same distractions and the same qualifications to
Mr. Greenwood's ability to devote his attentions to one
particular direction or smother.

      After three o'clock, one is concerned there with a
reaction to an emergency and perhaps this ties in, I
hope quite happily, with the further observation you
made yesterday as to whether there is in tfce case of
Ko n a , the Privy Council case, a situation that is
relevant.     In Kona , as you will recall, it was a case
of manslaughter originally brought against four
defendants arising out of a collision between two
hydrofoils which careered into each other in Victoria
Harbour, Hong Kong, and the express passages that you
drew our attention to last evening on page 25 and page
26 of that opinion envisage a situation where a
defendant is reacting to a situation which has been
created by another.

    I do not seek to persuade you that there is
anything other than an application of Lawrence in such
circumstances but it is obvious that the reasonably
prudent person, discharging the job of the person who
is called into question, must be considered in the
circumstances in which he finds himself.

    For further assistance for this there is a relevant
allusion in the case of ex parte Gray which doubtless
may have rung a bell when you read those particular
                                                              45

                                                     MR. RUSSELL


    passages in K o n g . It is on the last page of the
    judgment of Lord Justice Watkins and is the end of the
    penultimate paragraph of that judgment:
B
        "Without going into that evidence in detail,
        the medical aspects of it especially, I am in
        no doubt that I would have directed the jury
        that it would have been unsafe, wrong even, to
        find that the arresting officers misconducted
        themselves in a difficult situation in any
        sense whatsoever."

    Quite clearly there, sir, the difficult situation in
    which the officers found themselves was a highly
    material consideration and to say that the
    circumstances in which the reasonably prudent person
    discharging the job of the person called into question
    is to be shorn of the circumstances in which they are
    set is, in my submission, incorrect and really fanciful
    which brings me to Elliott, which is a further case you
    invited us to consider.

        As was clear from the submissions of my learned
    friend, Mr. Catchpole, he and I have discussed this and
    I would respectfully agree with the interpretation of
    Elliott that he aave in that one must consider the
    circumstances that pertained in considering what would
    have been a serious and obvious risk to a reasonably
    prudent person in the same position but one should
    ignore the particular personal idiosyncrasies of the
    person concerned.

        If one can draw an analogy from the case of Elliott
    to the presumed facts of this case, assume for the
    moment that one of the track officers had not slept for
    a week, either through illness, duty, pleasure,
    whatever, and he was in a state of exhaustion, in
    postulating what the reasonably prudent Police
    Constable doing that job would do, one would be obliged
    to take into account the circumstances which confronted
    him, the atmosphere and after three o'clock the
    emergency with which he was having to deal, but one
    would not be entitled to take into account the
    particular idiosyncrasies personal to that exhausted
    Police Constable, and I hope a distinction can be
    perceived in that.  I may be pushing at an open door so
    far as the argument of my learned friend, Mr. King, is
    concerned because it may be that he did accept the
    circumstances were relevant but the personal
    idiosyncrasies of the defendant are not.




H
                                                        46


                                    MR. RUSSELL




        MR. KING: Sir, I raised Elliott on the issue of
whether or not at the stage of considering what ray learned
friend refers to as an "actus reus" one had_to ask die
question whether it was obvious to the particular defendant
and I raised it in that context to show it was not the
particular defendant with his particular characteristics,
it was to the reasonably prudent person in the position o_
that,, defendant.
      The position of that defendant obviously includes
the circumstances in which that particular defendant xound
himself, but it excludes his characteristics which were
peculiar to him which might have led him to have not
reached the conclusion which the reasonable and pruaent
person would have concluded. To that extent I am
ad idem with my learned friend.
      MR. RUSSELL: Then I apologise for taking up an
unnecessary part of the Court time.
      HR. ISAACS: Sir, if it helps at all, he is also
ad idem with me because my learned friend was arguing the
point which I in fact had never put and I wish uo make
that clear at this stage.
      MR. RUSSELL: Sir, there are two further pages
left to my submission.
      I don't wish to trespass upon the Court's time any
longer than is necessary. The last page though should
perhaps be dealt with before the penultimate page.  I put
it in last because I thought at one stage I ought to rip
it out altogether.
       Sir, it concerns, as you will see, the identification
 of Mr. Greenwood by Mr. Hicks.  Sir, there has been no
 reference to that so far, but of course that does not
 mean that it is something I can safely leave alone.

       Sir, you will of course be familiar that in the
 criminal law there is a particular caution attached to
 evidence of identification and the Court of Appeal
 have laid down particular guidelines to be followed which
 are unanimously known as the Turnbull Guidelines.

       Now it is a side issue but most relevant to the
 evidence that has been given in respect of Superintendent
 Greenwood, it is particularly important that the jury should
 be directed to ignore, in my submission, that evidence,
 because as evidence of identification when compared to
 standard criteria of what constitutes good and bad evidence
 of identification it is, in my submission, very poor.
                                                             47


                                     MR. RUSSELL



      If you are proceeding to do other than direct the
jury to ignore Mr. Hicks' evidence in respecu oj.
Mr. Greenwood, his recollection in respect of seeing a^
senior Officer of course I cannot conunent on, but inso.ar
as his evidence of identification Oi Mr. Greenwood is
concerned then there are certain matters that I need to
address you on. I am in your hands or I can work througn
it as you wish?
      THE CORONER: I think (a) there is no need and (b)
I think it would be trespassing on the facts if you did that.

      MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, in my submission if^there is no
need I can leave it there but as far as the facts are
concerned I would respectfully subnit this is a special
case because of the sensitivity of evidence of identification
which the criminal law ....
      TEE CORONER: I think it is perfectly proper for you
to point out to me the rules of law relating to identification
evidence but I don't think you should deal with whether or
not the evidence, which we have heard, is adequate or in­
adequate or what the jury are to make of it, but you can
direct my mind, if that is the right word, to the principles,
the legal principles on which identification evidence may
be relied on.
      MR. RUSSELL: Sir, I take particu r comfort from
your first reaction to my suggestion, namely that there is
no need but might I very briefly then refer you to the
centre part of the page and invite you to ignore the rest.

      It is submitted that the evidence of identification
of Mr. Greenwood as that person, namely the person who
Mr. Hicks saw come out of the Control Box and whom he
addressed, is so poor in all the circumstances that it should
not be left to the jury.
      Sir, the cases are R. v. Turnbull which can perhaps
be dealt with most speedily by a reference to Archbold
and even more speedily by passing straight from Turnbull
to the case of Breslin where the matter is summarised in
a few lines.
       The paragraph at Archbold is from Vol. 1, 14-2c
 which appears on page 1140 of Vol. 1.  I will read its

       "In R. v. Breslin ___ that court stated that
       the following directions and warning in Weeder
            should be given in all 'identification'
       cases to which that passage is applicable:
       'When the quality of the identifying evidence
       is poor the judge should withdraw the case
       from the jury and direct an acquittal unless
s^                                                                   47


                                             MR. RUSSELL



               If you are proceeding to do other than direct the
         jury to ignore Mr. Hicks' evidence in respecu oj.
         Mr. Greenwood, his recollection in respect of seeing a^
         senior Officer of course I cannot comment on, but insofar
     B   as his evidence of identification of Mr. Greenwood is
         concerned then there are certain matters that I need to
         address you on. I am in your hands or I can work througa
         it as you wish?
               THE CORONER:  I think (a) there is no need and (b)
         I think it would be trespassing on the facts if you die that.

               MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, in my submission if^there is no
         need I can leave it there but as far as the facts are
         concerned I would respectfully subnit this is a specia1
         case because of the sensitivity oi evidence of identification
         which the criminal law ....
               TEE CORONER:  I think it is perfectly proper for you
         to point out to me the rules of law relating to identicicauion
         evidence but I don't think you should deal with whether or
         not the evidence, which we have heard, is adequate or in­
         adequate or what the jury are to make of it, but you can
         direct my mind, if that is the right word, to the principles,
         the legal principles on which identification evidence may
         be relied on.
               MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, I take particu r comfort from
         your first reaction to my suggestion, namely that there is
         no need but might I very briefly then refer you to the
         centre part of the page and invite you to ignore the rest.

               It is submitted that the evidence of identification
         of Mr. Greenwood as that person, namely the person who
         Mr. Hicks saw come out of the Control Box and whom he
         addressed, is so poor in all the circumstances that it should
         not be left to the jury.
               Sir, the cases are R. v. Turnbull which can perhaps
         be dealt with most speedily by a reference to Archbold
         and even more speedily by passing straight from Turnbull
         to the case of Breslin where the matter is summarised in
         a few lines.
                The paragraph at Archbold is from Vol. 1, 14-2c
          which appears on page 1140 of Vol. 1. I will read it:

                "In R. v. Breslin ___ that court stated that
                the following directions and warning in Weeder
                     should be given in all 'identification'
                cases to which that passage is applicable:
                'When the quality of the identifying evidence
                is poor the judge should withdraw the case
                from the jury and direct an acquittal unless




     H
                                                                     48

                                             MR. RUSSELL




     there is other evidence which goes in support
     of the correctness of the identification.
     The identification evidence can be poor, even
     though it is given by a number of witnesses.
     They raay all have had only the opportunity
     of a fleeting glance or a longer observation
     made in difficult conditions e.g. the
     occi^p^ntSi''q £.,-a^'bus.!, who.. QlDse^v^td. the incident,,
     at night as they drove past. Where the quality
     of the identification evidence is such that the
     jury can be safely left to assess its value,
     even though there is no other evidence to
     support it, then the trial judge is fully
     entitled, if &o minded, to direct the jury
     that an identification by one witness can
     constitute support for the identification by
     another, provided that he warns them in clear
     terms that even a number of honest witnesses
     can be mistaken."

Sir, moving, you will be glad to hear to my concluding
submissions which appear on the penultimate page of the
skeleton, if the jury are not to have the verdict of
unlawful killing withdrawn from them altogether, it is
submitted that:
      1. It is not possible on the evidence as a whole,
as a matter of law, to identify any act by Mr. Greenwood
which was a direct effective and substantial cause of
the death of any of the deceased.

      2. It is not possible on the evidence as a whole, or
as a matter of law, to identify any omission todo an act
which Mr. Greenwood was under a duty to do, which 'was a
direct and substantial cause of death of any of the deceased.
In any event:
      3. There is (no evidence) that any act (or omission)
on the part of Mr. Greenwood created a risk, serious and
obvious to a reasonably prudent Superintendent with the
duty of Ground Commander, of physical injury to any of
the deceased.

      4. There is (no evidence) that any such act
(or omission) on the part of Mr. Greenwood was done (or
omitted to be done) by him without thought to a serious
and obvious risk (as defined) that it would cause physical
injury or regardless of such a risk which he had in fact
recognised.

      Submissions 3 and 4 can be made with greater force
if for the phrase 'no evidence' is substituted 'insufficient
evidence upon which a reasonable jury, properly directed,
could conclude', and I invite you sir to instal that
phrase, that clause, into the first sentence of 3 and 4.
                                                            49


                                         MR. RUSSELL




      The corollary of all this sir,^in my submission, is
that Mr. Greenwood should be excluded xroo any pool Oi
persons in respect of whoa the jury can even consider
returning a verdict of unlawful killing.

      Sir, unless I can assist you further, those are ray
submissions on behali of Mr. Greenwood.

      THE CORONER: Thank you    very much indeed.

      MISS ADDLEHAN:   Sir, in view of what has gone before,^
the submissions of ray learned friend Mr. Russell, and indeeo
the submissions of my learned friend Mr. Payne, I nope I
can be mercifully short.
      I repeat and adopt those submissions save insoxar
as they are referable to any Officer of the rank whom I
represent.
      Sir, I hope to avoid needless repetition of what has
gone before and I will seek to confine myself to ampli­
fication which I hope will be of some assistance to those
points which have already been mentioned so ably.

      Sir, may I begin by reference to the second heading
on the sheet before you submitted by my learned iriend
Mr. Russell, namely the importance of excluding ineligible
persons from the jury's consideration.
      Sir, the relevant authorities have been brought to
your attention in that regard. I won't go over them save
sir to perhaps make one further reference to the decision
in ex parte. Gray.
      Sir, can I refer you to the headnote of that
authority.
      THE CORONER:     Yes, I am with you.

      MISS ADDLEMAN:     I am obliged.

       Before perhaps I look at   that can I say this:
 that of course by implication,   as I have already said, I
 adopt what has been said by my   learned friend Mr. Russell,
 namely that you have a duty to   form a judgment.

       Put another way you have a duty to withdraw from the
 jury's consideration verdicts which cannot be sustained
 because of no evidence or wholly insufficient evidence.

       Sir, if you need any further support from that
 proposition, namely that you have a duty as opposed to
 a discretion which you would exercise, then looking at
 the headnote, and you have already been referred to this
 in a different context, the final paragraph there under (ii
                                                            50


                                    MISS ADDLEMAN



     "The development of judicial review cannot
     possibly allow verdicts by jurors at inquests
     to stand which are based on no or wholly
     insufficient evidence."

Sir, the reference is given there to 1031 at letter ? and
I won't repeat it because in another context it has just
b e e n quoted by m y learned friend Mr. Russell.

      Sir, that makes quite clear the submissions which
have already been made what your duty is when considering
whether to 1eave the potential verdict of unlawful killing
to the jury.
      Sir, the reasons in my respectrul submission are
axiomatic.  It must be right looking at the law as a whole
on this particular topic that the one thing that is soujiu
to be avoided by the Court of Appeal in all its decisions
and indeed the Crown Courts, the lower Courts, is ior
a jury, indeed any jury, to come to a verdict which is
unsafe.
      Sir, it must follow, therefore, that you have a
duty and perhaps I need take the point no further.




                       Sir, next may I refer
                                                                51
                                                    MISS ADDELMAN

     Sir, next may I refer to the topic of causation?
As I say, I will not repeat all that has gone before, but
I would ask you to bear in mind in the context of what I
am saying, as I am sure you will, the "but for test.

     Sir, in this context it may well be needless and
superfluous for me' to1 mention* certain"■■rrFdivi#uai-» w-bom- I ’-
represent.   I hope that triat is tne case but, sir, of
course I cannot ignore certain individuals, one of whom
has been mentioned by my learned friend Mr. Isaacs and,
indeed, by my learned friend Mr. King, namely, Sergeant
Goddard who was in the Control Room.

     Sir, if I can say generally on that topic, obviously
what you, sir, in the exercise of your duty must first of
all consider before you get to the question of
recklessness and mens rea, is whether causation is made
out.   Sir, I will not refer to the evidence, but when
considering Sergeant Goddard's position, my respectful
submission to you is this, that no act or omission on the
part of Sergeant Goddard satisfies the "but for" test.

     Sir, if you are with me on that point then that is
the end of the matter and you have no need to consider
the question of recklessness.

     Sir, I submit secondly, however, that if you did
consider the mens rea and the question of any
recklessness on the part of Sergeant Goddard, then it
fails there too, reckless is not made out on the facts.

     In this regard you of course will have attention to
the position of Mr. Duckenfield and of course Hr. Murray.
Uhen considering the three comparatively you will no
doubt have regard to the hierarchy of Officers in that
contest, particularly, as I say, when considering
Sergeant Goddard here and of course without reference to
the fact it would be artificial for me not to ask your
attention to be drawn to the decision making process in
that regard.

     In my submission it is abundantly clear that
Sergeant Goddard is not an individual who had power to
make any sort of final decision and that accords with the
evidence of Mr. Murray and, indeed, Sergeant Goddard
himself.

      Sir, those are my submissions in that regard.

     So far - and I hope I am not wasting time here, but
perhaps again I cannot ignore the question of track
Officers because, of course, you know, sir, I have been
particularly concerned with their position throughout.
                                                              52

                                                M IS S   ADDELMAN


     THE CORONER:    If I can stop you for one moment.
You are not wasting time.    It is very difficult for you
when you are right at the end of the line not to feel
that you are.   You are just as entitled as Mr. Payne at
the beginning, so aon'.t feel you are wasting time at all,
not my time anyway.

     MISS ADDELMAN:     Sir, I am very much obliged for
that indication.    !iy anxiety perhaps extends a little
more than that.  I wonder whether there is in fact the
need at all to refer to these Officers that is why I say
I hope I am not wasting time, but I will mention tnem
because I obviously cannot afford to ignore their
position.

      Sir, their position is relevant under the heading of
causation as well, in my submission, because a 2ain as in
the case of Sergeant Goddard I would submit to you that
they fail on the first hurdle, namely, any act or
omission on their part does not satisfy the "but for"
test.    Uhat has been said already by my learned friend
Mr. Russell in the context of his client, Mr. Greenwood,
can be said in respect of the track Officers as well.

     Sir, can I invite you to look at page 2 of nv
learned friend Mr. Russell's submissions?   Tha
penultimate paragraph, which has just been rea^. to vou.
He was giving an example there.   There it is re:*.»rnl>le
to Mr. Greenwood and his rank, but if you substi.t»:t2 tne
names of track Officers and their rank, that ex.vr-le is
equally applicable.

     Similarly, sir, if one turns to the p e n j l t i : > 3 r;e
of my learned friend Mr. Russell's submissions, .n-
substitutes there the name of Mr. Greenwood wit 1 t *.nt of
track Officers and, of course, the rank, those .^oi-.ts are
equally applicable to track Officers.

     An additional point, sir, ought to be made in nv
submission in this regard and again it concerns tne
question of causation.   One cannot, in my submission,
identify, and this follows from a point I made earlier,
one cannot identify any act or omission, as I have
already said, as being responsible for the death of any
deceased.

     Now you would have to identify a particular deceased
and connect it to an act or omission of a track Officer
before you could safely leave the jury with one of the
track Officers as being an individual they could have in
mind when considering any unlawful killing verdict.
That, in rfiy submission, you simply cannot do.
                                             MISS ADDELMAN


      Sir, if I may comment on the question of
recklessness next and, sir, I do hope you will not
consider any of my comments to be impertinent here
because what I am suggesting is, and I am sure you have
taken this on board, is that there must be very, very
special care on your part to distinguish the vast
difference befweew wha't is -required to rate1rot'
recklessness and negligence.     It is very easy to
confuse.    I have heard one or other of my learned
friends refer to certain tests - simply slips of the
tongue as we have gone down the line - tending to suggest
that negligence is the test.     I know, of course, that
they do not mean it, but it just shows how very easy it
is to mix up the two concepts.     I know you have in mind,
sir, that on no account must this be done, but, of
course, to take on board what recklessness means is
nighly pertinent to your deliberations when you are
considering whether to leave the verdict of unlawful
 killing to the jury and, of course, if you do not accept
 the submissions when in due course you are directing them
about that.

     Sir, can I suggest that you can glean very great
assistance on this point from Mr. Justice Turner s
appreciation, which is contained throughout his ruling
ana, indeed, the comments he makes throughout the
arguments in the Stanley case.   As I say, sir, it is
relevant on the two points in the direction and, of
course, when you are considering the present
applications.

     Sir, again on the point of recklessness and the mens
rea here, can I draw particular attention to say my
learned friends have my support, my learned friend
Mr. Catchpole included, for the interpretation of the
decision in Elliott as to what is meant there when taking
into account any particular quality of a particular
individual.

     Sir, I support what has already been said and in my
submission it must be clear that what is meant there is
not a particular idiosyncrasy of a particular individual,
but the characteristics which have already been
mentioned.

     Can I, in the context of recklessness again, draw
your particular attention to the words "serious and
obvious", and again I hope I am not going to repeat what
has already been said by my learned friend Mr. Russell.
I agree with that exposition.   Perhaps the quickest way
of doing it is by reference to page A of my learned
friend Mr. Russell's submissions.
                                                        54

                                             MISS ADDELMAN


      If I may, sir, look at page 4, the top of the page
at (iv).    Hr. Russell's heading "Serious and Obvious to
Uhom?"    I would submit that the point is worth
reinforcing here.    The example is given which is
referable back to the case of Lawrence and the Judgment
of Lord Diplock.    Now obviously, sir, what is being said
when one is looking at a driving case is1 that"a"jury h-asr
a collective experience of motoring.    That must be so,
as in Lawrence.    Therefore, and this is most important
in my submission, therefore they can be trusced to draw
inferences from a particular set of facts of a road
traffic accident.    The same cannot apply with subject
matter such as these particular Inquests are dealing
with.    It must be axiomatic to say that a jury does not
have collective experience of any of the jobs of any of
the Police Officers with whom I am concerned, any of the
jobs that any of the Police Officers were doing on the
particular day with which we are concerned, in the
particular circumstances of the particular Officers with
whom you are concerned.

      Sir, perhaps I do not need to expound further on
that.    I have already mentioned the example further down
the page, the names and rank can be substituted there,
but the point is worth reinforcing.    They cannot draw
inferences in that fashion as they would be able to do in
a road traffic case.    There must be evidence to assist
with their consideration and it must be sufficient
evidence.

     Sir, in my submission there is none in this case.
If you are not with me on that point then I turn back to
what I have already mentioned, those submissions which
are contained on page 5 of my learned friend
Mr. Russell's submissions.

     Sir, unless I can assist further that is all I have
to say.




          TIIE CORONER:   Is the jury here
                                                            '55




     THE CORONER:    Are the.Jury here?  Can we just have
them in so that I can tell them they can go home again,
and then we will all go and have lunch as well.   I think
we will start at 10 tomorrow.   I did say 9.30 but I think
we will start at 10.   Mr. Isaacs?

     MR. ISAACS:    I was just wondering what we were
doing this afternoon?
     THE CORONER:   Coming back to see whether anybody has
any further comments, and if we have not got any further
comments then we are all going home.

     MR. ISAACS:    Do you intend to give a ruling about
this matter, or do you intend merely to deal with it all
in your summing up?

     THE   CORONER:   I think thatis ....

     MR.   ISAACS:    The latter?

     THE   CORONER:   Yes.

     MR.   ISAACS:    Very sensible, if     I may say so.

                (In the presence of the Jur y )

     THE CORONER:   Good afternoon.   Well, I have good
news for you in the sense we do not need you today.   We
have not got as far as I wanted to so I just wanted to
call you in and say that.  Tomorrow I think I had said
9.30 but I have changed my mind and we will start at 10,
but tomorrow we should be back in business so to speak.   I
am sorry to have dragged you all here abortively but it is
just one of those things.   We will all go and have lunch
now.

                      (Luncheon Adjournment)
                                                         '56

                                                  MR. -HALE


     THE CORONER:   Before I turn back to you I am going
to read Mr. Hale's submission so that we have that as well
and then we have heard from everybody.  It is in the form
of a letter dated 18th March 1991:

     "Dear Sir,

     Hillsborough Inquest - legal submissions - on behalf
     of Superintendent Roger Marshall.

     Thank you for the opportunity of making legal
     submissions in writing.  I have had the benefit of
     seeing the submissions in writing by my learned
     friend Mr. Richard Maxwell Q.C. and respectfully
     adopt his submissions so far as they deal with the
     general law.

     So far as Superintendent Marshall is concerned, I
     would merely add:

    1. That any act of his on the day which may be
    considered to have been a substantial cause of the
    death of any person would not be an unlawful act
    unless it were a totally voluntary act with a
    reasonable alternative which was recklessly ignored.
    If the act was carried out under pressure which was
    not itself caused unlawfully by Superintendent
    Marshall and if the only alternative was seen by
    Superintendent Marshall as being likely to lead to
    other disastrous consequences it could not be said
    that the action actually taken was unlawful merely
    because taking the alternative, in hindsight, might
    have led to less serious consequences.  A decision
    taken honestly in a dilemma or in the 'agony of the
    moment' even if subsequently proved to be wrong, has
    been held frequently to be unimpeachable.  If such
    decision was therefore a lawful act, no further
    consideration need be given in Superintendent
    Marshall's case to the many other issues such as
    intervening or multiple causes including the
    voluntary assumption of risk by some, I stress some,
    of the deceased.

    2. As regards any omission in prior planning
    (insofar as Mr. Marshall had any responsibility
    therefor) alleged to be the basis of recklessness,
    the standard of care is that of the reasonable man.
    There must not only have been foreseeability of the
    consequences of the omission but also a reasonable
    prospect of success for what is alleged ought to have
    been done.  The mere possibility of an alternative
    procedure which might have been effective is not
    enough.  It needs a precise alternative procedure
    which could be shown to have been available and so
                                                         '57

                                                    MR. -HALE


     likely to be effective in the particular
     circumstances that failure to consider that course
     was reckless.  If there was no such alternative with
     a high degree of probable success, any alleged
     failure to foresee and provide for the circumstances
     which actually occurred is a mere counsel of
     perfection and cannot be a foundation for a finding
     of unlawful killing by the application of any of the
     tests.

     Yours faithfully"

and it is signed and addressed to me, and then:

     "Authority for 'dilemma or agony of the mome n t 1
     decisions - as this is not tne High Court, I hope I
     may be excused for giving a text book 'Glanville
     Williams - Joint Torts and Contributory Negligence' -
     Part II - Pp 360-364 or Winfield and Jolowicz on
     torts 13th Edition P 162 (or any good book on torts!)
     Similarly, on the standard of care - to avoid quoting
     innumerable cases, Winfield and Jolowicz summarise
     the cases on Pp 118-119."

I   am afraid there is a bit of fact mixed up with this but
itis difficult when you are reading it,    so I just did it
because I could not see what else I could do.

     Mr. Maxwell, before you stand up may I say that
judging by what I heard from your colleagues your
contribution has been - and indeed for my own sake -
received with both   great interest and I think approbation
would be the right word.

     MR. MAXWELL:   Well   I   won't withdraw itthen.

     Sir, could I raise a matter that can most helpfully
be highlighted by looking at my learned friend Mr. Payne's
submissions, and I do it in this way, not with a view to
criticising those submissions.  It concerns this, if it is
to be the case that you leave unlawful killing to the Jury
as a possible verdict then a question arises as to an
orderly order of priority for their consideration of the
possible verdicts, and it is quite clear in my submission
that they begin with unlawful killing, but then, and I
hope you would accept this, I hope it is equally clear
that they move on to misadventure, then they end up with
open verdict, and it is in that order.

     Sir, therefore could I ask you just quickly to look
at that so that I can highlight this point by reference
to what Mr. Payne has said on page 1 of his submissions?

     THE CORONER:   Yes,   I   have got that.
                                                        58

                                       FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


     MR. MAXWELL:   Item 2, "Verdict".  He says "Choice of
Three", and I am sure we all agree but I say that the
sequential and orderly choice there would be, is it (ii)
unlawful killing?  If not then is it (i) misadventure?   If
not then I think the answer must be it is (iii) open
verdict.  That has only this further consequential effect
that I think, and I think it is an example of a mere slip,
on page 2 where it says "with regard to for open verdict
either misadventure not proved'or unlawful kiliing not
proved", I think it would have been more accurate to say,
 neither", "nor", because it is only if those two are
excluded that you have got into open verdict.  I hope,
sir, you would be able to adopt that, if unlawful killing
is to be put to the Jury, so that they can go through it
in that sequential and orderly manner.

     THE CORONER:   Well, I entirely agree with that.  I
had noticed the order of Mr. Payne but I had taken it as
not being part of the submission, if I can put it like
that, but merely as the types of verdict which he was
illustrating.

     MR. MAXWELL:   I make it clear, I am certainly not
seeking to correct that as a submission, only using it as
a way of making a point.

      MR. PAYNE:  I am greatly flattered that my
submission should escape the scrutiny of Mr. Maxwell with
the addition only of an "n" in front of "either" or "or'.
Actually, as you know, when I came to the questions for
the Court I then put it in the order which he now says is
the correct order and that is right, so when it comes to
questions we are on common ground as to how it should be
done.

     Sir, may I just briefly deal with the questions that
you raised yesterday? That is all I propose to do
although perhaps I might just be allowed to add an answer
to something that was said by Mrs. McBrien?

     THE CORONER:   Indeed.

     MR. PAYNE:    Sir, you raised five points which are
most helpful and certainly go to the centre of what needs
to be considered.   First of all you drew attention to Mr.
Maxwell's submissions, it is paragraph 6(iii), where he
was talking about novus actus and you queried how that
could stand with my list of matters which are capable of
being causes.   Sir, may I address that?

     THE CORONER:   Indeed.

     MR. PAYNE:   If you go to my list of matters which
are capable of being causes, of which I have managed to
                                                      ’59

                                       FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


put 18 in number.  My submission is that there is, in
fact, in this case no novus actus. This is not a case
where one can look back historically and see a number of
causes or a number of events which have taken place, and
then their effect has been exhausted or their effect is no
longer to be treated as a cause, and then a new act comes
in which so completely overtakes and intervenes between
those causes and the injury that the effect of those
original causes is now evaporated or put to one side or
stopped from being a cause.  That is not this case at all,
or at least this is my primary submission.  If one looks
at this list of things which are capable of being causes,
our main submission is that each one of these at the time
and the place and the circumstances of the disaster was
effective as a cause.

     That is my submission about it and it is quite
artificial to pick on the last incident in that batch of
causes, all of which come together at the material time,
and to pick on the last one which is literally the last
minute, and to say, right, that is the novus actus, and it
is of such significance that it intervenes between the
disaster and all the other causes.  Without going through
them again, you have got them in mind, and my submission
is that each one of these causes was still alive and very
much effective at the time, place and circumstances, all
there together.  Sir, I just advert briefly to Dr.
Nicholson's comment about all these matters coming
together to cause the disaster.  So that is what I say
about it.  I say there is not a novus actus.

     Having made that primary submission, can I just step
back from it and just consider the notion that there was a
novus actus and that the action of (a) opening the g8tes,
or (b) consequentially failing to close off the tunnel,
could qualify as a novus actus. Just considering that as
an idea, if either of those actions is to qualify tnen it
only qualifies because it is an unforeseeable, unexpected
event which was not in the contemplation of any of the
people who were responsible for all the earlier causes.




                                  I say that includes ....
                                                            60

                                          FURTHER SUBMISSIONS



I say that includes the Police.  It wipes out the whole
of the operational planning and contemplation of the
event and the history and the circumstances of the
location of the ground.  It wipes all that out because
these events, if this novus actus point is correct, are
of such overwhelming importance that they stand between
all the other matters.

    If that is so then the true perspective of the case
is that the Jury, if the verdict of unlawful killing is
left as an option to them, are being asked to
concentrate upon an unforeseeable event, unexpected, in
unprecedented circumstances, which occupied the space
of ten minutes and was of such significance that all
the other factors which surround the situation are of
no importance.  The Jury in concentrating on that brief
interval of time are being asked to say that beyond
reasonable doubt in those circumstances at that time
the people whose conduct is called into question - here
the Police - were guilty of unlawful killing.  In my
submission that only has to be stated for it to be seen
as unsustainable.  I do not know whether the argument
will improve with elaboration.  That is my submission.

    If it is a novus actus then my submission is that
it would be quite inappropriate for the Jury to
conclude to the high standard of proof that is required
that it is unlawful killing because it plainly is not.
Those are the two branches of the submission in answer
to the first point and I hope that is helpful.

    The second point you mentioned is as to whether Mr.
Justice Turner's judgment is binding on you, as
mentioned by Mr. Isaacs.  I regret to say that my
researches have not been able to find any authority for
whether a decision at first instance of a High Court
Judge is binding upon a Coroner and so I cannot draw
your attention to any authority.  Therefore, what I say
is probably very lightweight and I would merely say
that our position is that the directions and decisions
of Mr. Justice Turner are of strong, persuasive effect
and I would leave it at that.

    The third point you raised was with reference to
Mr. King's analysis of Lawrence. Elliott and ffj.ay and
his submission, if I understood it correctly, that the
Gray direction is not the one you should u s e . I hope I
have paraphrased it correctly.  I have made my
submissions about that and I put Gray at the front.
Our position would be that certainly the up to date
view of the interpretation of the Andrews. Caldwell.
Lawrence. Elliott. Sevmour. and the Hong Kong case is
                                           FURTHER SUBMISSIONS



80011781617 summarised in Gray and Gr ay , therefore, is
the correct direction.   So that is my answer to your
direct question.   Unfortunately in a moment, in answer
to an extremely good question, if I may say so, which
you posed later on I am going to have to slightly
amplify that.

    The fourth question you raised was about the
Higgins case and if I got the question correctly you
were concerned as to whether the judgment in Higgins
was to the effect that the Coroner had a duty to
withdraw the option of the verdict of unlawful
killing - I did not quite follow the way you expressed
it - or whether the Galbraith discretion still applied.

     THE CORONER:  Shall I have another go? It is not
a terribly important point but what I was trying to say
was this;  the Galbraith case is relatively clear to me
but it is a case dealing with a criminal prosecution.
In a sense it is the same question that I asked with
regard to Mr. Justice Turner,, is it binding on a
Coroner? The second point is that there is a case
which actually deals with the issue of Coroners
withdrawing verdicts from a Jury and that is the
Higgins case.

      My question was, because I have read the book, the
note seems to say categorically it is the duty of a
Coroner to withdraw but my reading of the case was that
whilst the Judge said that for reasons which he could
not quite understand the Coroner had not withdrawn the
c as e, the implication is that he felt it ought to have
been because he could not find anything in the evidence
to justify the verdict.

    I have two questions. Was not technically in fact
his comment merely obiter because it was not part of
his decision in relation to the finding, in which case
it is persuasive again but not binding? In fact that
was the question.

     MR. PAYNE:  I am very grateful, sir.  I think our
submission would be that there is in fact no
distinction between the decision in Galbraith and the
way in which it was applied in Higgins. That is what
we would say about it. Galbraith makes it clear that
the Coroner does have a duty to withdraw the verdict if
there is no evidence upon which the Jury, properly
directed, could come to that conclusion.  I do not know
whether it would be helpful for me to take you to
Galbraith again.
                                                          62

                                          FURTHER SUBMISSIONS



     THE CORONER:  I do not consider it a vital point
and I do not think it is necessary to spend a lot of
time on it.

     MR. PAYNE:  There are two stages to the Galbraith
test which I should just briefly mention and then pass
on.  Stage 1 is that if there is no evidence then the
Coroner has a duty to withdraw the verdict.  Stage 2 is
that if there is some evidence but it is of a tenuous
character, for example, because of inherent weakness or
vagueness or because it is inconsistent with other
evidence, in that stage the Coroner clearly has a
discretion because he is being called on to exercise a
judgment as to whether the evidence in a particular
case falls within that description and whereabouts it
falls on the table.  So that is what we say about it.

    The way that was applied in Higgins was that the
Divisional Court before Lord Justice Parker in fact
found there was no evidence.  In the relevant part of
his judgment he said:

    "I am wholly unable to accept that the evidence
    could conceivably amount to justification in
    law for any such verdict."

So he himself, having formed that view on the evidence,
he then commented:

    "For myself I gain the distinct impression that
    the Coroner was of the same view but for some
    reason or other did not withdraw that verdict
    from the purview of the Jury."

- carrying the clear implication that in the opinion of
the Lord Justice the Coroner ought to have done so,
once the Coroner himself had formed that view.  So it
is an illustration of Galbraith.

    The fifth point is the one which is of particular
interest which you mentioned and that is the opinion of
the Privy Council in the Hong Kong case where the
judgment comments on the meaning of the Diplock
Lawrence direction.  Sir, it is you who have drawn our
attention to this and may I, with deference, ask you to
look back at the passage that you have asked us to look
at.  The two passages are at page 25 at the top.  It is
important to see the context, which you have already
pointed out, in which this comment is made.  It appears
certainly to me that on page 24 at the bottom there is
a misprint in the report because the penultimate
begins:
                                            FURTHER SUBMISSIONS




    "Lord Diplock on this occasion, speaking for
    all the noble and learned lords then present,
    said..."
- and tiie word ’af t e r ’ appears. It says that after
quoting from his speech in Lawrence at page 11 in the
Criminal Appeal Reports and page 526 in the Appeal
Cases Reports, there is a quotation from the judgment
and that quotation is from the judgment in Lawrence.
It looks as if the word ’aft e r ’ ought not to be there.




                            /What the opinion of the.
                                                        64


                                      MR. PAYNE



      Unat the opinion   of the Privy Council here is clearly
directing itself to is   the application of the Diplock/
Lawrence direction and   citing it precisely. Then their
comment appears at the   top of the next page:

      "Their Lordships emphasise that in this passage
      Lord Diplock was speaking of an obvious and
      serious risk of causing physical injury created
      by the defendant. He was not there concerned
      to deal with cases where the conduct complained
      of was a defendant's reaction or lack of reaction
      to such a risk created by another person."

And then you drew our attention to a repetition of that same
point which appears at the bottom of page 26 towards the
end of the judgment where the opinion comments at the end
of that paragraph:
      "The summing-up does not seem to have distinguished
      between an obvious risk created by those navigating
      each hydrofoil by theirown navigation and the response
      by those on board one hydrofoil to any obvious risk
      created by the navigation of the other."

Mow I must say on considering what is being said by the
Privy Council in its application to this case, that is the
Hillsborough case, it appears that the opinion is this:
if the matter under consideration is in the context of
responding to a risk which is being caused by others, then
the undiluted or unamplified Lawrence/Diplock direction is
not intended to apply to that situation.

      Now if that is in fact what the Privy Council is
saying then it would mean in application to this case that
since the conduct of the Police which is called into
question was in fact in response to a risk which was caused
by others, then the Lawrence/Diplock direction would have
to be amplified to include that extra element.

      Nov/ if that is correct, if that is what this remark
in the course of the judgment means, then I have got two
submissions about it.

      The first is that first of all the reason that such
a remark appears in the course of the judgment specifically
in the context of quoting from the well known Diplock/
Lawrence direction, means that the House of Lords/Privy
Council, has particularly directed its collective mind
to this question and said that Diplock/Lawrence does not
cover the case "where the serious and obvious risk has
been caused, created by the defendant's reaction or lack
of reaction to such a risk created by another person."
                                        MR. PAYNE




      That is the first submission.  In other words they
have taken the trouble to include in the course of the
judgment that caveat or qualification of the direction.

       The second comment I respectfully make is that
the reason that such a comment appears in the judgement
nust be that it is in the mind of the Privy Council that
if- the situation is,-.-that,, the person ...whose conduct is
called into question is responding to a risk which has
been caused by others, then it is very unlikely in those
circumstances that anyone could be found guilty Ox
recklessness if their recklessness arises in the context
of their reaction by responding to a risk which has been
caused by others.    That seems to be the meaning of it.

      Once one recognises this one feels rather like a
limpet that h&s been prised off the rock by the crowbar
because it means that one is not in the position of simply
being able to direct the jury per Lawrence and Gray, but
one has to build into the direction the particular circum­
stances and time, which I amplified in the course of my
original address, and point out that the conduct which
is being called into question and in particular the
alleged recklessness, is only taking place in response
to a serious and obvious risk caused by others, so that
formulation is the way in which I would submit one would
need to add to the direction.

      I have no doubt sir that-by drawing this to our
attention this is something which you have already con­
sidered and I hope that that submission is helpful.

      My own respectful gloss upon it would be that if one
does get to the stage of having to amplify the Diplock
direction by adding this further qualification, it is a
further very strong argument that this is not a case of
unlawful killing at all but it is a case of accident.

      Sir, that is my answer to the question which you
put to us and I hope it is adequate or at least helpful.
Sir that deals with the points which you asked us to
consider.

      Finally may I just embark on something else very
shortly and I hope this will be helpful.

       Mrs. McBrien in the course of her very excellent
address to you this morning used an illuminating analogy
of imagining the Police to be driving the crowd, metaphori­
cally, as a vehicle at an excessive speed through the gates
instead of at a reasonable speed through the turnstiles
thereby creating the obvious and serious risk to people
in the ground to which the driver of the crowd/vehicle
was indifferent.   That is the way she put it.
                                          MR. PAYNE




       Our answer to that is this:    for the analogy to
be complete we come back to our primary submission made
vesterday, which is one does have to look at all the
circumstances in which the driving was taking place and
one is very familiar that with the situation, using
Mrs. McBrien's analogy, the crowd vehicle in this case
to expand her metaphor, had unexpectedly jammed against
the turnstile obstruction and liiore crowd vehicles were
piling up’ beh*in!dy thereby causing a serious trisii Oj. aeath.
    injury in the crowd vehicle and that serious risk was
in fact, on the evidence, obvious to the people v/hose conduc
is called into question, namely the Police driver of tap
vehicle.   There was an obvious and serious risk o*. deacn
or injury to people in the jam outside the uurnstilos.

       Using this analogy then, on the evidence the action
of the Police driver v/hose conduct is called into cruestion,
was to attempt to rescue those in the crowd vehicle who
were at risk of death but in the jam and his response
was by driving the vehicle, or attempting to drive it
in-to an open space to relieve the jam.

      Now I an not going to say any raore because ^
recognise that by taking the analogy further one is
venturing into argument and really in my submission
what I am saying I hope is self-evident.   That is all
I would say about it.

      Now unless there is any other particular uiattcr
those are the responses that we would make to w;u»t .ias
gone before and the questions you asked sir.

      THE CORONER:  I think the only other point i.>
what you thought of Mr. Russell's interpretation
Lord Justice Uatkin's comment.

      MR. PAYNE:  Yes, that is towards the end uf t.ic
judgment in Gray?

       THE CORONER:    That   is right.

       MR. KING:    Sir, if I may help it is the line:
 "It should be emphasised, however, failure to appreciate
 there was such arisk would not by itself be sufficient
 to amount to recklessness."

       MR. PAYNE:     Can I have the reference to that?

       MR. KING:  In the All England Reports it is page 136,
 letter H.  It is at the bottom of the extract where  the
 four ingredients  are set out.

       MR. PAYNE:      Well I mean I have got nothing   to add
 to that except I     found what Mr.   Russell said      very
 persuasive and I     ask you to accept      it.
                                        MR. PAYNE




      THE CORONER:     It in other words that it goes to the
actus reus?
      MR. PAYNE:     Sorry, no, it goes to the mens rea.

      THE CORONER:   I thought he said actus reus.     What
did you say, perhaps I misheard you?




                        MR. RUSSELL:   What I meant
                                                               63

                                                   MR.   ISAACS


     MU. RUSSELL:     I.7hat I meant was that that relates to
the mensrea and that recklessness cannot      live on mens
rea alone.  It requires the actus reus first.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I see.     I understand that now.
Tnat was the reason why I asked    that question.   I could
not quite understand.     I nad obviously misunderstood
wnat you had said.

     Mk. RUSSELL:   I apologise.      I am sure I didn't
express myself clearly.

     THE COivOKER:    No, I thinkit is entirely my fault.

     MR. ISAACS:       Sir, yes, the foresight goes to   the
mens r e a ; the actus reus still has to be proved.

     That brings me on to the first of the six points I
would wish to make in reply to the various matters that
have been canvassed before you.    The difference so far
as actus   reus is concerned between myself, Mr. Payne and
Mr. King,   is as to whether the risk would have been
serious and obvious to the reasonably prudent individual
in the position of - let us use shorthand, sir - the
defendant, is that I say it is not a jury question any
longer because there is not sufficient evidence.      My
learned friend Mr. King says it is a jury' question
because there is evidence.

     He referred for a time to Elliott and as I said
earlier, I formed the impression that with the skill of
advocacy that he has he was in fact answering a point
that was never being made.    I do not suggest that the
jury would have to, if there was evidence, consider (a)
whether Mr. Duckenfield would have been able to see the
risk had he thought about it.    I accept the test is
quite clear:  would the risk have been serious and
obvious to the independent, prudent, reasonable
individual in the position of Mr. Duckenfield?

     However, I do not concede and I do not move away
from the submission I made earlier, namely, it has to-be
in the circumstances that faced Mr. Duckenfield and all
the circumstances that faced Mr. Duckenfield.    Those
circumstances not only involve the environmental
circumstances, namely, the risk and all that went with
what was happening in the Control Room at the time,, but
also the personal circumstances insofar as they would
have affected the Police Controller in his position.     I
do not move away from that at all.   Uhen one reads
Elliott, Elliott does not suggest anything to the
contrary.   All Elliott is saying is that the test is
objective, namely, would the serious and obvious risk
have been apparent to the individual, that is, the
                                                 MR. ISAACS


reasonably prudent individual, but with those caveats.
That is, in that position, in those circumstances, and I
echo the submissions I referred to earlier made by
'ir. Kentridge in tne Zeebrugge case.

      Tne point I was seeking to make when I made my
earlier. .suJDoiASAaas^..,which... perhaps I„ made ratixex,
inelegantly, was that when one comes to consider whether
there is evidence upon which a jury properly directed
could come to the conclusion so that they were sure that
the reasonably prudent individual in the appropriate
circumstances at the relevant time would have considered
the risk to be serious and obvious, reliance can be
placed by Mr. Duckenfield on the risk that was not
perceived by Mr. Murray and the risk that was not
perceived by Mr. Goddard.           He can say that when one
looks at the evidence (a) there is no evidence from
anybody that there was in those circumstances an obvious
and serious risk.       Indeed, the only evidence that there
is from the other two people in the Control Box from whom
we have heard who had the same or a better view or
perception than he had, that is, Hr. Murray and
Mr. Goddard, if the jury is to regard them as reasonable
and prudent Police Officers, then they did not perceive
the risk.

     I hope, sir, you appreciate the distinction between
the two.    I am not saying that the test is whether
Mr. Duckenfield perceived the risk.    What I am saying is
that Mr. Duckenfield, when the jury are directed upon
this matter if it gets that far, can say, "When one has
to have regard to what the reasonably prudent individual
in my position would have perceived, you have got two
people there who can represent the reasonably prudent
individual in my position - indeed, in a better position.
Who better can one turn to than those two for the clear
view tnat no serious and obvious risk would have been
perceived?"

     I come back to the point I made originally that when
one applies the approach of Mr. Justice Turner, then
there is no sufficient evidence and it should not go to
the jury.   My learned friend said, "Well, look at
Mr. Marshall, what about his evidence?   That is evidence
upon which the jury could come to that conclusion."    I
say to that this, sir, Mr. Marshall's evidence in the
passages to which you were directed by my learned friend,
was hypothetical, was made with the benefit of hindsight,
and, more importantly, in the context of the appropriate
test he was not put, having regard to the questions asked
by my learned friend, in all the circumstances which
existed at the time to those in the Control Room.    All
tnose circumstances were not put forward to Mr. Marshall
for his consideration and those circumstances not having
                                                   .   70
                                               MR. ISAACS


been put, namely, the crisis, for example, the shortness
of time, for example, then Mr. Marshall's view is one
which the jury could not rely upon in determining what
the prudent and reasonable Police Controller would have
perceived.   This is why there is such a danger in
splitting up - and this is what I said earlier -
splitting up the ,stest into the step by step approach.




          The third point
                                                         71

                                        FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


     MR. ISAACS:    The third point I make is this, and it
follows on from that last point.  My learned friend said
the questions that could be put to the Jury might well be
these.  Was it obvious to the hypothetical person that the
pens were overcrowded?  Secondly, was it obvious to the
hypothetical person that fans might go into the central
pens? But again the flaw in that sort of argument,
leaving that sort of decision to the Jury, is that it is
so selective.  The test would be, was there created by any
act or omission in respect of which there was a duty to
act, a risk, I would say of death, but even if it be of
physical harm, as a result of the decision to open the
gate and the failure to divert?  My learned friend's
approach is selective.  That is the test in my submission
that the Jury would have to be asked to answer, and as I
say, and to be wearisome to say it again, there is no
evidence, taking Mr. Justice Turner's approach, for them
to come to any conclusion other than such a risk, that is
a serious and obvious risk, would not have been perceived
by the hypothetical person.

     By way of digressing, in relation to Mr. Justice
Turner, if I could add my observations on the question
that you asked, sir, my submission is this.  Mr. Justice
Turner as a High Court Judge in the Crown Court is sitting
as a judge in a superior court.  This, sir, with respect,
is an inferior court.  The authorities suggest that one
judge sitting in a court which is of a co-ordinate
jurisdiction should follow earlier decisions, unless he is
satisfied that they are wrong.  Even more so then in my
submission should, with respect, a tribunal in an inferior
court follow the decision of a superior court.

     Sir, a small passage from Halsbury's Laws, Vol. 26,
dealing with judicial decisions as authorities, at
paragraph 5-80, dealing with decisions of co-ordinate
courts, so another judge in the High Court essentially:

    "There is no statute or common law rule by which one
    court is bound to abide by the decision of another
    court of co-ordinate jurisdiction.     Where, however, a
    judge of first instance after consideration has come
    to a definite decision on a matter arising out of a
    complicated and difficult enactment, the opinion has
    been expressed that a second judge of first instance
    of co-ordinate jurisdiction should follow that
    decision, and the m o d e m practice is that a judge of
    first instance would as a matter of judicial comity
    usually follow the decision of another judge of first
    instance, unless he is convinced that the judgment
    was wrong".
                                                            72

                                          FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


And, sir, if it applies in that way to judges in
coincident jurisdictions, so much so then when one goes,
with respect, further down the line.

     Sir, my fourth point is in relation to causation.        I
adopt what has been said by my learned friend Mr. Payne
just a moment ago, save for this, that in so far as it
affects Mr. DucEenfi&ld then. I submit. tJi&t it i ^ imt. o»ly<
acts which are not foreseeable which can break a chain
that emanates directly from him, it is also unforeseeable
omissions on the parts of others that can break the chain,
and on that basis I repeat the submission that I made
yesterday upon that particular subject, that if there is
such a break in the chain of causation in your judgment,
so far as the failure to act on the part of Mr. Murray and
Mr. Goddard is concerned, a failure to act which Mr.
Duckenfield could have expected and foreseen had there
been an obvious risk, then there is no chain of causation
leading from Mr. Duckenfield to any deaths.

      My fifth point is this, and it is one which I did not
raise yesterday but which I have considered overnight, and
I make the point briefly.   Sir, I feel that you will have
to leave to the Jury - this is my submission - the
possibility on the evidence that Mr. Duckenfield
appreciated a risk that would be created when fans entered
the Ground.   If one considers the risk being that fans
would enter the Ground and might enter an area which was
already overcrowded, you would have to leave to the Jury
this question, whether Mr. Duckenfield was not reckless
because (a) he considered where the fans were to go when
he gave the order for the gates to be opened, namely on to
the concourse, and (b) he considered at that time that
there was room in the concourse and on the terrace for
them by going in different directions.   It may be that he
was wrong about that but that is not the point.   It means
that on the Lawrence test he would have given some
consideration to not a risk that he necessarily foresaw,
but a risk that would have or may have been apparent to
the hypothetical individual, and have come to the
conclusion in relation to the fans coming into the Ground
that there was no risk, in which case on the Lawrence test
it goes into the lacuna area which you have read about,
and which you have been addressed about - not least by my
learned friend Mr. King - in which case Mr. Duckenfield
would not have been reckless because it would not be, and
this would be a point that the Jury could consider, it
would not be a case of failing to advert to the risk, or
of seeing an obvious risk and going on to take it
regardless, but having considered where they would go and
deciding, perhaps wrongly, that they would disappear or
disperse safely.   Sir, that is a matter that you will have
to consider, as to whether to leave that concept to the
Jury.
                                                                     73

                                                FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


     Sir, the sixth point I make is this, and I do stress
it, in seeking once again to say that the case of unlawful
killing against Mr. Duckenfield and indeed against Mr.
Murray, because they are in a very similar position, save
for the question of causation, that there is a real risk
here that the Jury with 95 deaths may seek to find
scapegoats, and that there may be a temptation however
carefully directed, that they w i l l ,look,,.-wltl4,..-hinds.igh.t.-^,-
"Well, it must have been somebody's fault".            That is a
danger which, as I said yesterday, you must avoid and if
it means upsetting people by applying the law, grasping
the nettle and saying there is no evidence, applying the
appropriate law that can go to the Jury, then the risk
that scapegoats may be found outwith the law can be
avoided.   I do stress that point and I am sure it is one
that you have very much in mind if you do have to direct
the Jury on this particular point.

      THE CORONER:      Thank you, Mr. Isaacs.        Mr. Manning.

     MR. MANNING:   I am in danger if I continue to adopt
at the rate at which I am doing of having a very large
extended family, but I cannot improve upon both the law
and the eloquence of those who have spoken in this case,
and I say that with the greatest of respect to all of
them, and make that perfectly known.

     I adopted what I respectfully suggested was a
simplistic approach but if it be simplistic at least it
was in the good hands or in the clear words of Mr. Justice
Turner in the Zeebrugge case, which I referred to then and
do not intend to read again even though it is only a few
lines.  But I found it helpful; I think everyone would
find it helpful because it was much more in layman's
language and in words that you may very well care to adopt
when you are addressing the Jury.

     That I find myself in agreement with my learned
friend Mr. Isaacs as to the way in which that should be
adopted and accepted by you is no surprise, and the only
factor that I would draw to your attention so far as the
Zeebrugge case itself is concerned, in comparison to this
case, is that in the Zeebrugge case there was not at the
material time an emergency.  It is only when there is an
emergency that the case for the consideration of unlawful
killing comes to be the subject of the minute, painstaking
and necessary examination of decided authorities and of
very eminent people who have spoken to give us that
guidance.

     Again, it is quite possible for us, in looking at
those cases and in trying to find factors which either
distinguish between one another or bring the facts closer,
whether it is a coronial case or it is a divisional court
                                                           74

                                       FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


case, whether one Lord Justice of Appeal was sitting in
another tribunal and therefore could be said to adopt the
view and find a consensus, that we perhaps lose sight yet
again of simple elements and that simple element, I
respectfully suggest, is the difference between the facts
of Zeebrugge and the non emergency situation at the
outset, and the facts here when you have to look at them,
whichi was a real erisis of an uraprecedented pr©p©rtion

     I don't intend to seek to distinguish between the
command, the ultimate decision maker and he who sat, if
not at his side then in front, as to who had a better
perception or indeed view, or anything of that nature.  It
seems to me that the law adopted broadly has to be applied
across the board.

     I, sir, associate myself with the last remarks of Mr.
Isaacs in that respect, that this is an enquiry into how
people died.  It is not part of anyone's function to find
people to whom the finger can conveniently be pointed and
that is why you have taken the trouble and given us the
indulgence of listening to us now nearly two days, over
matters of legal importance and significance, so that you
are helped I hope, not befogged but helped, by the way in
which you will address this Jury and give them the
necessary guidance as to the law, picking between
everything that you have had before you both in verbal and
in written form, and you will be able to give them that
direction, putting out of their minds if you want, again
in simple English, that it is their function to discover
how, and not their function to point a finger simply so
that at the end of the day there is a culprit, for that is
not the purpose at all.

     There is nothing further that I can add save to thank
you for your kindness and indulgence, and I sincerely mean
that because it has been difficult and I think it should
be said and I would have wanted to say it.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you, that is very kind of you,
Mr. Manning.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I only address you again on certain
points of law.  Sir, we have heard one or two comments
from my learned friends which almost became cri de coeur,
somewhat emotional, about scapegoats and so forth.  Sir, I
don't respond to them, not in any disservice to my learned
friends, because I know what we are dealing with are legal
submissions and what should properly be done on the basis
of the matter before you, and it is not an issue here of
scapegoats it is an issue of whether or not it is proper
that certain verdicts should be left to the Jury in the
case of certain individuals.
                                         FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


     Sir, could I just go through one or two of the points
now raised.  To my learned friend Mr. Payne's point that
if there is a novus actus here there can be no question of
an unlawful killing verdict, as I understood what he was
saying to you, sir, my simple answer to that proposition
is this, you are concerned certainly in the context of the
cause which everybody has put forward to my left, as one
capable of breaking the- chain of -eaiisation' which* is tine
decision to open the concertina gates and allow in, in an
uncontrolled manner, the large cro.wd of people without
taking steps to divert them from the centre pens, that
cause, that intervening act is one where the simple
question arises, is that on the evidence a substantial
cause of the deaths?   If it   is a substantial cause then
there is a causative link.

     The fact that it is for the purposes of analysis the
only cause, if that be your conclusion, for the purposes
of leaving an unlawful killing verdict to     the Jury, sobe
it, that is the consequence   of it being a   novus actus.I
have not, in fact, sought to put forward my own
professional opinion as to whether it is a novus actus or
not.  That is a matter, it   may be a matter left to the
Jury or it may be simply a   matter for you, sir, to say
whether the evidence is conclusive all one way, but
assuming it is for the moment conclusive all one way, it
cannot possibly have that consequence that the intervening
act therefore ceases to be a substantial cause of death.
Far from it, it becomes the cause of death, and on any
view is a substantial cause, and we are all agreed on an
analysis of the law that when one is looking to the
conduct or omission of any   person whose conduct or
omission is called into question, the question on
causation is was that a substantial cause of death?

     Sir, I won't repeat and don't seek to repeat all the
matters I already laid before you as to why there was, in
relation to that conduct and omission, evidence, and is
evidence, clear evidence, which the Jury are entitled to
consider, be it as to the state of the pens, be it as to
the likely route of those coming in, in all the
circumstances which my learned friends pray in aid there
is the evidence there for them to consider whether there
was an obvious and serious risk to the reasonably prudent
person, and the risk of course is the risk of physical
injury to those who are about to enter the centre pens, or
those already there, so when my learned friend Mr. Payne
refers to a failure to react to a risk already created in
the context of the events at Hillsborough, I had the
impression, I may be wrong, that he was referring to a
risk already created outside the concertina gates, for
example.  I may be wrong on that, but that is not the
relevant risk which you are looking to at the time of the
conduct or omission which I am directing your attention
                                                        76

                                       FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


to,- namely the decision to let into the Ground a large '
group of people through those concertina gates.   The risk
there we are talking about is the risk of injury, physical
injury, to those who are about to enter and those who are
already in the centre pens.




                                 That risk is created
                                                           77

                                          FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


    That risk is created.    That is the question.   The
act which creates that risk, which is for the Jury to
decide, is the act of letting them in.    The act of
letting them in without taking the various steps which
I suggest the reasonably prudent person would have
taken is creating the risk and that is the question,
therefore, in, the, two stage. Lawrence/Caldwell
analysis, which I need not go through, sir.

    In the case of Hr. Duckenfield, I do say,
therefore, there is evidence not simply that, for
example, he failed to react to a risk which has already
been created but we are talking about the creation of
the risk through letting people into the ground and
that is what I directed your attention to, sir.

    I repeat again that it would not be proper, in fact
it would be wholly wrong, to say that the only evidence
that the Jury can consider as to whether or not it
would be obvious to a reasonably prudent person of
those in the Control Box, the only evidence one can
consider as to whether or not it would have been
obvious to then that the centre pens were full and the
likely route of the fans in the circumstances inwhich
they found themselves, the only evidence one could
consider would be those in the Control Box because they
are the very people whose conduct is being called in
question.

    It was rightly pointed out, I think by my learned
friend, Mr. Russell, in distinguishing Mr. Justice
Turner's judgment, they are the actors in the immediate
cause and, therefore, it would be wholly wrong to say
it is to be determined simply by their evidence.   The
Jury are entitled, of course, to take into account
their explanstion and I would not in any way detract
from that because that is wholly within the Jury's
province but they are entitled also to take into
account all the other evidence as to the centre pens,
the state of them, the views one gets from the Control
Box, the view* one gets from the gates, the layout of
the ground, the questions a reasonably prudent man
might ask and so forth.

    Sir, I do not go through them all and, as you know,
I have got my evidence all carefully scheduled on those
various issues but it would be wrong to fall into the
trap, if I can put it that way terribly gently, that
simply because those whose conduct is called into
question themselves deny it was obvious to them and so
forth is determinate of what would have been obvious to
the reasonable and prudent person in their positions.
                                                          78
                                         FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


One only has to state that perhaps to see that that is
correct.

    Equally, sir, my references to Elliott have been
somewhat misinterpreted.   I cited Elliott to you for
two reasons.  One was going to the actus reus and one
going to the mgns £ga.   So far as the actus reus, is.
concerned, it is clear authority for the proposition
that when dealing with recklessness, manslaughter, or
any other crime where recklessness is applicable on the
Lawrence test that the issue is what would be obvious
to the reasonable and prudent person in the position of
the defendant but you do not give to that reasonable
and prudent person the peculiar characteristics of the
defendant which he may pray in aid as to why it was not
particularly obvious to him.

    I am not now talking about the circumstances in
which he finds himself but I am talking about the
personal characteristics.  The 14 year old girl in
Elliott was not allowed to pray in aid that she was of
a young age, that she had no experience of white
spirit, that she was of low intelligence.  Those were
factors which were peculiar to her and would not be
imbued and put into the reasonable and prudent person
in her position.

    The second point I was raising out of Elliott was
to do with the mens rea was that the defendant (if I
can call him that for the moment) knew of the risk or
had not given thought to the possibility of there being
a risk and what Elliott establishes on this
recklessness test is that it matters not if the
defendant were able to convince a Jury that even if I
had considered the risk it would not have been obvious
to me because that is exactly what the defendant in
Elliott was saying to the Court.  "I did not consider,
I concede that, but because of my certain personal
characteristics if I had considered it I still would
not have realised it and recognised it".

     It was clearly stated there that was not the mens
rga.   The m^ns rea is simply, did the person know of
the risk and go on regardless or was the person in the
state of mind that he had not turned his mind to the
possibility of the risk? That is why I referred to
         on those two points.  I do not think anything
said in Gray countermands that now that I understand
how others interpret it which is no more than saying
that sentence need not be there because as I understand
^ ” you know the sentence to which I am referring ~
that what my learned friend, Mr. Russell, suggests is
being meant by the Lord Justice is that mens rea by
                                                            79

                                          FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


itself is not sufficient to create the crime.   You have
got to have actus reus as well.  I concede that
totally.

    That is a basic tenet of the criminal law but it
does mean, however, that failure to give any thought to
the possibility of the risk is sufficient mens r e a . On
reflection, perhaps that is not what I thought at first
the Lord Justice was saying.  What he was saying was,
simply having the mens rea without it being obvious to
the reasonably prudent man is not the offence.   So be
it.  It does not add anything but the way that it is
set out in the books and various submissions it stands
out in such an emphatic way as if it was given an
importance which on reflection it just does not have.
It is a matter of law, sir.

    The comments of my learned friend, Mr. Payne, as to
those whose conduct is called into question amounting
to a failure to react to a risk created elsewhere and
his submission that that under no circumstances could
amount to recklessness.  In my submission that cannot
be the law. I may have misunderstood him.

     MR. PAYNE:   I said it was very unlikely.

     MR. KING:  The reason why I say that cannot be the
case is, of course, if it were the case the judgment in
the Hong Kong case was the very judgment in which they
would have said so. Mot only that, it is quite clear
in the Hong Kong case that the Privy Council were
saying that recklessness for manslaughter on the
Lawrence test applied to any case where there is an
allegation of manslaughter.  In my submission, I
repeat, the only difference where you are dealing with
someone who has allegedly ignored or failed to act in
response to an obvious and serious risk of physical
injury to another, created by another, is that there
has to be a duty to act upon it.

    Of course, his failure to react to it has to be the
result of failing to see that which would have been
obvious to the reasonable and prudent person in his
position.  Indeed, the analysis in Gray would support
that because the judgment in that case was to deal with
unlawful killing by neglect.

    I do come back to my point, sir, that in my
submission you are not here simply dealing with an
allegation of neglect and unlawful killing in simple
terms because the opening of the concertina gates and
allowing in an uncontrolled flow of supporters of
itself was a positive act.  Obviously there are
                                                          80

                                        FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


elements in the totality of the conduct and omission
complained of which includes an omission which is an
omission to take steps to divert the spectators from
the centre pens.

    There is a creation, a positive act and an omission
together and, it cannot be viewed simply as a neglect
case but even if, sir, you were to view it simply as a
neglect case there is nothing in the Gray judgment to
suggest that cannot amount to unlawful killing because
you have the various ingredients there set out.

    On the issue again which my learned friend, Mr.
Isaacs, raised on the suggestion that there could be a
novus actus in the case of Mr. Duckenfield through the
failure of others around him to act, I do repeat my
earlier submission that that, as a matter of common
sense as well as law, cannot hold in the situation
where the Jury were to conclude - and I say it must be
open to them - that there was a continuing duty at all
times on Mr. Duckenfield in the Control Box to have
regard to the consequences of that which had brought
about the opening of the concertina gates.

    The fact that there is more than one person whose
conduct or omission might be called into question
cannot break the chain of causation as between their
particular conduct or omission and the disaster if they
are coincident, if they are all happening together on
whatever view of the facts the Jury form in a situation
where A has a duty and B has a duty; A and B in that
analysis could be guilty of unlawful killing.

    The fact that each of them has failed to act in a
situation where the reasonable and prudent person in
their position would have reacted can be no answer to
either of then and that is why I say, sir, it is only a
circumstance that can be prayed in aid for the Jury's
consideration on the issue of whether or not a
reasonable and prudent person would have observed the
risk but is not conclusive as a matter of causation as
to whether or not the failure of one to observe the
risk has caused the disaster.

    Sir, my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs, made the point
as to whether or not Mr. Duckenfield in fact turned his
mind to the risk and came to the conclusion there was
no risk is patently a Jury question and indeed he was
advising you and submitting to you on the basis that he
would like to put that to the Jury as a possibility
when considering the issue of recklessness.  I do not
make any comment on that at all, sir, because that is a
question which even Mr. Isaacs would say is a question
                                                           81

                                          FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


for the Jury when they are considering the issue of
recklessness against Mr. Duckenfield and I have made my
submissions already about whether gross negligence
applies there.

     THE CORONER:     I think I understood Mr. Isaacs to
say if I w e r a to decide to leave it then that is the
point which in those circumstances...

     MR. KING:   Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:  He did not quite use those words but
that is how I understood it.

     MR. KING:  That is how I understood it too and
that is why I say, sir, I do not address you on it
because that is essentially a question which would be
considered by the Jury.  If I were to address you it
would go on the issue of law whether gross negligence
existed.  Sir, unless I repeat my 'offer' to direct you
as to the evidence which I say the Jury could consider
on the issue as to whether or not it was obvious to a
reasonable and prudent person as those in the Control
Box, that if a large number of people were allowed into
the ground in an uncontrolled way there was a real risk
they were likely to end up in the centre pens which
were already full and, therefore, there was a risk of
overcrowding and crushing, unless you want me to
identify the evidence to you, I have nothing more to
say.  I have made clear that I am prepared so to do.

     THE CORONER:  I do understand and, as I said
yesterday, I would like you to but I think it would be
a mistake.  I think I had better say no.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, I hope I can be mercifully
brief.  I have one very brief comment to make in
relation to some of the comments that have been raised
about novus actus. I think there was a tendency, with
respect, to overlook the fact that the words novus
actus interveniens are simply a legal shorthand for
saying that if an individual’s acts or omissions give
rise to potentially causative conduct which is to be
regarded in law as liable and an unforeseen event -
unforeseen by him - occurs which overtakes that then in
law that person is not to be regarded as having caused
anything.

    That leaves the actual fact of what that person may
or may not have done at large, no doubt that will be
taken into the circumstances if the unforeseen event is
one which is an actual omission by another person in
breach of a duty to somebody else.  There is no magic
                                                             82

                                            FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


about novus actus. It does not throw out of the window
all the background.  It just says to an individual,
"You are no longer regarded in law as having set off a
train of events which led to someone's death".  It is a
simple concept.

    The other point I would raise is in relation to the
Zeebrugge ruling by Mr. Justice Turner.  Both myself
and Mr. Russell are playing away from home, so to
speak, and so we have not had access to a law library
but certainly when my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs, was
citing a passage to you as to the effect of courts at
the same level and binding decisions, he was citing
from Halsburv's Laws which I know is an old edition.
It is 1979 and certainly in my mind I am fairly clear
there is a more recent case which, if you are troubled
by it, I am sure we could find in the Sheffield City
Council law library which is to that effect, that
courts of equal jurisdiction should follow the decision
of another court unless they are satisfied that it is
wrong or if there are two conflicting decisions.

    Therefore, logically the court of an inferior
jurisdiction ought to follow the court at a higher
level.  I believe my learned friend, Mr. Russell, may
also extend an offer.  We both share the belief that
the Old Bailey actually sits as a High Court.  We have
no actual legal basis for that but if it is right it
would bind you in this instance and we would both be
happy to pop off and try and find it if it is
necessary.

       THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, have you anything to
say?




                                   /MRS. M c BRX EN.
                                                       83


                                     MISS ADDLEMAN



      MRS. McBRlEN:  Sir, I would' like to add to my
submission the application of the "but for" to the
following possible cause.

      But for the closing of Leppings Lane to traffic at
about 2.30 the congestion would not have arisen outside
the Leppings Lane turnstiles which led to the opening of
the exit gate, Gate C, so not only was a dangerous vehicle
created but. it was'aiso'* driven in a reckle,ss    cau®in>g
injuries ana death.    Than!: you.

      THE CORONER:   Thank you, Mrs. Ilc3rien.

      MISS ADDLEMAN:  Sir, only two points I think.
Both are referable to comments made by my learned rriend
Mr. Payne and can I say on the whole that I agree with the
matters which my learned friend Mr. Payne has brought to
your attention in his second address, but can I take issue
sir with something he said so far as the authority of
ex parte Higgins is concerned.

      As I understood it, I may be wrong about this, but
my learned friend Ur. Payne seemed to be suggesting to
you that this was a case where there was no evidence in
the view of the Court to support a verdict of unlawful
killing.

      In my respectful submission, sir, it seems clear
to me at any rate, that it was a case of insufficient
evidence and I gain support for that view particularly
from page 245, halfway down the page, the paragraph that
begins "Mr. Goghlan for the coroner .— "

      THE CORONER:   Yes.

      MISS ADDLEMAN: " ____ submitted that nevertheless
      there was evidence upon which a jury properly
      directed could have come to the conclusion that
      a verdict of unlawful killing was the proper
      verdict.  In this he was supported by
      Mr. O'Connor.  Both of them referred us to
      all such passages of the evidence as they were
      able to suggest might amount to sufficient
      evidence to justify a verdict."

Sir, clearly that submission was rejected but clearly there
was some material on which the Court came to the conclusion.

      Sir, I think that in my respectful submission could
be an important point and one to be borne in mind.

      Secondly, sir, can I say that I agree with the
remarks made by my learned friend Mr. Payne with regard
to those passages of the Kong Cheuk decision which he
drew to our attention yesterday on pages 25 and there again
on page 26.
                                      MISS ADDLEMAN




      Sir, in that context can I say that of course I also
agree with my learned friend Hr. King when he says that
of course such circumstances as are envisaged there can
in fact arise, namely when one is considering the reaction
or lack of reaction and here I use the word defendant
as shorthand, reaction or lack of reaction to a situation
created by the obvious and serious risk of another.

      Can I also observe this:  to envisage those situation's’'
one has to stretch one's imagination to very extreme
examples and sir the one that I have in mind is a situation
for instance where someone, some individual committed an
offence of arson and set fire to a house.  Thereafter
individual (B) comes along and thinks "Ah a fire" or indeed
perhaps thinks nothing, but pours petrol all over the fire.

       Sir, from this example I would submit that situations
do have to be extreme and therefore it does lend force
to ray learned friend Mr. Payne's comments, that if one has
to get to that situation before one can consider that the
Diplock direction, vis-a-vis Lawrence, has to be modified,
one really must be getting perilously near at the very least,
in my respectful submission, to a situation where one has
to say, particularly bearing in mind this context, whether
it is safe to leave a verdict to the jury, but one has to
say can a person be reckless in those circumstances?

      I appreciate it does in fact only go to circumstances
but it is highly relevant in your considerations at this
stage, indeed it would be if you reject that first sub­
mission of mine.

      Sir, I think those are the only matters that I would
wish to draw to your attention.

      MR. RUSSELL:  You will be relieved to hear that I
don't propose to add anything.

      THE CORONER:   Thank you, Mr. Russell.

      Well, ladies and gentlemen, can I just say that I
am most grateful to you, Mr. Manning has very generously
said that I have given you time but you too of course
have given me your thoughts and your time and I do
appreciate it very much indeed and I will obviously try
as best as I can to take on board what has been said.
It would be a lie to say that I had done no thinking on
this matter myself so I will also of course take that
into account.

      I don't think there is any merit or any need for
me to give any rulings or directions on your submissions.
May I say it will become apparent as I sum up what I
have accepted and what I have not or perhaps what I have
misunderstood I suppose is also a possibility, but I don't
think there is any need or any requirement for me to give
any direction and it also gives me an opportunity to
spend a little while before tomorrow morning to mull it
over and may be modify any thinking which I have done
already.  I hope that is acceptable to all of you.

       Now before we go there is just a couple of little
procedural things which I want to sort out todsy beesuse
it will save us time tomorrow.    It is this: I have
already mentioned that I want to introduce this one
exhibit.   It is, I hesitate to say, of no consequence.
It is of great consequence to Ilrs. McBrien but it is not
going to make any difference to the final decision as to
tfhere this particular mark appears on the plan, but so that
it is in the body so to speak of the documentation, I
hope you will forgive me introducing it after the
submissions. We should have had it on Monday but I
suppose the post and one thing and another. Anyway, be
that as it may.

      Now the second thing I want to do is this:     as you
know I have already told you I am going to let the jury
have 'the exhibits and at some point or other we are
going to bring into Court, I d o n ’t think it will be
tomorrow, it will be on Monday before they go out, a
video recorder and we will teach them how to use it so
that they can look at the videos if they wish.     They
don't have to. The videos which are exhibited of course,
not 71 hours of other film or thereabouts that is
available.

       Apart from the exhibits I don't intend to give them
anything other than about 100 copies of the "Inquisition"
blank.   They look like this. You know what they look
like.

        In addition to that I intend to give them - can
you just hand these out? This is just an example.      This
is just one case, it is Colin Wafer.    What I have done
in order to save them a lot of writing we have also
completed an Inquisition on all the parts that I consider
to fc>e totally non-controversial such as where we are
sitting; the date; who the Coroner was or is; the name
and the medical cause of death.

      Paragraphs   3 and 4, which are the crucial ones,
"Time, place and   circumstances" will be left blank.   I
will explain all   this to the jury but I want you to know
what I intend to   do in case you have-any comment.

      We have also completed the section which says:
"Particulars for the time being required by the
Registration Acts to be registered concerning the
death" because again that is really non-controversial,
it is names and dates.  It is really repetition to a
large extent of what has gone before.
                                                                    86




      I wi11-make it quite clear to them that they can
of course cross anything out they want and if they
don't like to use a typed version that is why I am giving
them blank copies as well so that if they wish they can
sit down and write it all out by hand, it does not matter
to me, but I hope that you will see this simply as a means
to make life easier for the jury and to save them having
to write it all down in note form here because there is
no way they could’ reiitexiiber every single nciui^ exactly right
and the dates of birth.

      Have you any comments on this?

      MR. MAXWELL: Could we have a copy of the reverse
side as well because apparently there are notes?

      THE CORONER:   I have not got a genuine puckka original
up here with me.   If somebody goes downstairs on my desk
there there are a few.   The reverse, yes there is a reverse,
you are quite right.

      HR. MAXWELL: Sir, it is simply that the numbers
are obviously referring to something on the back and I
wonder if you could tell us what it is that is on the back?

      THE CORONER:  Yes, I know what it is.  It is a list
of the possible verdicts which are actually lifted from
the rules and the back sheet basically to give the name
and the date and the address, so it lists about 12 possible
verdicts from natural causes down to, or up to, if you
wish, unlawfully killed, but we will get a copy and you
will see what it is in a moment.

      That is unavoidable.   They   have got to have    the
reverse because whether I give them a typed one or an
untyped one it is on the reverse because it is printed.




                               /The only way to get round it
                                                           87




     The only way to get round that would be to give them
completely blank’sheets of paper  and that in fact is
arguably not right.   I ought to say I do not use this
form normally.  We use our own.   Howevsr, I decided to
in these particular Inquests, because there is argument
as to whether one should use the prescribed form and I
decided I would use it in order t© avoid any difficulty.

     Now the second thing I want to give them - I will
try to give them some help with filling in paragraphs 3
and paragraphs 4.   One of the points which I will be
making to them is - as you can see it says, "Time, place
and circumstances at or in which  the injury was
sustained."   That is only the first sheet of sixteen
sheets, but it is just to give you an idea.

     One of the points I will be making to them is that
if they wish they could put the time of certification.
Personally I do not think they should, but tnev may want
to do that and that is a matter entirely for t;'.c-:.. what
I have done - you will recognise this document, it is a
truncated version of something you have already seen - 'it
gives the numerical number, the name, the thir^ column is
the age, then the time and the doctor who certified the
deaths in each case.   The last column says "i^ate of
Hearing", that is the date when we had the interim
inquests.   I could have cut that out but it mi.: it just
help them in locating the cases in their min^s.

     Again, I do not think there is anything
controversial about this and it is simply inten       to
save them writing all these numbers down in co»»rt i
will save us a considerable amount of time beca-.:--; 1 •..•ill
be able to deal with it without having to wait : -r tnem
to write.

     Can you see anything that worries you about fi t?

     You will notice on the Inquisition, by the wav, at
the top there is a number.   It is 13 on thio one.    That
is the sequential numbering system.    In fact the numbers
are important because if they were, for example, to want
to look, say, at the plan where the deceased were last
seen alive for instance, those are all identified by
numbers and it would be impossible for them to work out
who is who without having some means of locating the
numbers.    However, I do not intend to give them either
an alphabetical or numerical list because once I go into
that then I am giving them stuff we have not had in
evidence and I do not want to do that.

     Is there anything else, apart from just having a
look at this back sheet?
                                                       88




     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, there is one other natter.   It
will not surprise you that coming from me it concerns
photographs.

     One of the features of the photographs which have
been supplied to us taken from acetates, and I presume
the jury has photographs of a similar quality,, is that
there is a considerable difference in quality between the
standard of the quality of reproduction in the
photographs we have been given and the quality of
reproduction that exists in the master copies.     I am
wondering whether it would be possible, or even
advisable, for the jury to be provided with one set of
all the photographs which have been adduced in the best
quality that is available, which will probably mean the
relevant masters being extracted from the bundles of
10" x 8" photographs that are held by the West Midlands
Police, so that if the jury wish to refer to a particular
part of a photograph which they find unclear on the
acetate reproductions which are in their bundle, they can
do so.   I have in mind in particular the photographs
taken inside the ground where some of the detail is very
small.   For example, trying to spot a police woman's hat
in the middle of a certain pen may be impossible on an
acetate reproduction, but is quite possible on the real
master copies from which the acetates were prepared.

     THE CORONER:   I have no particular objection to
that because we are not introducing anytning new, we are
just producing better quality of the same.   The only
problem is whether we can do it within the time.    I
think the best I can offer you, Mr. Russell, is that we
will have a look and see whether it is feasible to
extract the photographs.   The jury is not going out
until Monday so the chances are we will be able to do it
because they do not necessarily need them tomorrow.   Ue
will do our best and see whether we can do that.

     I still would want to give them the files because it
is easier for them to handle them.

     MR. RUSSELL:   You can't give them the files because
the files include photographs which have not been made
exhibits.

     THE CORONER:   No.  I am sorry, you have
misunderstood me.   These folders, I mean.    Our exhibit
folders.   We have got to extract from the hundreds of
thousands of photographs which exist the ones which have
been exhibited.   That is the problem, whether we have
got the time to do it but we will do what we can.
                                                       89



     Has everyone seen the back of this now?
Mr. Maxwell are you happy with tnat?  As I say, in a
sense you nave no choice because it is printed on.

     MISS ADDELriAM:  Sir, on the question of exhibits,
can I ask if this is in your mind, sir, to make clear to
the jury that at any time in order to assist in their
deliberations they are at perfect liberty to see any of
the exhibits?

     THE COROMER:   Indeed, that is the very point I was
just making.   The exhibits fortunately are contained -
in fact there are three volumes of exhibits.

     MISS ADDELMAN:   I do apologise if I have
misunderstood.

      THE CORONER:   I intend to give them the whole lot.
In fact we will give them the whole lot.    We will give
them an abbreviated set where we have extracted the
plans, you know, where people have put their crosses,
because it is much easier to leaf through them if you do
not have to leave through several hundred plans, which
they may not need but we will give them those as well so
that they can have a look.    We will provide them with
equipment so that if they want to look at the exhibited
video material they can do so in the privacy of their
roam.    Of course, I will also tell them if they have any
problems all they need to do is to come back and I will
try to help them.

     HISS ADDELMAN:   Thank you, sir.

     MR. MANNING:   I am now on to a practical issue nnd
that is the time, or the times.   We know we are starting
at ten o'clock tomorrow.   It is going to be a very long
day for you as well as for the jury because obviously you
are talking to them and their concentration is...

     THE CORONER:   That is one of the reasons why I
decided to start at ten o'clock.

     MR. MANNING:   Yes, a ten o'clock start, obviously
breaks during the course of the morning.   Would I be
bold to anticipate that to go very much beyond four,
indeed, at all beyond four would be beyond anybody's
limit?

     THE CORONER:   I would be very surprised if I would
want to go beyond four.   It might be a minute or two if
I am just finishing something off but it would not my
plan to go beyond four because I think I will be a little
bit too tired.
                                                        90




     HR. MANNING:   Indeed, sir.   It is right, is it
not, that on Friday morning we still have the juror who
has an inability to come before one o'clock?

     THE CORONER:   One o'clock we start on Friday, and
on Friday I do intend to go on until about five, if that
is not too difficult because it redeems a little bit of
the time we have lost during the morning.

     MR. MANNING:   That was one of the questions I was
going to ask.   Two more questions:  would 10.30 be your
normal Monday intention, or would you like to wait and
see?

     THE CORONER:   Can I wait and see on Friday, because
it depends to a large extent how far down the road I am
and I must admit I find it very difficult.   I have not
managed to get it right yet, as you know, in my timings!
This last week has been a little bit better.

     MR. MANNING:   The last question, sir, relates to
the last post, if you like, on Monday and that is until
what time would you intend to keep the assembly assembled
in the hope that the jury may come back or, indeed, are
you going to say to them that come 4.30 they should take
their suitcases to a predestined place?

      THE CORONER:   That is a very good question,
Mr. Manning.    Again it depends to a certain extent upon
what time I send them out, but let's imagine that...     In
fact it probably answers your penultimate question as
well.    I think it may well be that we might start a
little bit earlier on Monday than 10.30, unless I am
strongly persuaded otherwise.    However, say I can get
the jury out by eleven, then I would probably at about
3.30 or so, have them back and just check with them how
they are getting on.    I would not want them to feel
pressurised.    If they were to say, "We aren't ready yet
but we think in a couple of hours we might be in a
position to come back with an answer," then obviously I
would say we would press on if they feel up to it.    If
they said there was no way in which they were going to be
able to conclude the matter on Monday, then I would say*
"Press on until 4.30 and then off to your hotel and see
you in the morning."    Is that reasonable?

     MR. MANNING:   Thank you very much for that
indication.

     MR. MAXWELL:   Could you indicate when your
directions on law, or the main body of them, will be
given?   Would that be first thing tomorrow morning?
                                                            91



      THE CORONER:    It will not be first thing, but it
will be tomorrow, probably sometime during the morning.
I want to do it fairly early on, the main part.       It will
obviously have to be repeated from time to time, as I am
sure you will appreciate, but after a few introductory
remarks, so to speak, I intend to get on to the legal
direction,, because I, think it, is necessary that the. j*ur,y.
has my thoughts on what the law is in their minds fairly
early on.    It if helps you, it is my intention to deal
with the "how" question, if you like, the bit we have
been doing since the 19t’ n of'November up to now, then,
and I wili then deal with wnat we did at the interim
inquests last.     It has various advantages, not least
that we will actually be finishing up reminded that we
are dealing with ninety-five deaths and not other
matters.

     Tomorrow and Friday most likely I will be dealing
with the body of tne matters we have been thinking about
for the last three or four months.

     HR. MAXWELL:   Sir, not simply touching wood but
gripping this substantial wooden structure in front of
me, it is your intention and expectation at the moment
that the jury will be sent out on Monday?

     THE CORONERs    That is what I want to achieve.    In
fact we   would have achieved it if it had not been for the
fact we were losing three hours or so on Friday because
of the late start.    I am pretty confident tliat if we
could have had a full-Thursday and a full Friday, all
things being equal I would have achieved it.     I just
hesitate a little bit about the timing on Monday because
I have lost a certain number of hours.

     Can I just say this as an aside.     Once or twice,
some of   you - you mentioned it Mr. Catchpole and I think
it was you Hr, Payne, about having to shoot from the hip
because there were no pleadings, no nothing, one did not
know where one was and I must admit, particularly when
you mentioned it the first time I did get a bit worried
as to perhaps where I had made my mistake in this regard.
However, I was encouraged by somebody who read from a
Judgement, I think it was from ex parte Gray, where the
judge quite clearly says precisely that, that in an
Inquest there are no pleadings, there is no indictment,
there is nothing, one just shoots from the hip, so I feel
a little bit encouraged by that.

     MR. PAYI5E: Sir, I say I did say words to that
effect.   It certainly was not intended as a criticism of
any way in which you have conducted these  Inquests. It
was just a statement of fact.
                                                       9



     THE CORONER:   Hr. Payne, it was not intended...    I
was not in fact intending to criticise anybody either.   I
was just saying that oddly enough I had not noticed that
particular quotation.   I must have read it but it had
not sunk in, so I was pleased to see it.   That is all I
was saying, to finish on a slightly different note.

     Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much.



          (The Inquests were adjourned until
          ten o ’clock the following morning)
  HER M A J E S T Y *S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      i W E S T DISTRICT) _
                                                     75
        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                      Before

DR. S-L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP
    >*
             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

                  The Town Hall,
                    Sheffield.

                         On

                 21st March, 1991




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J .L . Harp ham, L t d .,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                   &A«.y
                           ‘ lo                    *\o
                                                                      1

                  SEVENTY FIFTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                     THURSDAY. 21st MARCH.1991

                              SUMMING UP

   THE CORONER:     This is the part of the proceedings which

from my point of view I have dreaded most.        I am not saying I

have not dreaded other parts but this is quite different £&t

me anyway.   What I have to do is sum up what we have heard

over four months if you think about it because not only have

we been sitting since November with a break for Christmas but

we were together in April and May time as well.          So it has

been a very, very considerable period of time.

   When we first began you will probably remember I said

something to the effect that you had been catapulted into a

niche of history.     I do not think I quite realised how right

that was and I certainly had not anticipated that it would

take as long as it has done but it has and that is how it is.

   Before we go on I would just like to say, and I hope to

say it again at the end, you have been an extraordinarily

good Jury.   The fact that we have not lost a single day due

to any illness of yours, I know there were one or two

children who were ill, but when you think about it that is

fantastic and I am exceedingly grateful for being here.           I

know once or twice some of you have not felt exactly 100 per

cent but you have still been here.         I appreciate it, the

families I am sure appreciate it, and so does everybody else.

Thank you very much indeed for that.

   What I have to do according to the rules is that I have to

sum up.   Rule 41 says:
      "Where the Coroner sits with a jury he shall sum up the
      evidence to the jury and direct them as to the law
      before they consider their verdict and shall draw their
      attention to Rules 36(2) and 42."


      The first point that I want to make is that this rule

which applies to me uses the words      'summing u p '.   It does not

use the words    'shall present a summary of the evidence'.       It

does not say that I have to read 100 days odd, not quite, of

transcripts.     The way I interpret the words    'summing up' is

that if I am given a column of figures and am asked to sum

them I add them up and look at the figure at the bottom.          In

other words, I tell you what the total of 3 plus 7 is, equals

10.     I do not have to tell you that it is composed of 3 and

7.     I just tell you 10.   That is the way I am going to

approach this summing up.

      That is not to say, of course, that I will not refer to

the evidence.     I will.    I have to because otherwise I cannot

make sense of it but I have no intention whatsoever of

repeating the evidence of each and every witness whom we have

heard.     There may be a few whom I will have to deal with in a

little bit more detail but there will be many Who it will be

possible to group and there will be others who I may not even

mention.

      The important point about that is that although it is my

summing up it is going to be your decision on the facts.

You, of course, have been here just as I have and have heard

the evidence.     It follows, therefore, that simply because I

have not stressed a particular matter which you may consider

important that it is of no importance.       On the contrary, it
                                                                      3

may just be I have not spotted what you have seen.       That is

the reason why we have a Jury rather than me sitting on my

own.    It is to enable you to make a judgment on the facts and

to come back with a verdict.     I will explain some of these

words to you as we go along.

   I do want to make it quite clear that merely because I

happened not to have mentioned a particular person or perhaps

emphasised something in a particular way does not necessarily

mean you are not allowed to think about it.       On the contrary,

I want you. to clearly understand - and I will probably repeat

this several times as we go along - that issues of fact are

for you.

       Questions of law cure for me.   If I were to say to you,

the law is this or that, you may think the law is an ass for

all I know.     You may disagree with the law but as far as this

Inquest is concerned you must accept the law as I state it.

If I make a mistake with the statement, and if it is

sufficiently important, then there cure means for it to be

corrected in other places.     It is not for you to correct it.

That is the law.    So when I say that this is the law you have

to accept it.

       When I express my views on the facts in the way I have

already indicated to you then the position is different.         It

may be I will express my view on some facts, maybe strongly,

maybe too strongly you may think, and although I will attempt

not to stray too far out of the bounds of reasonableness it

is possible I may do so.     You may say,   "We cure not impressed

with his stress on this particular question of fact".       Is
that quite clear?   I want you to understand the distinction

between law and fact and your privileges and powers, if I can

use those words, with regard to the facts because at the end

of the day when you come back with your verdict it has to be

your verdict.   I will sign the inquisition because that is

the way it is done but in the end it is your verdicts.

   Before I go on I also want to remind you that we are

dealing not with an Inquest.   Everybody has tended, including

me, from time to time to use that word.   It is not the

Inquest.   We are dealing with 95 Inquests.   This was much

more apparent last April and May when we did each individual

case and we actually paused between each individual person

for various reasons.   One of the advantages, if you like, was

that we were clearly dealing with one important person.       We

happened to deal with 95 important people.    They were

important to their families, important to their friends,

important perhaps to society, I do not know, but certainly to

their kith and kin important and we have to remember that

throughout.




                                  /Since November..
    , Since November we have still been dealing with 95

Inquests but bearing in mind that we have taken four

months when we have been taking the evidence so to speak

together, you can imagine that if we had to repeat all

this evidence 95 times, if we had had every single witness

come in and say the same thing 95 times over it would not

have helped us and it would not have advanced our knowledge

and it would have been disaster in fact from an inquest

point of view.

      Nevertheless,   the evidence which you have heard hub

to be related individually to each of the 95 deceased and

your job is to find four things basically - I will read

you the rules in a moment but I will just tell you briefly

now, you know them anyway because I have told you many

times already - there are four things which you do.        You

decide who the deceased person was; when he died; where

he died and how he died, and how means by what means,

the circumstances.    It does not mean why.   It does not

include determining questions of civil liability.     It

does not include even finding out who is to blame.     On

the contrary, that is not actually part of Inquest

proceedings, but I will come back to that again in a moment.

      These are the limits of what we are doing, who,

when, where and how and in fact an inquest is what is

known as a fact finding situation, not a fault finding

one and this has been clearly said by people more able

than me on several occasions.    I will read you a little
                                                             6




bit out of one of the judgments if I can find it.

      This is a quotation from a judgment by Lord Chief

Justice Lane and in fact it is quoted by another Judge

and he says, and I am reading you a little bit:

      "Once again it. should not be forgotten that
      an Inquest is a fact finding exercise and
      not a method of apportioning guilt.   The
      procedure and rules of evidence which are
      suitable for one are unsuitable for the
      other.  In an Inquest it should never be
      forgotten that there are no parties; there
      is no indictment; there is no prosecution;
      there is no defence; there is no trial,
      simply an attempt to establish facts.   It
      is an inquisitorial process, a process of
      investigation quite unlike a criminal trial."

It is worth remembering that when one thinks about what we

have heard.

      In another case, it is colloquially known as

ex parte Spooner, don't worry about the name, one of

the Judges says:

      "It is his duty ___" talking about the
      Coroner "... to guide the jury to a correct
      verdict but his responsibility is to conduct
      a fact finding exercise, not to apportion
      blame and not to decide civil liability."

So I have read you those two extracts because it is

important for us to understand what our limits are.

      Now you might possible be excused for saying if

he knew that why did he allow (a) the Inquest to take so

long and (b) to deal with so many questions which appeared

to deal with the question of who is to blame?

      This is in fact not an easy question to answer,

but the reason why I allowed it was twpfold, we will

start off with two anyway.
      (1) Because I perceived that it was important

that if we had a fact finding exercise I should,

particularly with a highly emotive and large matter

such as a major disaster, to allow sufficient time and

scope, for people to be able to ask the sort of questions

within the overall limit as far as I could keep it O j.

an inquest, so that at the end of the day within those

limits we had done a thorough fact finding exploration.

      The second reason why I allowed it is because

although we are not a fault finding body, one of the

potential verdicts which a jury can bring in is a verdict

of unlawfully killed and I could not see how you could

sensibly think about that verdict if you had not heard

the sort of matters which might enable you to contemplate

it and as a result I felt it was right to allow questions

to be asked which did go towards fault because in a sense

that is part of the facts of the circumstances,    it is a

question of how a person died, as to what had happened

in those situations, and the corollary of course is that,

 if you allow somebody to ask questions which point in

one direction then you must also allow people to give

 their responses.   It therefore was inevitable, I think,

 that we had quite a lot of evidence which did go and

 did explore, in many cases at considerable length and

 in considerable depth, the isssues of whether or not

 there was a fault which would be of a nature which would

 allow you to consider that verdict.
                                                             8




        The third point which perhaps I should mention is

this:    that the rules in fact provide that people whose

conduct may be called in question have a right of

representation and so there is implicit within the

coronal system this concept of criticism and perhaps

I ought to say at this point that a person whose conduct

may be called in question does not necessarily mean

somebody who necessarily might be found to have unlawfully

killed somebody.    A person’s conduct may be called in

question if he has been negligent say, which is a

completely different category as you will discover in a

few moments, to the sort of criteria which have to be

met before you can even consider the possibility of an

unlawfully killed verdict.




                              There are
                                                                    9




      There are those various strands which makes i t
sometimes d i f f i c u l t to know where to draw the lin e and as
1 say in the end I drew the lin e where I have done, and
whether I am r ig h t or wrong th a t was my decision.
      Now two fu rth e r points w ith regard to th is m atter
and i t is th is :   you have to remember th at what you are
considering is the evidence of the witnesses.            You are
not in te re s te d in the questions from e ith e r me or the
lawyers.     Now th a t is a very important point because we
have had on occasions from d iffe r e n t people, q u ite firm
and strong questioning.         I make no complaint about th at
because i f I had wanted to make a complaint I would have
done i t a t the tim e.      However, the c ru c ia l m atter you
have to consider is not the question, but the answer*
What is the witness r e a lly saying?        What did he see?
What did he hear?         What did he think?     What did he do?
That is what you are in te re s te d in .
      That brings me on to the p o int of the q u a lity of the
witnesses, or i f you wish, the q u a lity of the evidence of
the witnesses.       I t is wrong to say the q u a lity of the
witnesses.      The witnesses are a l l of very high q u a lity
because they are a l l human beings so I make no c r itic is m
of any witness w ith regard to him and i t is of no concern
of ours what they a re , who they a re , what th e ir jobs a re .
That is n e ith e r here nor th e re .   However, what we are
in te re s te d in is the q u a lity of the evidence.     When you
consider th is you can consider i t in a t le a s t four
aspects.      The f i r s t one is you can look a t the witness
an you can hear what he says and you can come to the
conclusion, "This chap is t e llin g the tru th .               I b elieve
him."      Not only is he t e llin g the tr u th , he is t e llin g
the whole tru th as f a r as he is ab le .            That, of course,
is the id e a l and should apply, of course, to every single
witness in theory, and i t would be nice to th in k th a t

th at were so.
        Human beings being what they a re , on occasion the
witness may be what is known as economical w ith the
tru th .    They are not exactly t e llin g lie s but they are
not q u ite fin is h in g o f f the s to ry .      Therefore you. have
to assess, as you th in k about the various witnesses, "Was
he tru th fu l?    Uas he t e llin g us the whole truth?                Uas
he perhaps rounding the comers a l i t t l e b it?                Not
a c tu a lly t e llin g lie s but ju s t not q u ite th e re ."         I f you
come to th a t conclusion obviously you have to take th at
in to account, not only w ith regard to the answer which is
given in respect of th at p a rtic u la r matter but in your
assessment as to the value or weight th a t you can put on
the re s t of th a t w itness's evidence.            Be c a re fu l.      Just
because he is economical w ith the tr u th in one regard
does not necessarily mean th at he is being economical
w ith the tru th in every regard.               I t is a m atter fo r you
to assess.
      The th ird p o s s ib ility i s , of course, th a t the
witness is u n tru th fu l.      That is a d if fe r e n t class
a lto g e th e r, th a t th is witness is not ju s t being
economical, he is a c tu a lly t e llin g you something which
you do not b e lie v e .     Obviously is you were to com e...
I have ju s t fa lle n in to the very tra p which I do not want
to f a l l in to - I have used the word "obviously".            I w ill
try and avoid using th at word because i t is an important
word in these Inquests and I do not want to confuse you
by using i t in sentences.           I f you were to take the view
th a t the witness was u n tru th fu l, in respect of th a t re p ly
you c le a rly could not accept i t and you might w ell have
g reat d i f f i c u l t y in accepting other matters which he has
said.      However, even there exercise a degree of caution
because a witness nay w e ll be u n tru th fu l in respect of
one or other matter which to him is im portant, or where
the tru th to h ia is something he cannot or w i l l not or
must not or should not say.            I am not saying any of
those are good sxcuses but to him th a t may be the
m otivation .     I t nay s t i l l be r ig h t th a t everything else
he said is c o rre c t and very o ften i t is possible to te s t
the evidence of the witness by comparing i t w ith what
other people have said in r e la tio n to the same in c id e n t,
circumstance, fa c t or what have you.            I t may then be
possible fo r you to sake a value judgment as to the
q u a lity of th a t p a r tic u la r evidence.
        Then the la s t p o s s ib ilit y th a t I want to mention on
th is score is th a t a witness may be genuinely fo r g e t f u l.
In fa c t there arc two, fo r g e tfu l is the f i r s t word I want
to mention.        That is c le a r.     We have had I d o n 't know
how many witnesses.          We have had w ell over two hundred
since November and n early a l l of them, I th in k , in some
respect or other could not remember something.                I f you
th ink about i t i f you had been in th e ir shoes you would
not have remembered a l l the d e ta ils e ith e r .      The chances
are i f you asked me what I did la s t week on a p a rtic u la r
day I might not remember i t a t a l l or i f I did remember
i t I would have already fo rg o tten q u ite a lo t of the
d e t a il.   The fa c t   th a t somebody is fo rg e tfu l is not a
c ritic is m of th a t person.         I t may be unfortunate from
our point of view because we want him to remember th at
very th in g , but i t is not something th a t you can a c tu a lly
complain about but         you must take in to account when you
consider and weigh the evidence*
        The other thing th a t happens to witnesses, and again
we had p lenty of examples of t h i s y is th a t witnesses get
muddled, e ith e r because of the passage of time or because
of the stress of the s itu a tio n a t the time or because
sometimes they may wish to suppress c e rta in inform ation
fo r th e ir own personal - I am not ta lk in g about
suppressing inform ation because they do not want to t e l l
the tru th but because they need to liv e w ith themselves*
They may become muddled in what they say.               We had
several examples of people who were in th a t category.
Some were more obviously muddled than others and some did
not th in k they were, but they may have been.
      Therefore, when you th in k about the evidence which
you have heard from the witnesses you have to so rt out in
your mind, is i t tru e , is i t c o rre c t, is i t complete, is
i t muddled, has he forgotten something which we r e a lly
need to know but which we might be able to supplement,
has he made a mistake even?          I include th at under the
term "muddle".       Has he confused two issues?           I may a t
some point give you one or two illu s t r a t io n s of th is but
a t the moment I am r e a lly ta lk in g about p rin c ip le s .




             Apart from lis te n in g
                                                              14



       Apart from listening to their words, of course, you

see them.    They are sitting over there, and when we were

at the Medico-Legal Centre you saw them as well, didn't

you?    You can sometimes judge what the position is by

looking, at their, demeanour .   How did they come over to

you?   What was your impression of them with regard to

their evidence?   That is, of course, a subjective

judgment.    I may think he was entirely truthful; you may

think you did not like his demeanour, there was something

there which was not right, and amongst eleven of you there

may be eleven different opinions with regard to any

particular witness, but it is nevertheless a factor you

have to take it into account.

       Do not allow prejudice as to position in life, social

strata, accent, status, do not allow prejudice of that

nature to influence your opinion on demeanour because that

is not the witness's fault.      If the witness happens to be,

as we had one, a general manager, for instance, of a

health authority, that is a very senior job.      If you

happen to hate health authorities do not be prejudiced

against him because of his job.      Nor, on the other hand,

be so impressed by his status that everything that he says

must be true, as against a witness who may have had a very

humble position in our social strata.      That makes him no

less a person, no less reliable, no less anything.         It is

a matter of judging each person on his merits, and do not
be prejudiced by outer circumstances relating to the

individual.   It is not easy that actually.    We all tend to

have pre-formed views but beware of it.

     The second thing that you can take into account when

you are making your assessment is, -of course, the question

of bias.   Did the witness have a particular, I will use

the term axe to grind?   Did he want us to believe or

accept a particular construction of the events, and if you

were to think that the witness was biased then of course

you must treat his evidence with considerable caution,

certainly in those respects where the bias is real.      As I

have already said to you, one of the real problems with

witnesses is where do you draw the line?      If you feel that

there is a bias do you reject everything he has said, do

you accept some of it, do you accept it with caution?

That is a matter for you; I can merely draw your attention

to the sort of matters which you have to keep in your head

when you are thinking about the witness.

     The last point on this matter is what I have already

alluded to, namely corroboration.    This is not a trial so

in that sense we do not have to have corroboration but it

does make it easier if you hear the same view from

different people whom you believe.    Of course if you do

not believe any of them it makes no difference but if you

hear a view from "a" and you are not quite sure, but you

hear the same view from "b", and a similar view from "c"
whom you believe, then it may help you to say, "Well, I

think on reflection that must be right because of the

corroborative effect of the evidence from other

witnesses".

      I repeat then, what matters are facts and I have

already stressed to you that it is the replies of the

witnesses, it is their answers which are the crucial

thing.     I know we had lots of answers which were yes and

no, and so if you take me literally and you only look at

the answers you do not know what on earth the witness has

said, so I am not saying that you must not look at the

questions where the answer was, "Yes".     If I said to you,

for instance, "Is it true that at night the moon sometimes

comes out?", and you were to say, "Yes", that would be a

meaningless answer because it could mean yes to anything.

You have to look at the question as well.    What I am

trying to stress is that you have to sort out the heart of

the question and what the witness is actually responding

to.

      The next matter which arises is the question of

opinion.    We have had quite a lot of opinion evidence from

a large number of people and maybe I was remiss in not

sometimes intervening at an earlier stage, but it is

difficult sometimes to know where to draw the line, and

for the reasons which I have already given you and which I

am not going to repeat, I felt on the whole it was better
to allow more extensive answers rather than less extensive

answers.     But in the final analysis issues of opinion by

people who are not experts do not carry very much weight,

if any.     You can form an opinion, you can draw inferences,

that is different.     You can say here are the facts, what

do they mean?     That is your job really but be very, very

careful in drawing conclusions based simply on the

opinions that people may have expressed, and this is

particularly true in cases where we have had a lot     of

opinion evidence, where we have had hypothetical

propositions put to people - if this had been, what would

you have done or said or thought?      You might agree with

what they are saying but the very real problem with

opinion evidence, apart from the fact that it does relate

to facts, is of course that it is all or nearly all

tinged with hindsight.      It is exceedingly difficult for

anybody, including me or indeed anybody, not to exclude

from t’heir mind what we all know that happened, namely

that 95 people died at Hillsborough on 15th April.

          Therefore opinions which are expressed you have to

be very, very cautious with because the only thingwe are

really interested in, if we are going to look at an

opinion at all, is what would have been that person's

opinion on 15th April, 1989, prior to the match, on the

assumption that he knew and knows nothing of what has

happened?     Do you see?   So be careful.
A
                                                                                    18


               WS d id h a v e a few people who did have o • •
       whose opinions you may w ell * iv e                         P ln i° nS ^

B                                                                    “ •        ■
                               - -..I.. 1„                              “ ‘h‘ "‘"l
           Ve y°u * « « s ,   because when thev                     ‘
      naematoma, in other words ^               ^                       8



     • -      i t b u t when th e y say he d i e d from           *“ • « “ * —
     actually an „pinion.           But ,t                    a t ’ th“     «

     is a specialist          . •■                          °Pini°n and it
           pecialist          opinion and although   Ithink T   •„
     °nly had consultants, in fact, that _                £                     “

     ^ dld n<>t “Se ^   consultants but I am quit      riEht‘
    that the quality of th                         satisfied
    h-                      Pathologists whom we did h*
    high and therefore you may feel                  ^    " as

    rely upon their opi„ion      .       y°U      ” °re readllV
                    opinion, particularly when h ,.
    the causes of death                               S1Te you




                                                          I will deal
                                                                    19
      I will deal with some of the other matters.      For

example, they were asked on many, many occasions how long did

it take before somebody lost consciousness?      How long does it

take before irretrievable damage is done?      You will

remember - this happened at the interim Inquests - we had

expressions from every single -one of them and r ' v r ill not go

into the evidence but they did have opinions and those

opinions you can weigh and decide upon.      Obviously the more

who say the same thing the more strong, if you like, the

opinion becomes.

      We also had opinions from Dr. Nicholson.     He was the HSE

man, do you remember?    You can weigh those opinions but you

may feel that they are fairly strong.     First of all, they

were based on data as far as he was able to obtain it and use

it.   Secondly, he came in with the specific purpose of

investigating and finding out so far as he could certain

questions.   He did a lot more work actually them what we

dealt with but we dealt with more them enough for our

purposes.    Here is a mem who expresses em opinion which you

may well find acceptable.

      Dr. Nicholls, the statistician, also expressed opinions.

You may feel that on the statistical side there is not much

one cem argue with but you cem weigh it.      It is for you to

decide the strength or otherwise of the opinion and what

weight, if emy, you put on it.     We also had opinions from

several Police Officers emd there were some where I felt it

was right we should listen to their opinion because they were

relatively senior Officers emd one would hope on the basis of
their experience they could express views which might help

you in judging some of the issues which are before you.

       There are other people.     Dr. Eastwood, for instance,   in

many cases might well be called as an expert to give

evidence.     He was.not called as an expert here but he was

called as a witness to fact but nevertheless owe should not
too lightly discount his opinion.

       Opinions are one thing.     Conclusions are even worse.   So

where witnesses drew conclusions and said, "This is what

caused it", I think on the whole it would be wise to treat

that with exceeding caution because that is actually your

job.    You have to draw the conclusion and not the witness.

The witness tells us the facts and where appropriate might

express his views emd even give his opinions but the

conclusions in the final emalysis is yours. I am very slow

and I will try    and speed up.

       Am I being cleeur?   That is actually more important them

speeding up.     Is it clear?    I wemt you to understemd that you

should exclude matters which eure not evidence in this Court

and they eure obvious things.     You may see things on

television.    You may read matters in the paper.     You may heeur

people discussing things in the pub or wherever you happen to

be.    None of that is evidence and you ought to exclude it.

You should also exclude what I call non-verbal communications

from anybody, me, the lawyers and indeed the general public.

That, of course, includes the people who eure in this room

from time to time.    We have all I think, because I caught

myself at it, occasionally given non-verbal clues as to what
                                                                    21
we thought about certain matters but it is not evidence.          Do

not allow yourself to be swayed.     When I say all, I include

the lawyers in this.

      It is not easy not to do it in fact.     We all tend to do

it.   Do not allow yourself to be swayed by it.       It is not

evidence.   It does not matter - and I will use the lawyers as

an example - whether lawyer A does not like what is being

said and shows it on his face or lawyer B thinks that is

great and a good point there.     It does not matter and it is

not evidence.     The evidence is there.   Exclude it from your

cons ideration.

      It is a very important point because it goes to the

whole route of Jury hearings namely that you must return an

unbiased, truthful, correct verdict based on the evidence

without fear or favour.    Whether it is popular or unpopular,

whether it will please some, all or none is neither here nor

there.   That is why when you retire you are locked in.      That

is not quite true but it will do.     You take your

deliberations on your own.    There is nobody there.     None of

us will ever know what you said or thought or how you came to

your conclusions.    It is your decision and none of us will

know what any of you felt or thought.      I think that will do
on this point.

      I now want to turn to what you are going to take with

you when you go into the room for retirement.     What we are

going to provide you with is, first of all, a complete set of

exhibits.   You know what I mean by the exhibits.      You have

         got quite a lot of them but I am going to give you.
                                                                  22
or ask for you to be given, either my set or another spare

set, which is complete and contains all the plans which

people put crosses on and, in fact, I have arranged for the

plans which we used at the interim Inquests to be brought

over as well so that you have got one complete set.     It is

three big files.    Yfcm may find you do not need to look at all

the plans in great detail but we will give you a set made up

like the witnesses had where we extracted the plans so that

we could get it into one folder emd so that it was easier to

find exhibits and indeed for you.     We cem give you that as

well and you can use what you wish.     It is entirely up to

you.

       One of my legal colleagues drew my attention yesterday

to the quality of some photographs in our exhibits which are

not as good as the quality of some of the original properly

printed photographs.    We are going to try, if we can, to

extract the original photographs.     They will be no different

apart from the fact that they will be easier for you to see.

       We will also supply you, because they are part of the

evidence, with five video tapes which we have seen.     There is

what is known as the compilation tape, which is a two hour

job, do you remember that?   There is a split screen

compeurison between 1988 emd 1989 which we abandoned in a

sense because it was not ideal by emy meems but it was the

best we had at the time but it is still there emd you cem

look at it.   It is em exhibit.   We will give you the third

one which is our effort to make sense of that split screen

video where we took little segments at different times and
 join them up so that you get a comparison between 1988 and
 1989 and that is very much shorter.

      You will also have the BBC film which we have seen a

 couple of times, once right through and the first time only

 partially through or at least right through to the point

 where we cut it off.    Lastly, there are the shots of Leppings

 Lane terraces which you saw a few days ago.    In addition to

 that we will supply you with a play back machine and we will

 teach you how to use it.   We will show it to you.   You will

 know how to do it but we need to show you which are the

 buttons and then you can take it into your room and you

 do with the exhibits as you wish.   We want •fchom all back, of
course, at the end.

      I want to just say this;   Hillsborough is most unusual

in many respects but it is certainly unusual in that there is

such a lot of visual evidence, photographs, videos, there is

an enormous amount of visual evidence and that has proved to

be in many respects very, very helpful and I do not wish to

decry that.   It is not the only evidence we have got at

Hillsborough and you have to treat what you look at with

caution.   We have had this many, many times.   We have shown

people photographs and I know that you spotted one particular

example and I will use that because you picked it up but you

will see what I mean.    It is the picture taken from the West

Stand where you can see the whole of the West Stand and

virtually the whole of the terracing.    You were not entirely

happy as to whether somebody sitting in the stands could

actually see that.    That is, of course, because you paid some
 Visits, did you not, three in total I think?     I suspect you

 did the same as me.     You sat down in the stand and you had a
 look.

         That is the important point about the visual evidence.

 When you look at the photograph remember each time,      "Where

 was it taken from?    What is the angle?   Was it the view the

person could actually see?"      That particular photograph is

quite useful because it gives you an over-view of the whole

set up as long as you understand its limitations.      I think

you do understand that and so there is no need for me to
stress it any further.

     The same applies to the videos to a slightly lesser

extent because the videos are moving things but in the end it

is still only a picture from one point where that camera

happened to be pointed at and so whilst it may well be a very

accurate representation of what we can see at that location

you have still got to make the necessary adjustments in your

thinking with regard to that.     So be careful with the use of

the photographs and do not base everything that you decide
simply on the visual evidence.




                                              /The one.
        The one real useful thing on the visual evidence,

  not "the one" there are many, but one of the real useful

  things is the fact that there are times and particularly

  on the BBC tapes it would appear that the times are

  accurate and even on the others the times are pretty
 accurate.

        You know on many of the still shots there is an

 error on the clock and we have said you have got to make

 an adjustment by one minute, but be careful with that,

 the little tiny bit, because if you don't have seconds,

 which you don't on those particular prints, we have just

 adjusted to a minute but it could actually be one second

 or 1 minute and 59 seconds, we don't know that.   As a

 rough guide a minute is good enough but bear that point
 in mind.

       Shall we pause for ten minutes and we will press
on.

                      (Short adjournment)


      Perhaps I ought to just make one other thing clear.

Although you are getting all the exhibits and all the

videos you are not getting a copy of the transcripts.

I think you will be relieved to hear that but I am not

going to do that, that would be madness and not normal
practice either.

      Now what you actually have to do Is to complete

what is known as an -Inquisition" form and what 1 am
going to        do now is I am going to ask Mr.' Griffiths to hand

you a blank       one.   (Formhanded to jury) This is     a

standard form.       It has got two sides.    This side, the

back of it, for practical purposes you can ignore.            On

one side you insert dates, causes of death and so on.

It is really when you look at them you can tell at a

glance.       The notes you can ignore as well because I will

be telling you the conclusions that you can reach.            It

is the front of it that matters.

         It     is going to be your inquisition and you   will be

expected        to complete it for 95 individuals.   Now that

is a big job because there is a lot of writing to be done

so what I intend to do is to give you about 95 or 100

of these, blank ones, so that you can do it that way if

you wish.

         In addition to that we have pretyped these foi.— .

This is an example.        This is Colin Wafer's.    We have Lw.c

them for everybody.        (Form handed to jury)

         What we have done, it actually falls into two

parts.        There is the section at the bottom under

paragraph 5 where it says:        "Particulars for the tiuic-

being required by the Registration Acts to be registered

concerning the death" and that is really the sort of

information which will appear on the Death Certificate

and it is formal really but it is a way of conveying to

the Registrar,       in fact the form does not go to the

Registrar, I fill out another form and copy this on to
 another form and that goes to' the Registrar, but you don'

 need to worry about that.

       The top half from 1-4 is what is the inquisition

 proper, so to speak, and you will see that the first line

 is merely a description of the location, that, it is        a

 Coroner's Court and   where it is, that it       isin South

 Yorkshire and it is   the West District.

       The next line   is on the 18th of April it says on

 this particular one, 1989,   "And by adjournment" and I

have typed in but you don't have to use the typed version

you can write it out yourself if you wish, the        typing

is what is supposed to be simply all the bits which it

is unlikely that you are going to have any difficulty

with and it is intended simply to save you handwriting,

but if you don't like it you can screw it up and amend

it or you can re-write it, you can do what you like, it

is your inquisition, but the third line       says:   "And

by adjournment" and I have typed in "on various dates up

to and including the" blank day of 1991.

      Now d o n 't insert a date there when you are in the

room because the date that is going to go in there is

whatever happens to be the last date of the Inquest,

so if for example you were to come back with your verdict

at an hour when I am able to complete the matter there

and then then we will insert that date,     if we have

to come back the next morning we will insert whatever

date it is.   All right?   Is that clear?
                  Because o f the way th e m q u e s ts have been done


   to say "on various dates- because we have been going fo r

             m °nthS' h” “ ’t                  we can *t list the, a n .
              The next section merely, describes me.                  It puts
   name.          After that it says*                  j-u
                                    the undermentioned jurors)
  it says before me "One of Her
                             er majesty's coroners" and
  '• (and the undermentioned Jurors, touching on the death

            and in this particular instance it is "COLIH WAFER"

  * * t i t w in be a separate f o r . fo r each in d iv id u a l.

             so up to there th a t is ju s t to t e l l us who we are
  ta lk in g about and where i t happened.

             We then turn to paragraphs 1 - 4 .               Number , i£ ^
  »ame of the deceased" whi oh ls ju s t . r e p e titlo n .

             Humber 2 is the -Injury or disease causing death"

 “ a th a t iS ^         f * Ct           t h . p ath o lo g ists to ld us and
 y° U W1U re” ember th a t th a t happened a t the interim
 Inquests and I will
                                  re" ina you- ^      win     actually be in
--ront of you because             t
                  ec.use I am going to give you these but
  w in s t i l l reaina you in open court      the        Qf

 ea t       were so th a t everybody knows what i t is th a t you
are thinking about.

        Paragraphs 3 .„ d , you B i u see _                    ^      ^

those paragraph. I want you to complete.

      Paragraph 3 says: * ^ e , place and circumstances
  o r in which i „ ju ry was sustalned. M a ^

        “     ^                       “    -    « - -te      and the time and
the place and the circuiastances that you think are necessary

that ought to go into this gap.

        Before I give you some guidance with regard to that

I want to hand out something else which is a list basically.

It looks 1ike this ana.there are 16 pages of     it because

there are 95 deceased and if I take Colin Wafer simply

as the example because he happens to be the first person

on the list, the first column has a number.     That number

is if you like our registration number in respect of Colin.

The next of course is his name.     The third column is his

age, not terribly relevant but it happens to be on this

form.     The next two columns are the times and the doctor

who certified the death.     I will explain what I think about

this in a moment, but with regard to Colin Wafer it says:

"15.40" and it has got the name of "BYRNE" and then the

last column says "Date of hearing" and that is in fact the

date when we did the Inquest last April or May because it

might just help      to bring the case back to you if you

happen to know which date a particular case was done.

        The list in fact is in the order in which we heard

the cases in April/May.    There is no significance to the

orders.    At the time we did have some idea as to why we

chose them because we wanted to fit it in with pathologists*

times and getting the families together,    family groups

together and various things like that, but I decided not

to try and reshuffle it and put it into alphabetical order

or anything else because it may be much easier for you if
we stick to the sequence which we are familiar with.

It also avoids any suggestion that anybody is more important

or less important because from the point of view of the

names it is entirely random as you can see from the

numbers and the alphabetical order, we start with 'W',

not with 'A', and the same applies to every single person

here.

        Now can you hand this up?   (Forms handed to jury)

This again is simply as an aid to you.    You don't have

to use this if you don't want to, but it saves you

writing names and matters of that nature.    It is also

dotible checked because when I hand you the Inquisitions

they are here.    I can give them to you now but I don't

think there is any need because you don't actually need

them at the moment.    If by some misfortune a form was

left out you will be able to - I don't think it is likely

- but if it were to be, anything can happen, you will

be able to pick it up because as you do them you need to

apply your mind to each and every single person.




                           Now what do you
        Now what do you put in section 3?                I am going to
give you a number o f suggestions but these are simply
suggestions.           You d o n 't have to accept these.           These
are simply intended to give you some idea th a t i f I were
s it t in g in , say, a road t r a f f i c in c id e n t - w e ll, I w i l l
give you th a t as an example.             I f I were dealing w ith a
road t r a f f i c in c id e n t and I was w ritin g th a t sectio n, I
would say the person died on the 15th of A p r il, 1989, as
a re s u lt of      a c o llis io n between two p riv a te motor
vehicles in         such-and-such a road in S h e ffie ld .
Sometimes I         might say a p riv a te v e h ic le and a heavy goods
v e h ic le , i f   th a t happened to be the case.          In other
words a r e la t iv e ly b r ie f account, but I look a t i t and
say, "Oh, yes, th a t was a road t r a f f i c a c c id e n t."         It
t e l l s me the place.        I t t e l l s me when.     I t t e l l s me
whether i t was a motor b ik e , a c a r, a heavy goods veh icle
and so on."          That   is the way I normally do i t .
       On th a t basis      I am going to give you one or two
examples of what you might l ik e to th in k , but you are not
tie d to th is .       With regard to the deceased a l l of them
died on the 15th A p r il, 1989, except fo r Lee N ich o l, who
died on the 17th of A p r il, but I am ju s t going to use the
15th , but you must remember th a t when you get to Lee.
       Example 1 - they are a l l very s im ila r - "Died on the
15th of A p r il, 1989, as a r e s u lt of crush in ju r ie s
sustained a t Hillsborough F o o tb all Ground, S h e ffie ld ."
My normal p ra c tic e is not to put a time because i t is
                                                                        32




very d i f f i c u l t in most cases to know exactly when a
person died and we havehad plenty of examples in                 these
Inquests.       You know, when did th is person die?             I f you
remember Dr. Gumpert came along and gave us a very
e ru d ite le c tu re on death on the la s t day, I th in k the 4th
of May, and Dr.      S la te r , who we saw a few days ago,       also
did a j o l l y good job a t explaining to us what the word
"death" means.       I t is not q u ite as easy as some of us
might th in k , so I tend to p ick the date ra th e r than the

time.
        On the other hand th is section does not a c tu a lly ask
what time they died.         I t says, "Time, place and
circumstances a t or in which in ju ry was sustained."
That makes i t a t r i f l e e a s ie r in fa c t because w ith Lee
Nichol we know th a t the in ju ry was sustained a t
Hillsborough.       He was not c e r t if ie d d ead *..    In fa c t he
is the one example where the c e r t if ic a t io n was a c tu a lly
important w ith regard to estab lish in g a time o f death
u n t i l the 17th, because in his case i f you remember b rain
stem death c r i t e r i a were used.     I w i l l t a lk about him

la te r .
        You could, fo r example, as an a lte r n a tiv e , put "Died
on the 15th A p r il, 1989, b e tw e e n ..." whatever time you
wish in the lig h t of whatever evidence you heard,
" . . . a n d . . . " - you know give two periods.     I w i l l pick
fa n c ifu l periods now.     You could say between 6.00 pm and
8.00 pm, fo r instance.       We know th a t is not r ig h t .      I
have d e lib e ra te ly chosen times which are not r ig h t so as
not to confuse you.        I t is a m atter fo r you to decide
when the r e a l problem, in the lig h t of the evidence
occurred, and you may, i f you wish, take a s lig h t ly wider
bracket i f you want to be on the safe side.            However,
you do not have to do i t .       I would be q u ite content w ith

the date.
      Therefore th a t would be, "Died on the 15th of A p ril
between 6.00 pm and 8.00 pm as a r e s u lt of crush in ju r ie s
sustained a t Hillsborough F o o tb all Ground, S h e ffie ld ."
      Now another p o s s ib ility would be, which I do not
p a r tic u la r ly favour, but i t is a m atter fo r you.      You
could say th a t and you could then add i f you wished,
" C e r tifie d dead by Dr* Byrne a t 15.40'% or whatever i t
says there*       I t does not t e l l us very much more but i f
you would be more content w ith th a t, so be i t *          That is
the reason why I have l e f t those two columns in there so
you can use them i f you wish*         You w i l l notice there are
one or two places in th is where there is no c e r t if ie d
time o f death.      To take the second one, Stephen O 'N e ill,
i t is Dr. Doore and th a t s t i l l blank.      I t is a lady
doctor and there is no doubt th a t she c e r t if ie d people.
These were a l l people a t the h o s p ita l, but there is very
grave doubt w ith regard to her tim ings.           Strangely
enough there is one case where we a c tu a lly do give a
timing fo r h er.     We say four o 'c lo c k .    I t is on the
la s t page, Barry Sidney Bennett, and we have got 1600
hours, w ith a questionmark.            In th a t p a rtic u la r Inquest
we a c tu a lly said th a t Dr. Doore c e r t if ie d a t about 1600
hours, but in a l l the others we merely said th at
Dr. Doore c e r t if i e d .   I am in c lin e d to th in k th at i f you
were going to use th is method th a t you should be
consistent and tr e a t her w ithout a tim e, but i t is a

matter fo r you.
         You have got the p o s s ib ility of in s e rtin g tim es, and
as I say, my recommendation is a bracket because the
evidence is not a v a ila b le fo r you to say th a t anybody
dieid a t a p a rtic u la r minute or o th er.       You can i f you
wish go on to add some reference as to when death was
c e r t if ie d .   That is a m atter fo r you.
         I w i l l give you another example of what you might
say.        They are a l l b a s ic a lly the same but there is
s lig h t variance.        You could say, "Died on the 15th
A p r il, 1989, as a re s u lt of crush in ju rie s s u s ta in e d .. . "
and you could add, i f th a t is what you thought the
evidence said, " . ..fo llo w in g overcrowding and/or crowd
movement and/or fo llo w in g the opening of concertina
g ates," or anything else th a t re la te s to the
circumstances which you fe e l have been found in r e la tio n
to th a t death and which you th in k ought to be included.
Instead of simply saying a t Hillsborough F o o tb all Ground
you could simply say, "On Leppings Lane terraces a t
Hillsborough F o o tb all Ground, S h e ffie ld ," i f you wanted
to pin i t down a l i t t l e b i t more a ccu rately.
       That is the way I would ta ckle i t but I do want to
stress to you th a t in the f i n a l analysis i t is your
decision.         So long as you bear in mind the ru les which I
w i l l be t e llin g you about in a moment, and b a s ic a lly
which are th a t under no circumstances must you id e n tify
anybody, nor must you appear to be determining c i v i l
lia b ility .
       I think th at is reasonably c le a r .               I f , when you
have r e t ir e d , and I say th is now, and you are s it t in g
there and th in k , "Goodness me, I d o n 't know what to do,"
i f you ju s t bang on the door and the usher w i l l arrange
fo r you to come back.            We w i l l reconvene.         You t e l l me
what the problem i s .          I f I can help you w ith fu rth e r
d ire c tio n s I w i l l .   You are not abandoned.
       Now the la s t one, number 5 , is what i t says,
"Conclusion".           This is what is c o llo q u ia lly known as the
v e r d ic t, but in fa c t the v e rd ic t is the whole l o t .             A ll
th is is the v e rd ic t.       In c o llo q u ia l language, when the
newspapers rep o rt an Inquest they do not re p o rt i t a l l ,
they ju s t rep o rt the conclusion.             In th is p a r tic u la r
instance I have come to the conclusion there are th ree
possible conclusions or ve rd ic ts which you might be able
to re tu rn .      These are u n law fu lly k i l l e d ,
accident/misadventure - I w i l l exp lain th is to you in a
moment - and t h ir d ly , an open v e rd ic t, and I w i l l exp lain
th a t to you as w e ll.
       At this point I am now going to turn and give you
what I b elieve to be the law on th is -matter because I
th in k the time has come fo r you to hear i t .            I re g re t
th a t the law on th is subject is        not the easiest     in the
world and I am bound to take a l i t t l e w hile over i t .              I
hope I w i l l be c le a r and th a t you w i l l be able to
understand i t and fo llo w i t .        I t is exceedingly
important th a t you have a proper grasp of i t and also
th a t you accept my d ire c tio n s on the issue of law.
        I am going to turn to give        you a number   of

directions on this matter.          As    you will see   in a moment

the majority of my time will be occupied witti aspects

relating to the possible verdict of unlawfully killed.

You are not to construe th is as meaning I am d ire c tin g
you towards th is v e rd ic t, o r, indeed, away from i t , or
th a t I am d ire c tin g you in respect of any p a r tic u la r
ve rd ic ts simply because I am spending more time on th is
to p ic .   I t is simply th a t the le g a l concepts and aspects
which go to the v e rd ic t of u n law fu lly k i ll e d are both
numerous and complex and important and they d i f f e r in
many respects from those ap p licab le to the other possible
v e rd ic ts which w i l l be open to you.
        I want to draw to your a tte n tio n fo r a moment a
couple of sections from the Coroners Act 1988.                 I have
already to ld you about these but I am going to read them
s tra ig h t out of the book, so to speak.         I ought to make
i t p la in th a t although th is Act is the Coroners Act of
1988, i t is in fa c t what is' known as a consolidating Act.
                                                                            37
A


     You might th in k the law is bang up to date, but i t i s n 't .
     A consolidating Act is merely an Act which draws together
B|   a l l the previous le g is la tio n and puts i t in to one piece
     of paper, so to speak, to save people thumbing through
     huge books fin d in g l i t t l e   snippets here and th e re .   It
     should have been - and th is is simply an aside - in 1987,
     but a General E lectio n intervened.            The reason why i t
     was being done then was because i t was supposed to have
     been the hundredth anniversary of the Coroners Act 1887,
     which was the cornerstone of what one might c a l l the
     modern Coronal p ra c tic e .       That is why we have got a new

     Act.
            Section 11, sub-section (5 ) says:


            "An in q u is itio n :


            (a ) s h a ll be in w ritin g under the hand of the
                 coroner and, in the case of an inquest held w ith
                 a ju r y , under the hands of the ju ro rs who concur

                 in the v e rd ic t;"


     That is th is form which you have got ly in g in fro n t of

     you.


            Then:
                                                                 38




     " (b ) s h a ll set out, so fa r as such p a rtic u la rs have

          been proved:


        ( i ) who the deceased was;         and


       ( i i ) how, when and where the deceased came by his

            death;"


Sounds fa m ilia r , doesn't it?     Then:


     " (c ) s h a ll be in such form as the Lord Chancellor
           may by ru les made by s ta tu to ry instrument from
           time to time p re s c rib e ."


That is the reason why I am using th a t form.




             I also want to read
                                                            .39




        I also want to read to you sub-section 6 of that same

section:

        "At a coroner's inquest into the death of a person
        who came by his death by murder, manslaughter or
        infanticide, the purpose of the proceedings shall not
        include ..."

- shall not include -

        "... the finding of any person guilty of the murder,
        manslaughter or infanticide; and accordingly a
        coroner s inquisition shall in no case charge a
        person with any of those offences."

So that is the statutory basis.     Until 1977 or thereabouts

it was possible and indeed did happen that coroners'

juries actually named people and said, "He did it", or

"She did it", as the case may be, but for reasons which I

do not need to go into Parliament decided that was not

what coroners' juries were supposed to be doing, and we

don't do it in the circumstances.     I wanted to read to you

the actual section of the Act.

        I am now going to turn to the Rules because certain

rules have been made and the current Rules are, in fact,

1984.     I say *84 and the Act is '88 but I have already

explained that to you.     I want to remind you, as I say, as

I have already done, that I have to sum up and that I have

to draw your attention to various rules, and in particular

Rule 36(2) and Rule 42.     Rule 36, I will read it all

because it makes better sense, although it is a bit

repetitive.     Rule 36(1) says:

        "The proceedings and evidence at an inquest shall be
        directed solely to ascertaining the following matters
        namely -
                                                             .40




       (a) who the deceased was;
       (b) how, when and where the deceased came by his
           death;"

-that is a repetition of     the Act -

       "(c) the particulars for the time being required by
            the Registration Acts^to be registered
            concerning the death.

and this is the bit that I have to draw to your attention:

       "Neither the coroner nor the ^jury   shall express any
       opinion on any other matters. '

What that means is that we cannot add riders; we cannot

add recommendations; we cannot add things which we think

could, should, ought to be done better.       The rule is quite

clear:
       "Neither the coroner nor the j[ury shall express any
       opinion on any other matters. '

So that is Rule 36(2) and      while we are here we will   read

Rule     42 as well.   This is headed "Verdict":

       "No verdict shall be framed in such a way as to
       appear to determine any question of -

       (a) criminal liability on the part of a named person*
           or
       (b) civil liability."

So you have to be careful in the wording that you do not

frame it in such a way that it appears to determine civil

liability, and with regard to criminal liability you must

not name anyone.       If a verdict of unlawfully killed were

returned then that may determine, or at least it may

indicate your views as to the possibility that there is

some criminal liability but you must not name names, nor
must you put anything in which might indicate who         you have

in mind.   Is that quite clear?

     Whilst I am on the Rules I     want to   draw your

attention to another Rule which     we have mentioned once       or

twice in the course of these proceedings*,.      It is.actually

Rule 22 but it is an opportune time for me to draw it to

your attention.   It says:

     "(1) No witness at any inquest shall be obliged to
     answer any question tending to incriminate himself.

     (2)   Where it appears to the coroner that a witness
     has been asked such a question, the coroner shall
     inform the witness that he may refuse to answer."

This is, in fact, an exceedingly important Rule and it is

fundamental to our present system of justice in the United

Kingdom as we understand it today.      You will have noticed

that some of the witnesses were told of the Rule and of

the privilege to which they were entitled, and some

exercised their rights.      Very few in fact exercised their

rights but some did.

     If you like, we can put the Rule another way, and

that is that the witness has the right of silence.          It

would be grossly unfair and quite contrary to the

intention of the Rule, and indeed to justice, if you were

to construe a refusal to answer a question under the

privilege - and I remind you that some people did do that

to a greater or lesser extent - but if you were to

construe such a refusal to answer a question under the

privilege as an admission or an indication of guilt, to
                                                              .42




construe the privilege in such a way would not only run

contrary to the whole principle of the Rule but would in

effect place the person who exercised the privilege in a

far worse position than if he had in fact answered the

question.     Can you see that?

     The position is simply this, that you may not

construe silence as constituting any part of the evidence

on which your deliberations are based.      You have to be

satisfied from the evidence which you have heard and not

from the evidence which you have not heard, nor may you

draw any inferences from the exercise of the privilege.

Under no circumstances must you turn this privilege into a

noose.     Think about it; it is self evident, isn't it?

     Before I go on to discuss possible verdicts there is

one other Rule which I perhaps should just mention very

briefly.     It is an aside.   I have already told you that

you may not add any riders, nor may I for that matter, but

I do have a snail advantage over you because under Rule 43

if I believe that action could be taken which might

prevent the recurrence of similar fatalities I can write

to anybody who I think might be interested and who might

be able to do something about it.      So it does not

necessarily mean that just because we cannot add riders

that nothing can come out of it but it is my privilege not

yours.     That is the way the Rules are.
     Now, I turn to the verdicts and I remind_you of what

I have already said, that there are three basically which

I am going to leave with you:    (1) unlawfully killed,   (2)

accidental death or misadventure, and I will tell you now

that as a matter of law there is no difference between

these two terms - we will deal with this a little later

when I get on to actually explaining it but as far as you

are concerned these are the same - and then the third

option that you have is what is known as an open verdict

and again I will come to that.

     Before you are able to reach any verdict at all upon

the evidence you have got to be satisfied on the evidence

that is appropriate and therefore you have to know what

standard of proof has to be applied.    In considering the

evidence you obviously will have to be satisfied that the

necessary standard of proof has been achieved, in order to

enable you to reach one or other of the verdicts which I

have mentioned.

     Different standards of proof are required for

different verdicts.   In respect of the verdict of

unlawfully killed you have to be satisfied to the standard

which can be described as the criminal standard of proof.

In respect of accidental death or misadventure the

standard would be that of the balance of probability.      In

the case of an open verdict there is in a sense no
                                                          M




standard, for the reasons which will become apparent as we

go through it.

     Now what is meant by the words "criminal standard of

proof”?   We will deal with this in a little more detail,

and this is the standard that has to h e reached, cxr that,

you have to be satisfied on if you are dealing with the

possible verdict - I use the word verdict but it strictly

should be the word conclusion - of unlawfully killed.

Before you are able to bring in this verdict you have to

be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt, or to put it in

slightly more modern language you have to be satisfied so

that you are sure, that the evidence which you have heard

and which you are considering satisfies you that both the

act and the necessary mental state of the criminal offence

which you are considering has been made out.       The

balance of probability, in respect of the other verdicts,

except of course the open one, is simply a lower one,

described as the balance of probability, and I will refer

to that again in a few moments.

     Because of the differences in standards of proof you

have to take the verdicts in the correct order and in

effect what you have to do is you have to start with the

verdict of unlawfully killed, because that has got the

highest standard of proof.   You have to consider that

verdict in respect of each of the deceased.     It would not

be right for you to take an example, so to speak, and just
say you will only think about one and that is it.     You

have to think about all 95 individually and you have to

apply the facts within the context of the law, as

explained to you, to each one of those 95.     That does not

necessarily mean, of course, that you have to spend

identical amounts of time on each case.     Just as we have

not repeated 95 times evidence which is common it may be

possible for you to apply the evidence to them, but at the

end of the day because you have got to sign 95 of these,

you have to apply your mind to each and every one.     It may

be, as you will see in a moment,    that it might be possible

to look at some of the people, not as groups, but there

are similarities between certain members, if you like Pen

3 and Pen 4 deaths, but in the end you have still got to

think of each one individually.

     Now, what do we mean by unlawfully killed in the

context of these Inquests?   What are the legal parameters

and requirements that you have to meet when you are

considering this verdict?    I am not going to take you

through the whole of the law on murder and manslaughter

you will be relieved to hear, but for the purposes of

these Inquests the criminal equivalent of the verdict of

unlawfully killed is one of the forms of involuntary

manslaughter and I can tell you, just so that there is no

misunderstanding, infanticide clearly does not apply and

murder does not apply either.     We have heard no evidence
                                                         * 46




whatsoever which could possibly enable you to consider

that verdict so we are talking about manslaughter and we

are talking about a particular variety which I have

described as one of the forms of involuntary manslaughter.

     The legal requirements for this type of manslaughter

have been considered in various cases and in particular a

case known as Regina v. West London Coroner ex parte Gray,

but there are other cases which have dealt with this.      I

am not going to bother you with all the cases.   In that

particular case, and I am not giving you all the story,

but in that particular case it happened to deal with an

alleged unlawful killing by a Police Officer by neglect.




                        Lord Justice Watkins set out
                                                                  47

     Lord Justice Watkins set out the matters - he was the

judge in that case - which the jury have to be satisfied on

before they can reach an appropriate conclusion.      Before I go

through all the points that he has raised I should add that

although in that particular case the issue related to the

alleged neglect on the part o f t h e Police the fundamental

principle is the same however one might be thinking.        Before

you can reach a verdict of unlawfully killed in the

circumstances of this case you have to be satisfied of

several things and I am now going to tell you what they are.

I am then going to tell you again with some elaboration.

     You have to be satisfied of the following points in the

first instance (1 ) that the person whose conduct you are

considering had a duty to have regard to the health and

welfare of the deceased, or as is said in other places and I

will be using the term and I say it now, had a duty not to

cause injury to the deceased.    So, the person whose conduct

you are considering had a duty not to cause injury to the

deceased.   Lord Justice Watkins used the term 'health and

welfare'.   Others have used 'injury' and others have said

that you can sum all that up into the word 's af e t y '.   The

sense is clear.

     First, that is point 1 and I will repeat it, that the

person whose conduct you are considering had a duty not to

cause injury to the deceased;     (2 ) in the circumstances there

was a failure to do what should have been done for the health

and welfare of the deceased;     (3) that that failure amounted

to a substantial cause of death;     (4) that the failure
                                                            . 4 8

amounted to recklessness;    (5) recklessness means that there

was an obvious and serious risk~~to the health and welfare of

the deceased that injury might be caused and that the person

whose conduct is being considered, having regard to his duty,

was either indifferent to such a risk or, recognising that

risk to be present, he nevertheless deliberately chose to run

that risk by doing nothing about it;    (6 ) it must be clearly

understood, however, that the failure to appreciate that

there was such a risk would not by itself by sufficient to

amount to recklessness;    (7) you can only return this verdict

of unlawfully killed if you can attribute these ingredients

to a single individual whose conduct is being called in

question.     Such an individual should on no account be named

or otherwise identified.

        That was the way Lord Justice Watkins set it out.    I am

going to come back to these points in slightly more detail

later but before I do that I want to say a word or two about

what is known as causation because causation in a sense

precedes anything.     If something did not cause something then

you cannot be thinking about it, can you?     You have to be

satisfied that the act or omission complained of was a

substantial cause of the injury which led to the death in

this particular case.     Not every causative act would give

rise to liability.    For example, it could be argued that

nobody would have died if the game of football were not

played in the United Kingdom and but for the fact that we

play football here in the United Kingdom nobody would have

died.    I do not think you have too much difficulty in saying,




                                          I
                                          \
                                                                  49

"That is nonsense.    It is far too remote".     If you bring it a

little bit nearer home you could say-, "But for the fact there

is an FA competition nobody would have died" and again you

might say,   "Yes, but that is too remote".     Bringing it a bit

nearer you could say, But for the fact that Hillsborough was

chosen by the FA as the venue nobody w o u l d h a v e died".

      All these in one sense are causes but with none of them

I think you will have particular difficulty, even with the

last one, in excluding them as causes in relation to these

deaths because you would exclude them on the basis that they

are too remote.    They are not direct.     When you come to think

about this you will first of all have to decide what, in

fact, is the cause to which one needs apply one's mind.         This

may in the end as we go along turn out not to be quite as

complicated as I make it sound at the moment but I am merely

stating the principles.

     You have to be satisfied then that the act or. omission

which you are looking at is, on the one hand, sufficiently

close, sufficiently related to the event as to be logically

classifiable as causative.      In other words, but for that

event and that it has got some proper proximity to it and in

addition to that, that it was directly connected with the

death of the person and, for good measure, that it is a

substantial cause of the death.      If it is not substantial it

cannot be causative.     That is all I am going to say to you at

this stage on the question of causation.

      If I turn back to what Lord Justice Watkins said, the

heart of his seven points vith regard to unlawful killing is
                                                                 50

the issue of recklessness and so I am going to repeat for you

what I have already said.    The kernel of his conditions is

recklessness and what he said was that there has to be an

obvious and serious risk to the health and welfare of the

deceased.    If that is established then the person whose

conduct is called in question was (a) indifferent to such

risk or, recognising the risk, has decided to go on to take

it.   That is the kernel.

      Before you come to the definition of recklessness, if

you think back, there were several other things he said and

there are in fact what I perceive to be three preliminary

steps, or gates if you wish, that you have to go through

before you can even come to the issue of whether or not

recklessness applies.    I have called it involuntary

manslaughter but if you wish we might call this reckless

manslaughter, the equivalent criminal offence.     We are not,

of course, dealing with that.    We are merely trying to decide

how people died.    Were they killed unlawfully?   To decide

that you have to decide whether the criminal offence has been

made out.

      Step one that you have to traverse; that there has to be

a duty of care.    That in many instances is not too difficult

to determine and you may take it, as a general rule, that if

somebody undertakes to perform a task, eg stage a football

match, organise it, supervise it, they c m   be assumed to have

a duty of care towards the people with whom they come in

contact.    Slightly more difficult but I think relatively

straightforward is the issue of whether or not fans who
                                                                    51

attend also have a duty of care to each other.      I can see no

reason why if, for instance, road users have a duty of care

to others using the road pedestrians or fans attending do not

also have a similar obligation towards each other but you in

the end have to decide on the facts that there was a duty of

care.

        Step two, failure to do what should have been done or

that something was done which ought not to have been.        That

is the second gate.     Have you understood that?   Simply

because, something goes wrong does not mean that there has

been a breach of duty or that there has been a failure.

Beware of that.     There are two major aspects which you need

to think about and the best way of doing that is to look at

it from the point of view of ordinary individuals and from

the point of view of professional people.     I will deal with

the professional person first.    You have to be satisfied that

in the case of a professional, who is required to exercise

special skill, knowledge or experience, the standard of care

which he is expected to achieve is that of an ordinary,

skilled member of that profession and which such ordinary,

skilled person would have exercised or professed to have had

in respect of that special skill.

        We are not talking about some paragon of virtue, nor

somebody who is particularly bad.     It is an ordinary, average

member of that profession or class.     This is to really get

into the heart of the matter, the standard of the

professional and you measure that in relation to the standard

which an ordinary, skilled member of his class will have
exhibited in the circumstances and with the knowledge that

that person had, not with hindsight and everything else but

as it was.
     With regard to ordinary individuals in respect of people

who do not profess to have special skills you apply the

standard of an ordinary prudent person as exemplified by

yourselves, for example.   If, when you come to apply these

tests, you were to come to the conclusion that there has been

no breach of duty in respect of the person whom you are

considering then, of course, there is no need to consider any

other points in the definition because you have not got

passed this stage.   That was the first point.

     The second point that you have to consider is what I

would describe as a dilemma or crisis situation.   In an

emergency the fact that in the event a wrong decision is

taken need not constitute a breach of duty provided that a

decision was not unreasonably taken in the circumstances

which prevailed and taking all the aspects into account.      If

you come to the conclusion from the evidence that there was

an emergency situation you have to decide whether the

response to that situation was or was not unreasonable.

     You may, of course, come to the conclusion that there

was no emergency situation at all or alternatively that the

situation itself had been caused or precipitated by a breach

of duty by the person whose conduct you are considering.      You

must have it clearly fixed in your mind that the breach of

duty has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt from the

evidence and it must be attributable to one individual and
                                                            53




not be a summation of the acts of different people.

       A third point, a preliminary point, is that it must

amount to a substantial cause of death.       This is important

because in this Inquest we have been looking at the

activities of all kinds of people from the most junior

people to the most senior and from people right in the

centre of the stadium to people miles away, or hundreds

of   yards away if you like, some very small cogs, and

they may well have made mistakes some of them for all

I know, but it should not be too difficult for you to

be able to exclude the vast majority of people whom we

have been thinking about on the basis of whatever they

may or may    not have done isn't the substantial cause

of the death of anyone, quite apart from any other

consideration.

       You should give the word "substantial" its usual

meaning.     It is an English word.   There is no legal

definition.     It is what you understand it to mean.

       Now I am going to pause again because I need five

minutes and then we are going to get on to the recklessness

bit.

                        (Short adjournment)


       Now then, if a person whose conduct you are considering

does not pass these first three preliminary steps, you

do not of course have to proceed to consider the question

of recklessness in respect of him, but even if he does

get through here, the very most that you have established
                                                             54




will be that he had been negligent.    That would be the

highest that you would have got to him, so to speak,

and it is perfectly clear that mere negligence or if

you might prefer to use the word mere carelessness is

not a sufficient ground for you to bring in a verdict

of unlawfully killed.    You have got to be crystal clear

in your minds.
      It simply seems to ms to be in this     particular

type o f unlawful killing it is the opening of the door

which enables you to consider, as     I have already said,

the heart of the matter, namely whether or not there-

has been recklessness as defined and I am sorry I will

have to remind you again of what the definition is

because the only way to learn it really is to keep     011


repeating it.

      I remind you that there are three basic matters,

in respect of recklessness:

       (1)   That there is an obvious and serious risr.

of injury.     Of course there has to be some act or

omission.
       (2)   That the person was indifferent or had not

given any thought to such a risk.

       (3)   Or recognising that risk had decided to go on

and take it.

      Now the first thing that you must notice is that

this definition includes two words.     It says that there

is, or was, "an obvious and serious risk of injury" and

you have to be satisfied on both.     It has got to be
both "obvious" and it has got to be "serious".     It is not

terribly easy to know, particularly the word "serious" is

a difficult word but nevertheless you have to weigh thera

and give them their appropriate meaning.

         In considering these you have to put yourself into

the position of the people with their state of knowledge

on the 15th April 1989 or you have to put a reasonably

prudent professional man into their situation with their

state of knowledge and with their particular circumstances

and exclude the benefit of hindsight and you have to ask

yourself the question whether on that day there was an

obvious and serious risk of injury?

         Recently in the Crown Court one of Her Majesty's

Judges Mr. Justice Turner was dealing with a prosecution

which had arisen out of the Zeebrugge disaster and you

will remember that was a case where a ship sailed with

its bow doors open and not surprisingly went down, but

we are not interested in the facts of that case, but he

was talking in a long judgment in fact, but in one place

he said:

         "Obviously we are talking about a risk and
         nobody denies there was a risk.  It is the
         application of the word 'obvious' that is
         troubling me and has been troubling me for
         a long time. Obvious if it operates that
         it will be a serious risk,  I quite follow,
         but obvious that it will occur is the problem."

Now this is a complicated sentence actually but it is I

think a very helpful one so I am going to read it

again.
                                                                 56




        "Obviously we   are talking about a risk and
        nobody denies   there was a risk. It is the
        application of the word 'obvious' that is
        troubling me and has been troubling me for
        a long time. Obvious if it operates that
        it will be a serious risk if ithappens, I
        quite follow,   but obvious that it will occur
        is the problem."

And if you think about the cases which we are dealing with

it is precisely this problem which     you are faced with.

        You may feel, and this was in fact canvassed before

the same Judge, that the word "obvious" means something

like perfectly evident, staring one in the face and there

were other attempts at explaining what that word might

mean.    Immediately apparent.   These are definitions of

that word which you may find helpful.

        You should be clear in your mind, as indeed

Mr. Justice Turner was,    that "obvious" and "serious" are

not merely synonyms for what is reasonably foreseeable.

Just because it might be possible to foresee something

does not necessarily mean that it.is obvious.         There is

a big distinction^     It may well be that what is obvious

is reasonably foreseeable but the other way round it

does not follow.

        You may ask yourself:    "Obvious to whom?"     "To

whom should this obvious and serious risk be obvious?"

        Clearly in the first instance it has got to be

to the person whose conduct you are considering but in

assessing that you apply the test of the ordinary skilled

professional, as I have already described, or if you are

thinking of a non-professional person an ordinary prudent
                                                              57




individual as exemplified b y yourself and who might find

himself in the same position and in the same circumstances

as the conditions were on that day.

      I want to make it clear that obviousness on its own

is not sufficient, it is not enough.   The definition

clearly includes the word "serious" and you have to give

that its appropriate weight, in other words there must

be an obvious and serious risk of injury.

      If you are satisfied that there was such an obvious

and serious risk you are not yet home and dry because you

then have to ask yourself the next question namely:     was

the person whose conduct you are calling in question

indifferent to the risk or having recognised the risk

decided to go ahead and take it?

      Remember those were the other two limbs, and in

order to avoid any misunderstanding Lord Justice Watkins

then adds:

      "It must be emphasised that mere failure to
      recognise the presence of such a risk is
      not sufficient of itself."

Mere failure to recognise the presence of such a risk of

itself is not sufficient.

      In other words he is drawing, as I see it, a

distinction between a person who may well be negligent

and in that sense liable to say civil damages but whose

state of mind does not meet the criteria required for

recklessness, and which despite repetition, is either

a recognition of an obvious and serious risk and a decision

to take it or indifference to such risk.
                                                              58




      It is also possible to-imagine or postulate a

situation where a person perceives a situation, assesses

it as not constituting an obvious and serious risk situation

at all.
      I don’t want to deal with the particulars, I just

want to deal with the principles, but if you were to find

that this applies, in other words an assessment is made

and one feels there is no obvious and serious risk, then

that person would not fall within either of the two limbs

of the definition of recklessness because he would have

applied his mind to the risk situation, in other words

he would not have been indifferent to it and having

decided there was either no risk at all or that it was

not bbvious and serious, could not be described as having

seen it and deliberately gone on to take it.

      In considering all these matters you have of course

to take the totality of the evidence into account including

any explanations of the state of mind of the person whose

conduct you are considering.      That is obviously coimaonsense,

isn't it?
      You have to be satisfied before you bring in such

a verdict and you have to be satisfied beyond reasonable

doubt that the recklessness and indeed all these points

have all got to be beyond reasonable doubt so that you

are sure, that the recklessness which you are considering

is attributable to one single person.

          What this means is that you iaay not aggregate or
                                                            59




add together the acts of different people and then

attribute all the failures and all the acts of several

people to one individual.   Each person stands on his

own and you have to be satisfied on the evidence that

the ingredients have been made out.

      This is not to say that you cannot in fact, have

more than one person who might be liable to the binding

of unlawfully killed.
      For example, to give you a simple example, if three

people attack one individual and they all individually

inflict wounds which are sufficiently severe as to

constitute a substantial cause of death, the fact that

there may be three wounds, each one on its own would have

been sufficient to kill the victim, does not absolve the

other two assailants.   All three for their individual

act may be held responsible because each one taken on

its own would satisfy the definition of murder or

manslaughter as the case may be.
      Finally, and I don't need to spend much more time

on this because I have already said it, if you were to

find a verdict of unlawfully killed under no circumstances

must you name or identify the person.    You can think about

people, obviously you must, but this thing here no

way must name or identify the person and I again remind

you that we are dealing with an Inquest so we are not

dealing with persons to be blamed and we are not here

 to charge anybody, in fact I read you the section out of
the Act, you are actually looking at the victims or the

people who died and you are bringing in verdicts in

respect of their deaths and what you are saying is, if

you were to bring this verdict in:   "I think this person

was killed unlawfully" but you are not saying anything

else or any more than that.




                         If you were to decide
                                                               61




        If you were to decide that the verdict of unlawfully

killed is inappropriate in respect of some or all of the

deceased - obviously it is a matter for you in respect of

each one - then you would be able to proceed to the other

conclusions which I have mentioned.

        Before I deal with those and more especially for

completeness on the issue of law I should mention that it is

in fact now clearly established that a company or

corporation can, in law, be charged with the offence of

manslaughter.      You could prosecute a company for

manslaughter.      In fact it was done in Mr. Justice Turner s

case.      From a legal point of view a company is no different

to anybody else.      It is just a person.   Before you could

decide that a company had liability you would have to be

satisfied with all these points I have told you about which

Lord Justice Watkins said.      The only real problem is how

you decide the company is made responsible and the answer to

that is you would have to be satisfied that the directing

mind and will of the company knows about it.      In other

words, a mere employee, somebody fairly low down the line,

cannot, however wrong he may have been, affect the mind of

the company, but a company director might in appropriate

circumstances, but the rules of aggregation are exactly the

same, everything is the same.      You cannot add different

directors' knowledge together and make it one big plus, so

to speak.

        I mention it for the sake of completeness because as we
go along we may find this is not quite as relevant as you

otherwise might think.

     I now turn to the other verdicts.     If you come to the

conclusion that unlawfully killed is inappropriate, then you

may go on to decide whether the verdict of accidental death

or misadventure is the right one.     In this case the burden

of proof is entirely different.     You may bring in such a

verdict if you are satisfied on the balance of

probabilities.     In other words, if you are satisfied it is

more likely than not that the deceased's death was due to

accident or misadventure.

     There is no difference, as I have already told you, in

these two words.    You may choose whichever one you prefer.

If you cannot make up your mind which one you prefer, and if

this is the verdict you have in mind, then choose the word

"accidental", but it is a matter entirely for you.     What I

am trying to say to you is do not spend hours arguing which

of these two words is better.     In law they mean the same.

There are different overtones, or undertones, people

perceive them differently, but there is no difference.

     You should understand, and this is very important, that

the word "accident" straddles the whole spectrum of events

from force majeure or Act of God.     In other words, from

something over which one has no control - an earthquake, for

instance, where most of us would take the view that no-one

could be blamed - to a situation where you are in fact

satisfied there has been carelessness, negligence, to a
greater or lesser extent and that someone would have to

make, for instance, compensation payments in civil

litigation.      It straddles a whole range of events and the

fact that the jury brings in a verdict of accidental death

does not mean to say that nothing has not gone wrong.         In

other words, bringing in this verdict does not mean that you

absolve each and every party from all and every measure from

blame.      You cannot, of course, specify parties because we

are not allowed to determine aspects of civil liability, but

you should understand that when you use that word you are

not saying, "I have decided that everything is perfect."

     What then does accident and misadventure mean?      It

means an unforeseen event arising out of a situation which

was intended to occur«     Most of us understand the word

without too much difficulty.      I will give you a very simple

example, both of what you might consider to be an accident

and also the differences in using that word with different,

if you like, blameworthiness.          *

     You may, for instance, be washing up glasses and whilst

you do so you drop one and it breaks.      It is an accident.

Now whether or not there is any culpability will depend on

all the circumstances.     For example, supposing you were

washing up these glasses as carefully as you could and

because of the soapy water one slipped out of your hand.

You might well say, "I have broken it but it is not really

my fault.     Maddening, but not my fault."     You would not

blame yourself and you would be a bit annoyed if other
people blamed you.

      Supposing, on the other hand, you were washing up these

delicate glasses in total darkness and one of them broke,

you might then say to yourself, "Well, that wasn't very

sensible of me."      It is still an accident but the level of

responsibility has changed.

      Now then, open verdict.     If after due deliberation you

come to the conclusion there is insufficient evidence to

enable you to reach either of the other verdicts to the

standard of proof required beyond reasonable doubt in the

case of unlawfully killed, balance of probability in the

case of accident, then an open verdict is appropriate and an

open verdict means what it says.      It means that you are not

satisfied that the evidence which has been put before you

enables you to reach a conclusion.

      There is nothing wrong with an open verdict.     Some

juries might feel, *'0h, if I bring in an open verdict I have

failed.*'     I always try and tell my juries that that is not

so.      Of course it would be entirely wrong if you went in

and said, "Let's not bother to think about this, call it

open."      That is not what I am saying.   You have to do it

the right way round.      It is when you have given the matter

proper consideration and if at the end of the day you feel

the evidence is not there to enable you to reach one of the

others, then it is perfectly proper and you would not have

failed in your duty in bringing in such a verdict.
                                                         65




     Now this is a convenient point for me to stop.   It is

virtually lunch time.   We will break now and come together

again at two o'clock.




                   (Luncheon adjournment)
                                                               • 66




       THE CORONER:   You will be pleased to hear that I am

not going on with all that legal stuff now, we are moving

on to something else.     It is very, very important but a

bit heavy going in places.

       I have already told you that fou have to deal with

each case on its own.     That is because they are all

individual people, but there are one or two things which

do make life a little bit easier for you and I have

indicated one already, that everybody in fact died on 15th

April, 1989, apart from Lee Nicol who died on the 17th.               I

will remind you with regard to Lee, this was the young lad

who donated his organs, who had signed a donor card, do

you remember him?     He was certified as having been brain

dead on the 17th, and his organs were taken, those which

were used, on the 18th.     So although, of course, it was

very, very sad that his life should have been lost it was

good that he had signed a card and it was even better of'-

his mum, in the agony of that decision,    to have said yes,

that they would do what he wanted, and for all I know

there is somebody walking round happy today because of

him.

       The second way which will.help you is because there

were two pens you can split people between the two pens.

In fact, there were only at the most nine people who died

in Pen 4.    There is Stephen O'Neill where there is a

little bit of doubt actually, with regard to him.        The
                                                               •67




doubt arises when there either is not a very good

photograph or where there is not anybody who was with

them, and I think in Stephen's case he was identified but

Inspector Layton said that it was not the world's best

photograph, but it was the best we had.     Then there was

somebody called David Hawley, Adam Spearritt, William

Pemberton, David Riramer, Gordon Horn, John Anderson, Paul

Carlile and Steven Robinson.   Those are the Pen 4 group.

Of those, just as a matter of interest, two actually got

to hospital, for what it is worth.

     All the rest were almost certainly in Pen 3.       There

are three where there is a little bit of doubt.       Alan

Johnston is another one where the identification is poor

and David Thomas was not identified at all but     he was with

the Traynors and they   have been identified in Pen    3, so

the chances are that he was with them.     It is a matter for

you to decide whether   you wish to classify him   as Pen 3.

The last one where we   found no visual evidence or indeed

any other evidence was Francis McAllister and he was in

fact a friend of Nicholas Joynes, and you remember one of

the last witnesses, Mr. Thomas who came along, told us

that he saw Nicholas and Francis going down the tunnel.

They had turned round and were coming back out.       So we

know that Nicholas was in Pen 3.     It is a matter for you

whether you think that there is enough evidence there to

satisfy yourself that he was in Pen 3.
                                                           • 68




    -It may not be terribly relevant except when you fill

in this form.   If you want to put the pen, then the ones

where you are doubtful you have to think whether that is

sufficient or whether in those cases you merely want to

say Hillsborough Stadium or Leppings Lane Terraces.     That

is the way to deal with that.   So Stephen O'Neill probably

Pen A; Alan Johnston and David Thomas and Francis

McAllister probably Pen 3, but with the doubts which I

have told you about.

     I have already told you that you can have different

verdicts for different people, both between pens and even,

if you think the evidence were to show it, within a pen.

The only reservation I would make is that if you were to

decide, say on an accidental/misadventure verdict, try and

use one of those words rather than both.   Although they

mean the same if you use different words - if you say

accidental here and misadventure there - it is an

unanswerable question but it merely raises a question

which need not be raised.

     You will of course have noticed that on the whole •

we took evidence from November to March - we did not take

much evidence after 3.15, in fact hardly any, and that was

a deliberate decision of mine, because I took the view

that we had to have a cut off point somewhere.   In the

light of the pathological evidence in particular which we

had had, and you remember we heard from about eight
                                                             •69




pathologists, quite a lot,-and although they differed in

minor detail as to whether it was ten seconds or five

seconds or fifteen seconds that people lost consciousness,

it was clear that people lost consciousness within a

relatively short period of time according, to their view,

and what was much more important was that irretrievable

damage had been done, with somebody who was asphyxiated,

between four and six minutes.     I think six minutes was the

longest period stated by anyone and I think it was Prof.

Usher who said that.     He said that actually in Alan

Johnson's inquest.     He said that once the chest had been

fixed so that the person could not breathe then

irretrievable brain damage was caused.

     If that is right, and as I say it was the unanimous

view and it is a matter for you whether you accept it, but

if you accept that as being correct then whether or not

somebody subsequently breathed for a period or was

resuscitated,    like Stephen O'Neill, he was resuscitated

for a period, in fact for two days he appeared to be

breathing and his heart was beating, and yet the damage

had been done.    It is very interesting - I have to pick on

Stephen because Dr. Holt actually dealt with this - you

may not remember the detail but she said that when she

examined the brain she was satisfied that the damage to

the brain had been done at the time of the injury and at

the time when he had inhaled.     So although it was in his
particular case possible to'restart the heart - in fact,

they did not get the breathing going because they had to

ventilate him but they were able to restart the heart - in

fact, it was a lost cause right from the word go.       It is

sad but there is no use beating about the bush.     That is,

in fact, how it was.

     Mr. Wardrobe said the same.     He said of all the

people who actually got to the hospital in cardiac arrest

not one survived.    It is just one of those very sad

things.     So I took the view that if that is correct all

the evidence which you have heard would point to the fact

that the crushing had started - well it certainly was in

full swing - by 6-minutes-past, when the match had

finished.    I am not going to say when it started because

that we might come to when I review the evidence for you,

or some of it.    But assuming that it did not begin until

6-minutes-pasty if we exclude everything else, you have

still got nine minutes of time from there up to 15.15 for

the damage to be done.

     I know that a lot of people have been anxious that

because death was not certified in many cases until say

4.30 - let's just pick that figure, it does not really

matter what - that the people were not dead, if you like,

until that had happened.     In fact, if you think about it

that cannot be the case because a person cannot be

certified dead until he is, so by definition he must be
                                                                    71
dead before he is certified.     All that certification does is

it puts a medical confirmation on the fact, and the fact that

it was not done at three minutes past three - it could have

been done next morning - would not have meant that the people

were living or alive for all that time.     Secondly,   I decided

not to go any further because the overwhelming medical is

that the injuries which caused the death were crushing or

asphyxia or some form of compression.     The only place where

that could have happened was within the terraces.       It is true

in some cases there was inhalation of vomit.     You will

remember that and there were some subdural haemorrhages and

so on and those could have occurred outside.     If somebody had

.been taken out it is possible that they might inhale outside

but it was all related to and connected with the injuries

that the people suffered within those terraces.     That is the

second reason why I did not feel it was appropriate at this

stage of the Inquest to go and explore and follow people

right through to death certification or even beyond.        It is

very interesting and it may be very relevant in other places

but not relevant, as I saw it, to establishing who, when,

where and how.

        I have also got to say, and in fact it is not entirely

true that we did not look at what happened after 3.15.        On

the contrary, we actually looked at considerable length doing

that.    We spent two and a half weeks in April and May time

and a large part of that was actually spent, if you remember,

tracing people across the field, up to the mortuary, up to

certification and identification.    So, although we did not
                                                                   72

deal with it viva voce in quite the same way as we dealt with

some of the other matters, in fact, we did hear a great deal

more in my view than one would normally hear in any Inquest

which I would do in this situation because, after all, it

happens all the ti m e .   People are involved in road traffic *

incidents and suffer severe injuries.      I usually just say,

"Did an ambulance come?     Yes, thank you very much.   What is

the cause of death?     Multiple injuries" and I do not pursue

them all the way to the hospital even if they have lived may

be for days or weeks.      If the pathologist tells me that the

cause of death is multiple injury caused by the RTA then tKe

subsequent events, unless they were completely new and in a

sense were the causative thing;      if the pathologist said,    "It

had nothing to do with the RTA but it was the way they did

this, that or the other", then that is a different matter.

All the evidence, as I have said, is that it is quite clear

it was crushing.    I have already dealt with that.

     In order to avoid any possible misunderstandings, of

course, you have to understand particularly with asphyxial

deaths and particularly in the light of what the various

pathologists said, if you could have got to a particular

person or if one had got to a person before the irretrievable

damage had been done then, provided one did resuscitation

correctly, that person might well not only have recovered but

might have been perfectly all right.      That is undeniable.

Indeed, we have seen several people who were unconscious, who

told us so, and who are here and who seem perfectly all right

because the cells in their case fortunately had not been so
severely damaged as to be irretrievably harmed.       That, if you

like, is the beauty of the body, that you can assault it like

that and retrieve it before it is too late and the people

themselves just recover.

       I am not denying that.   As a fact that is obviously a

possibility but we also have to face the fact that that is

precisely what did not happen and so I, as I say, took the

view that the cut off was right.     We had to have some limit

at some point.     The other way I went quite a long way back

but even there we tended to start in Sheffield.       We did not

start in Liverpool.     We could have done but we did not

because we have to have some limit somewhere.

       In passing I will just say this;    of the 95 people who

died 14 or so actually got to hospital.      One got to the

Hallamshire and that was Carl Lewis.      One, Lee Nicol, got on

to a ward and stayed on a ward.     One, Adam Spearritt, appears

to have got on to the ITU ward but for some reason they had

no notes and the evidence we heard was that he did not

survive.    We know that he did not survive.     All the rest got

into the building, if you like, but did not get beyond either

the resuscitation room or the mortuary which they had set up.

       Of these 14 people the majority had no hospital notes.

That was perhaps unfortunate but we did not investigate it

any further.     I merely mention it because obviously if you

have notes it makes it much easier to know what actually

happened if one wants to do it but in most cases there were

not.   In most cases you have to remember,     if you say,   "They

only had 13 in and so why on earth did they not have notes?".
                                                              -74

the answer is because there were a lot of other people coming

in as well and it may be that they found it more difficult~to

keep up with the paperwork than would appear on the face of

it but the fact remains that they did not keep up with the

paperwork so far as the deceased are concerned.

      Included in those 14 therfe are 6 people who were untffer

16.   That is quite interesting because there were 11

youngsters under 16 who died and so more than half actually

got to hospital.   Whether that is a coincidence or whether

the fact that they were children made people put them into

the ambulances I do not know, but it is interesting that of

the younger end of the spectrum more finished up in hospital.

It did not unfortunately make any difference so far as they

were concerned.




                           /I will leave the deceased..
                                                                 75




        Now then I will leave the deceased in detail

at this stage.     Perhaps I ought to read out the names

of the people who did get to hospital so that we have

that.
        It was Carl David Lewis; Lee Ilico.1.;. Stephen, Harrison;,,

Gary Jones; Arthur Horrocks; Adam Spearritt; Philip Hcuiuaond

Barry Bennett; Victoria Hicks; Stephen O'Neill; Paul Brady;

Jon Gilhooley; Philip Steele and David Leonard Thomas.

        Perhaps I should also say that you can do the

arithmetic yourself but you can see that the vast majority

of people who died died in Pen 3 and that is quite

interesting, well not interesting but it actually fits

in with one point Mr. Greenwood made if you remember.

He said there was absolutely no comparison, in his vie..-,

between the condition in Pen 3 as compared to Pen 4

and that would fit in with the distribution, wouldn't it?

        Now what I intend to do now is to do my suramimj

as opposed to my summary and I am going to start by

just reminding you very very briefly of the sort ol

historical situation and remind you that this xuatch tool;

place in a stadium which had been in existence for many

years, which had staged I don't know how many football

matches but somebody said from the 70s onwards about

I think it was 16 semi-finals, or some order.          Admittedly

a lot of them were in the '70s but in the '80s there were

at least, including the one that unfortunately led to

this tragedy, four, so it was not a stadium which was.
brand new, by any means, or one where football had never

been played before.       13 serai-finals there were actually,

Mr. Mole said it.

      I don't think it has been disputed and it is common-

sense anyway, that the Club had responsibility for the

stadium, it was their stadium.      They were the holders of

the Safety Certificate and they had whatever responsibilities

there were under that and we will come to that in a moment.

      They were staging the match.      The F.A. approached

them. They agreed to do it.      They consulted with the

Police as to whether it would be feasible and it was agreed

that it could go ahead but it was their stadium and their

ground and they provided the tickets if you like and did

the printing and stuff like that.

      They also provided the staff.      They had their
                      v


Stewards and other people, quite a lot, several hundred,

and in one sense at least they even provided the Police

because the Police were not employees in any sense of the

Club, the arrangement was that the Club had to be involved

and had to deal with various aspects of the matter.

      It was their responsibility to observe as far as

was necessary the provisions of the Green Guide and remember

it is only a guide, I don't want us to get into any

arguments as to the fact that this document is binding

in any sense of the word, it is a guide.       Obviously you

folio? guides but it is a guide nevertheless.

      They dealt with the ticketing.      They dealt with
                                                               77




the allocation of turnstiles subject to the overriding

requirement for segregation which meant that in fact

you could only use a limited amount of turnstiles for

the Leppings Lane end and as we know from, I have

forgotten who, but one witness, that in other matches

they might have used more for that end but for segregation

purposes they had to exclude a number of turnstiles.

      I think it must follow that the Club were

responsible for the lettering, the signing of the turnstiles

and the signing within the concourse area and you will

remember that we have spent an awful lot of time on these

signs but there is no doubt that there was a big sigfc over

the tunnel which said "Standing"; that there was a smaller

sign on a pillar, if you came in through the turnstiles

it was on your right which led down to the south side of

the West Stand.     There is a photograph which shows it but

it clearly was not as large, and there was no sign over

the gap in the wall which would have led to the other

north end if you like, the North West terrace.

      It would appear that the situation had been such

for some time.    This was not a new development.   I

don't know whether anybody actually said that but I

think it follows.

      Certainly Mr. Mole told us that he had never

considered the signing as such presented him with any

particular policing problems and it is also right, and

Dr. Nicholson in fact dealt with this point, that however
                                                             78




you count the number of people within Pens 3 and 4 and

even on the highest numbers there was still something

of the order of two-thirds of the total population of the

terrace as a whole in other parts and not in the central

pens.   How they got there is another question.   Did they

go round the sides?   Did they go   down the tunnel and

spread out?   Were they people who knew their way about?

We don't know, but the fact remains that there was a

substantial number who did in fact find    their way to

other parts of the ground.

        Indeed if you look at the compilation video which

I am sure you will do, I expect you will do, when Gate C

has been opened, unfortunately you cannot actually see

the tunnel because of the positioning of the camera but

you can see the gap in the wall and you may want to have

a look and see what is actually happening around that

gap in the wall.   You will find that people are actually

traversing it, so the fact that there was no sign of it

did not necessarily mean that people could not use it

but on the other hand I think you may feel that the

evidence is pretty clear that the main sign was above

the tunnel and you may also feel that the tunnel was in

a very prominent position in relation both to the turnstiles

and perhaps more than that in relation to Gate C.

        The turnstiles, you went round the ground so I

don't have to describe it, but you will remember the layout

and you will be able to visualise it I am sure and you can
                                                                79




make up your own assessment-with regard to the other

entrances and what people might or might not have seen.

Gate C was if you like more in line with the tunnel even

than the turnstile but they were all very close to each

other anyway.

       The Green Guide and Safety Certificate.      I am not

going to go through this Green Guide again or indeed the

Safety Certificate in any detail.       Vie have done it at

length and to a certain e::tent I don't know to what extent

it will actually help you in your deliberations.

       I think if I just deal with the Green Guide first.

I think there are three or four points that I want to

draw to your attention.

       First of all to whom is it addressed, and it is

addressed if you remember to the holders and the Local

Authorities.    That is the first   thing. I don't know if

it   is actually addressed to the   Police but obviously

it   is available to them to look at.

       What I think is more significant     is that the bull:

of the information in the Green Guide if you read it

it deals with structure.     It is more to do with the

stadium than with the use.    That is not to say that it

does not contain a lot about ingress and egress and the

needs for avoiding overcrowding and matters of that sort.

Of course it does contain a lot of that but it also contains

a great deal of information on how to calculate the

capacities; you know what the formulae are; how to measure
                                                          80




the strength of the barriers; what the escape routes

should be and the sort of times that you need to have.

These are all more to me structural matters rather than

operational aspects.




                       I think the other thing
                                                                 81




     I think the other thing that it says, and I think this

is a point you do have to bear in mind , the Green Guide

makes it clear that sections of the ground ought to be

units, like the Kop, the West Stand, the North Stand, the

South Stand.      However, it is also quite clear, 206 is the

paragraph or 210, that contemplates sub-sections within a

section.   In fact not only does it contemplate them, it

actually advocates the installation of radial fences and it

says quite clearly that ideally* Dr. Eastwood made this

point very emphatically, that ideally these sub-sections

should be serviced and served by individual and specific

dedicated facilities.     Dr. Eastwood said that in 1981, when

this matter first came up, he actually proposed a plan.          It

was his initiative to do that because he could see that this

would be a better way of dealing with matters.        In 1981, he

said, well before the time.      It wasn't pursued.     It re­

appeared in 1985 when there were some more discussions of

radial fences and on that occasion you will remember there

is in the exhibits a letter from Superintendent Moseley

where he talks about segregation but where he clearly says

that if one did what he wanted one would have separate,

distinct areas.

     Now whether or not those proposals in 1985 were being

put forward for segregation purposes or separation purposes,

I do not think is a matter on which you need to dwell for

too long because apart from anything else the reason why

that scheme was not proceeded with - it actually got as far
                                                               82




as the Officers' Working Party because they actually

commented on it - it was not proceeded with because a pore

pressing safety matter arose, namely, the Bradford fire.

However much we may not like it, at the end of the day if

you think that here is a matter which has to be dealt with

immediately,    then you have to deal with that, and

particularly if you have nothing to indicate to you that the

arrangements you have are so intrinsically bad that a change

must be made.

     Therefore in 1985 we have heard no evidence whatsoever

that anybody at that time had the slightest concern that the

situation at the Leppings Lane end of the ground was so

intrinsically bad that it could not be allowed to continue.

Indeed, Mr. Bownes, you remember him from the City Council,

said if they had felt there was something which was really

dangerous they would have had to have served a Prohibition

Notice.   That wasn't done.

     Although we spent a lot of time looking at these

alternative plans and drawings and so on, and although no

doubt had they been in place it would have been better than

what we had, particularly with hindsight, the fact of the

matter is they weren't.      It would also appear to me from

all the evidence which we have heard, Dr. Eastwood,

Mr. Seaman, Mr. Mackrell, Mr. Lock, Mr. Mole, it does not

matter who you think of, nobody has given us any evidence to

suggest that at that time they were so concerned - indeed,

the City Council as well - that action had to be taken to
                                                                 83




 implement those plans.

      The Safety Certificate, of course, had been issued by

 the South Yorkshire County Council in 1979 and there was a

 capacity for the terrace as a whole, including the North

 West terrace, of 10,100, or thereabouts.        You will remember

 that Dr. Eastwood explained this to us.     He had been

 appointed, as far as I understood his evidence, to

 specifically deal with the provisions of the Safety

 Certificate and he had carried out an appraisal.       In his

 terms he had gone round, he had assessed it, he had done his

sums, based on drawings which were available to him at the

time, and he had calculated certain figures.        In fact he

then abated the figures because there were no gangways on

the terraces.      This was known at the time.     The Green

Guide refers to gangways.      It talks about having exit doors

within 12 metres of a gangway or exit door, but there

weren't any.      Dr. Eastwood proposed, bearing in mind that

this was a guide, he said, "Let's reduce the capacity by 10%

to allow for a bit of give, for the fact there are no

gangways."      He did not decide, nor did the club for that

matter.      The Officers' Working Party, having assessed the

situation, decided that was an acceptable situation.

Interestingly enough, you remember, he told us that all the

figures which he put up for the various parts of the ground,

not one of them was accepted unamended.     In fact, one of

them was increased.     He did not complain about that but I

think he was a bit surprised.     The only figure which was
I




                                                                          84




            accepted unamended was the Leppings Lane terracing.

            However, of course, in 1979 there were no radial fences.
        B   It was a wide open terrace.

                 In 1981 there was a match and we have heard a little

            bit about that.   The reason I was interested in that match

            was because there was a crushing incident and in fact

            Superintendent Greenwood turned out not only to have been

            there but to have actually been on the gate.      It was not in

            fact in the centre pens, which is where I originally thought

            it was, it turned out to be at pens 1 and 2.      In that

            particular instance that gate was opened and an evacuation

            was effected apparently in satisfactory manner.

                 Superintendent Greenwood told us a little bit more

            about the match and the fact that people did come over the

            fences and the thought that having opened the gate, the way

            he saw it there was pressure from the back and that having

            opened the gate people continued to come out, whether or not

            it was a necessary thing.     However, we are not really

            interested in that detail.    The two things that interested

            me were first of all that the crushing occurred on an open

            terrace, which is a factor you have to bear in mind because

            we have spent a g reat deal of time thinking about the radial

            fences.   It is very easy to take the view that but for

            radial fences crushing could not have occurred.      It did

            occur in 1981 and there weren't any.     That is not to say,

            of course, that those radial fences did not play a part.

            It is a matter for to decide on the basis of the evidence




    H
which you have heard to what extent you think those radial

fences contributed to the situation.      I suppose if you

think about it, it would seem that they must have done,

because if you have not got them there, it should have been

possible for people to spread.     So it may not be such a

difficult thought after all but do not overlook 1981.

     The other thing about 1981 is that the evacuation

turned out to be successful through those little gates.

Now that in retrospect was probably very unfortunate because

if they had had major problems in 1981 with the people

coming out of that little gate, then it is quite likely that

somebody would have done something about it and we might not

be sitting here today.

     However, there is no way in which you could now say

that any of those people in 1981, that it was obvious to

them that there was an obvious and serious risk.      So those

you can exclude and forget.

     These are background facts which enable you to put the

information in April into context.

     What was done was in fact to put in the radial fences

and the idea was...      We have heard different accounts as to

what the idea was, but there was probably a combination.

There was the convenience of better segregation.      There was

prevention of lateral movement because it may be that what

was in fact complained of in 1981 was that people were

actually coming down.     What you wanted was to block them.

In fact to do the very thing which we are now complaining
                                                              86




of.    Whatever   the motives, the intention, I think,

certainly   from Dr. Eastwood's evidence and as far asI can

recollect   from really everybody else who had any comment    on

that, was   that the installation of the radial fences was

intended to improve the situation on the terraces and

initially I think they were divided into three big sections.

Subsequently they were re-divided,    as you know, into pens 3

and 4 and the little narrow pen 5.      However, I do not think

that actually makes very much difference to the situation

because the crushing insofar as it occurred, occurred in the

centre pen and if that middle divide had not been there it

would have still been exactly the same except for the narrow

little strip of pen 5, which probably would not have made

that much difference.

      Whatever the rights and wrongs of the matter at the

time, it is quite clear that nobody considered it was

necessary to amend the Safety Certificate.      It is perfectly

clear that this matter was considered by the Officers'

Working Party and they made a number of stipulations in

relation to it, one of which has been another bone of

contention, namely, that the gates at the back of the radial

fences were to be under Police control.

      Whatever that might mean, and we might come back to

that in a moment, nobody either at the Council, the Fire

Service, the Police, the club, or anybody else, at that

time, or, indeed, at any time prior to the 15th of April,

1989, considered it necessary to amend the Safety
                                                              87




Certificate because of the installation of the radial

fences*.

      The Fire Service in the shape of Mr. Seaman in fact

came along and they were asked about means of escape.       That

is, after all, their main activity because one might have

thought if you put the radial fences in they would affect

it.   On the contrary, he did not really see any particular

problem.      He did say they needed the gates at the back as a

secondary means of escape in case the tunnel was blocked and

he said that as far as he was concerned, although the word

used in all the correspondence is "control” , he had always

understood that the word "control" meant manning.




           I must say I had some
                                                              88




I must say I had some difficulty in following the logic of

his arguments when he was developing that when he was

being cross-examined - I think by Mr. Payne but I am not

absolutely sure - because it seemed to me that from what

he was saying you have got to have somebody there in case

the gates are locked, so that you can unlock them.      As

soon as he said, "Well what if they are unlocked?", he

said, "You still need somebody there so that people can be

directed".   Well, as I say, I had a little bit of

difficulty in following the logic of his argument.

     I also found it difficult to follow the logic of his

argument that you needed people to direct people at those

gates but you did not need them at the tunnel exit.      He

justified it because he said the tunnel was the normal

route of entry and therefore people would know if they

came in that way they could go out that way, whereas the

radial gates were not the normal route of entry so people

might not know about it.   I did not find, personally,       that

argument entirely convincing.

     There are several other things, while I am on Mr.

Seamen, I might as well dispose of it, that I was not

entirely happy with.   I was surprised that he had no

objection to the closure of the big blue gates,

particularly in the light of the, if you like, I am now

cheating a little bit and saying particularly in the light

of hindsight, because his explanation as to why he had no
                                                            .89




objection was that there was sufficient time for messages

to be passed backward and forward in case there was a

tragedy.     Well,   that means that not only have you got to

have somebody who has actually observed that there is a

need to pass the message - that is the first problem you

have got to overcome - you have then got to pass the

message and somebody has got to receive it and has got to

action it.

     We, of course, are not here to criticise that but I

was a little bit surprised by that response.       The fact of

the matter is, of course, on 15th April, 1989, there is

absolutely no evidence whatever to show that those blue

gates were shut so whatever the rights and wrongs of

shutting the blue gates,     the shutting of them did not

cause or contribute to the disaster.       In fact, if anything

the argument has been the other way round, that if they

had been shut the disaster might or would not have

occurred.     That is the irony of a lot of the evidence we

have heard, that it depends which way you look at it.

Nearly everything - it is amazing as I was listening to

the evidence quite often I thought to myself, "Yes, that's

true", then if you turn it round and look at the other       ’

side it seems to say almost exactly the opposite.

     While we are on the gates - I am skipping around a

little bit, forgive me - Dr. Eastwood, of course, was

referring to his blue gates, the ones on the inner side.
                                                               *90




He said, "Ah, these opened correctly so everything is

fine.     If there is an emergency you can have them shut,

people will be able to get out of them because they will

open with the flow".     Quite apart from the fact he does

not seem to me to have communicated --- although he says

he put them in for that very purpose I did not hear from

anyone that they had ever understood that was what they

were intended for.     Neither Mr. Mackrell nor Mr. Lock nor

Mr. Mole, who, if you like, are the people who spring to

mind, ever seemed to have understood this as their

objective.     Of course, the argument is if those gates had

been shut in the way in which Dr. Eastwood would have

wanted, instead of having a tragedy in the terrace we

would have had it, no doubt, in the tunnel, and possibly

worse because the gates would have shut against the

incoming crowd.     It just shows you that it is very

difficult to construct gates which you can shut in that

sort of situation with complete safety.

        There has been an endless amount of evidence as to

whether or not the terrace was to be treated as a unit or

whether it was to be treated as sections, and whether the

sections were to be treated as individual parts.        In a

nutshell,    the argument for treating them as parts is that

the entrance (we will think about the centre sections only

for the time being - it could apply, of course to the

other ones as well but it is much more acute in the
                                                            •91




centre), was that if you had come down the tunnel, you

exit on to the terracing a little bit proud of the back

wall; the radial gates are right at the back; if you do

not know that they are there they will not immediately

spring to your attention; and that the fuller the terrace

gets the more obscured they become.

     So whatever the legal theory might be about it being

an open terrace, in practice the pens became self

contained.    I think there is certainly quite a lot of

justice in that argument.    What I am not so convinced

about is whether the remedy which had been proposed by the

Fire Service, for instance, or indeed the other people who

said that the gates had to be manned, would actually have

remedied that situation because whilst a Police Officer

with his helmet is perhaps a little bit more visible than

the gate, he may not be that visible,   that is the first

thing.

     Secondly, all the evidence which we have had from

people along that back wall - we heard several people from

that back wall.    I think it was Mr. Twydale and Mr. Oyitch

- either Mr. Oyitch or Mr. Goodman - it does not matter

but I will check that and tell you tomorrow which one it

was - and Mr. Hughes and to a slightly lesser degree Mr.

Grier,   the evidence from those people - and Mr. Skarratt

- that is five of them along the back there but two were

very near the gate, that is Mr. Twydale and I think Mr.
                                                              ■92




Goodman actually, their evidence was that they were not

distressed., that is the first thing.      The second thing is

as far as I could understand their evidence,      from that

position they had not really seen very much of the

distress at the front, so even if you had an Officer

standing there does it follow that it would actually have

made very much difference until       if you like it   was too

late?     Then it might, and indeed Mr. Twydale did say that

he tried to encourage people to go out through that little

gate.     He said he did not succeed,   that all they wanted to

do was go up into the stands.       I found that a little

difficult to understand but he did say that when a Police

Officer came along he subsequently did seem to be more

successful in diverting people into Pen 2.       So from that

point of view the manning might have been beneficial.

        Of course,   the Police evidence was that they had

never understood it in this light at all.       Mr. Mole's

evidence was quite clear,     that he accepted that the gates

had to be under Police control because that was a

condition from the Officers Working Party, but that he

understood it in two senses:      that if you had segregation

- in other words opposing fans - and you needed somebody

there because you had the gate closed and you had to have

somebody who could open it; or if you were sequentially

filling and you had the gates closed, you had to have

somebody there, but once, if the gates were open and in
                                                             *93




fact the terrace was treated as a whole then you did not

need Officers standing there, and indeed he and several

other of the Police Officers said that putting an Officer

within the terrace on his own was not a good use of Police

manpower, not only for the sake of the safety of the

Officers but also because you lost --   one Officer in a

big crowd was not likely to be able to do very much.     A

serial or a group was a different matter all together.

     The other thing about these radial gates is this, and

Mr. Creaser made this point and I thought this was an

interesting observation, when he was asked or when it was

pointed out to him that the gates were not very visible he

did not deny that but he said that when the pens filled up

and people started wanting to move out and started moving

out through the gates, the crowd perceived the movement.

Now of course I have not been in a crowd.   I can't

actually tell whether that is true but I thought it was an

interesting comment, and it struck me as a possibility, I

am not saying any more than that, that that might well be

true, that if you can get the movement going - this is

really the heart of the matter, can you get it going -

then you might get some perception and then you will get a

flow to the gates.

     The other point is, of course, although Anfield as I

understand it from the evidence from lots of the

witnesses, do not have radial fences, other grounds do,
and I think it was Mr. Ball who did not quite say, but who

almost said it, that he thought that the gates would be at

the back, that there would be a passageway.   He did not

think of gates but he thought there would be a passageway

at the back.   Now whether that is, .5n fact, the standard

practice of building these radial fences I do not know

because, as I say, we did not press him too hard on the

matter.

     In practice hardly anybody, I think, used the gates.

Certainly if you look, Mr. Bullas said that he could see

people passing and re-passing, and in fact we know of at

least one chap, Mr. Hinton, who came from Pen 1 and

finished up, I think, in Pen 4.   He says he cannot

remember quite how he did it but he was adamant that he

did not go round the back and he was equally adamant that

he did not climb the fences, so the only way he could have

done it is to go through the gates.   In fact, Mr. Johnston

- this is the gentleman I have already mentioned where

there is some doubt as to where he was - the little bit of

evidence, and as I say it is a little bit suspect so treat

this with caution, there is some evidence that he was seen

in Pen 2 at about 14.45.   He has been identified but it is

not a strong identification, and then re-identified at

15.03 or 04, something like that, in Pen 3, so if those

are correct, jLf, he would have come in to the pen from a

distance.
                                                           •95




       I haye been reminded that I have been talking too

long again.   We will stop for a few minutes - not too long

because I want to try and finish as near as possible at 4

o'clock.   Just long enough for you to have a quick cup of

tea.

                     (Short Adjournment)
                                                                      96

        I think there has been enough said about the radial

gates .    I am supposed to be summing up and not giving you a

blow by blow account.     I must keep on reminding myself of

that but what I am trying to do is just remind you of what I

consider to be the more salient facts.       You may have thought

of all these yourself as well.

        Before I carry on, we made a mistake this morning,       we

forgot to put this acetate up of Mrs. McBrien and so I am

going to do it now despite the fact that it is in the middle

of the summing up.     It is C.276A.   This re-positions John

McBrien to the left as opposed to the right.      We can press on

now.

        The Safety Certificate did not specify individual

capacities for these pens and the inevitable corollary to

that must be that as far as the Safety Certificate was

concerned the test was treated as a whole in my view.        You

may not agree.     As I said to you right at the beginning,      if I

express my views a little bit robustly it is like the Green

Guide on facts.     You can discount them.   That, of course,

meant that when you had a capacity crowd this crowd would he

dispersed, so to speak, on the terrace as a whole.       If you

had a small crowd, the practice was, as Mr. Mole described,

sequential filling.

        Remember that this was where you allowed people into a

section having locked appropriate gates.      If you then felt

that you had more than you could cope with you opened another

section.    There was a bit of argument about it.     Mr. Mole

said,    "I would describe it as opening sections".    Some of the
                                                                  97
other witnesses said,   "What we used to do is seal off areas".

The net effect was the same but the important point about it

was that somebody had to look to see whether or not you

needed more space.    Whether that sequential filling was

legitimate within the Green Guide I do not know but you do

not have to worry your mind on that score here.      When you had

a larger crowd or a capacity crowd or a crowd where you

thought you were going to need them all the practice appears

to have been that the gates were locked open and the terrace

was used in fact as if it were an open terrace.

       This seems to me, if you   assess the evidence, to have

been   the understanding of Dr.   Eastwood, Mr. Lock, Mr.

Mackrell, Mr. Mole, Mr. Marshall in so far as he expressed

views and opinions on this, Mr. Creaser, Mr. Murray and

indeed everybody.    Until 1989 it appeared to have worked

without any particular problem.     The term which was used for

this   was 'finding your own level'.    Before we immediately

say,   "My goodness me, we have heard a lot of criticism of

that term", finding your own level from my understanding of

the evidence of all these people who have been mentioned was

in fact nobody actually condemned it as such.

       Even Dr. Eastwood who perhaps was strongest in his

criticisms, if you like, on this matter agreed that it was

perfectly proper to allow people to find their own levels and

allow them to choose where they wanted to stand provided that

it was not allowed to proceed, in Mr. Mole's words, on a

willy nilly basis but there had to be some monitoring at

least of the distribution so that if things appeared to be
                                                                   98

getting out of hand intervention could take place.     Dr.

Eastwood wanted, that done by having men on the radial gates

and may be at the tunnel mouth and may be at the tunnel e x i t .

In fact when he was pressed he had Police or stewards, in

fact Police, in at least three locations specifically to do

this task.    Mr. Lock, as I understood his evidence, took the

same view.    Certainly Mr. Mole and indeed most of the other

Police Officers took the view that they operated a system

which they described as 'find your own level' but that

monitoring had to take place to see what was going on.

     He will come to the question of whether or not any

instructions had been given with regard to monitoring and in

particular whether any instructions had been given to

overcrowding, but forget that.   My overall impression of the

evidence with regard to 'find your own level' is this;       in

principle it was not objected to subject to certain

safeguards and, of course, on the assumption that the ground

would be used in its designed way, namely that people would

enter in a conventional manner through the turnstiles.       Mr.

Mole very fairly, as I have already mentioned, said that

signing or lack of it had never caused him the slightest bit

of concern.

     Even if you used just one pen, say you sealed off all

the others and just used one pen, you would still within that

pen have a 'find your own level' situation if you think about

it because nobody had in fact suggested that somebody should

actually position people and say,   "You stand here" or "You

stand there".    It would not be reasonable and people would
                                                            . 9 9
not like it.     Indeed, we have heard from several of the

Officers that if you tried to move people out of the centre

pens particularly before they were, shall we say, crowded or

whatever that might mean or before they were full they would

object because that is where they wanted to be.     So there was

always an understanding that people would be allowed to

distribute themselves and there was always an understanding,

as we have heard, that the centre pens would be denser than

the wings.     How much denser is another matter and at what

point they should be denser is another matter and whether at

what point you assess the densities at the wings and at what

point they become significant is another matter but there was

always this background understanding that they were the most

popular, that people would want to go there, you should not

and could not move them, but that you should monitor them.

If appropriate action should be taken whatever that might

mean.

     Mr. Greenwood said in his experience local densities

tended to occur.    Whatever you did you would get little

patches but these would sort themselves out and indeed the

overwhelming majority of the supporters who when pressed

about these sort of conditions, those who were pressed that

is, also said exactly the same.    They said "In a big match we

expect to be crowded, we expect to be crushed, we expect it

to be uncomfortable.    We expect it to sort itself out once

kick-off has taken place".    So, the sense if you like of the

whole of the evidence tended in the same direction so far as
                                                                   100

that is concerned, and I think it is important to understand

th a t .

       One of the big problems of finding your own level was

that certainly Mr. Mole, if you accept his evidence,

understood so far as he was concerned that the tunnel had

never been used to divert people.    He certainly said he would

never have agreed to close the blue gates.     That incidentally

was Mr. Lock's view as well and it was Mr. Marshall's view.

Dr. Nicholson's view was a little bit more ambivalent.       In

one respect he agreed that if the Fire ..Service said you could

close it then he would not dispute it but he also agreed that

he could see the dangers.    He was not running the show anyway

but all the people on the ground, apart from the Fire

Service, tended to think that closing    the gates was not

necessarily the best way of doing it.    Mr. Mole said that       so

far as he was concerned not only did he disapprove of closing

the gates but in fact it was not done    and what is more, so

far as he knew, fans had not been diverted.

       I think you may take the view that the evidence which

you heard both from Mr. Lock and also Mr. Creaser does tend

to show, certainly when Mr. Lock was in charge, he was aware

certainly of a diversion.   He said he would not have approved

of the gates but he would have expected people to be diverted

if it were necessary.   The difficulty with Mr. L o c k ’s

evidence on this point is that he never had a Semi Final and,

therefore, although he did have one big match I think, most

of his matches tended to be smaller and it may be that his

diversions were more connected with sequential filling than
                                                                     101

with the terrace as a whole filling.       Nevertheless it was in

his mind.     Mr. Creaser said something very similar, if you

remember, because he said that when he used to be an

Inspector he frequently used to go round.       He used to assess

the situation.     He used to run round to the Control Box or

radio up to them and say,    "Can you get any more in?     What

shall we do ?” and that is when he was working on the

concourse area.

        My impression, if you add all this together, is that for

reasons which we do not understand or have not had any

evidence o n , the senior Commanders, certainly from M r . M o l e 's

time onward, appeared not to have been aware that this was in

fact happening.    They all said closing, sealing or diverting

the tunnel was an option which would have been open to them

if they had realised the need for it and if they had thought

that was what they should do but they had all worked on the

premise, in particular with regard to the 1988 match, that

nothing had happened on the concourse.       The fans had in fact

successfully found their own level.

        The evidence is I think relatively conclusive that in

fact in 1988 there was some diversion of fans from the centre

pens.    He heard from lots of witnesses.     There was Mr.

Kenworthy, Mr. Devonside and Mr. H u t t , for instance.      They

all said that the blue gates were shut at around 14.30 and

that they were diverted towards the side.       They did not

recollect any Officers outside, from which one would have to

deduce that the Officers were on the inside.        That would fit
in with ex-Sergeant Higgins who said that he had in fact shut

the gates in 1988.

     I was not entirely happy with ex-Sergeant Higgins'

evidence.   I do not blame him for this, of course, because by

the time he was asked as to what had happened in 1988 it was

well into 1989 and there was no reason why he should in 1988

have realised he might be asked a question as to the closure

or otherwise of blue gates which suddenly became a matter of

vital importance.    The fact that he could not fully remember

is not surprising but I was not entirely convinced that the

closure was of the length - if he was right then the gates

were closed for an hour or there abouts.   That did not strike

me as being right or indeed necessary because if everybody

was in by three then there is no point in having the gates

closed against people coming in.   In fact you want them open

so that they can come out if they want to but he did say he

had closed them.




                                         /There is a certain.-
                                                                103




        There is a certain amount of conflict here because

Inspector Crawford also came along.         Do you remember

Inspector Cranford, he came near the end?         lie was not

in charge of those gates but he said that one of his

Serial men actually closed the gates bun he insisted

that it was only one leaf, everybody else said it was

two l&aves of those who said that the leaves were shut

and it was difficult to work out the precise timing.

        We also had people who claimed that they went

through.      We had two chaps.     Was it Mr. Griffiths and

Mr.. Owens?     I can't remember.     They came together.

One of them said the gates were shut and they had to

go round the side and the other one said:         "I went

down the tunnel" so there was a little bit of conflict

of evidence but I think taking it as a whole my

impression of the evidence is that there was certainly

diversion away from the centre pens for a period of

time.

        An interesting point which in fact Mrs. McBrien

made, and this if you like is one of the reasons why

I am a bit doubtful about the length of time of

Sergeant Higgins.      If the gates were shut as early

as 2.30 and if some of the other witnesses who had been

in Pen 3 in 1988 were right that it was very overcrowded,

very uncomfortable and that people climbed out halfway

through in order to get up into the Stands,        it is

difficult to see how that occurred if nobody was able
                                                           104




to get in, because Mrs.’McBrien postulated that they

would have had to come in from the sides, in other words

that they were coming through the radial gates and if you

had had Officers on those radial gates in 19S8 then that

would not nave happened.
      It is a possibility.   After all as I have already

indicated there were two people whom we lcnow who actually

did that who came in tov/ards the centre and in fact that

was one of the reasons tnat M r • Mole said uhoss radial

fences were put up to prevent natural movement towards

the centre.
      It is not impossible but my feeling is, it is a

matter for you, they might not have been shut for

quite as long as we might think, but be that as it may

the point is it does not really matter, we are not

concerned about the 1988 match, the point is that

the premise on which the "find your own level" was

proceeding appears to have been mistaken as far as t'.ie

senior Officers were concerned.

      We spent quite a bit of time finding out whether

these matters had been reported and it was quite clear

from what everybody said who could have reported the;a

that they had not and again I make no criticism of them,

they did not see the need for it, it was just an everyday

event as far as they were concerned.    Somebody said

there were too many people in there; shut the gates for

a while; open them, it was just something that did not
                                                           105
                                                          *




need reporting and in particular if this was regular

practice at league matches and sequential filling

situations, they may not have appreciated the difference

between the semi-final and a normal league match, but the

fact was that the people who were running the show were

doing it on a premise which in fact turned out was

incorrect.   You will have to decide to v/hat extent ii

any that is significant in the overall picture.

      How I want to turn to the second point which flows

from this, namely that if there were no specific numbers

allocated to these pens how did you know when they were

full or that they had reached the capacity stated in

the Safety Certificate which was 10,100 divided by so

many square metres and multiplied by the appropriate

5.4 or whatever it is?

      I thought it was very interesting that on the whole

most of the witnesses whom we heard and indeed most of

us when we looked at the photographs said:    "Oh well

that Pen 2 does not look too bad.    That one is even

emptier Pen 6 or Pen 1“ .

      I thought it was very interesting that when

Dr. Nicholson did his count he did if you remember take

a small segment of Pen 2, just did a sliver, and the

count which he got was 5 per square metre which was in

fact as near as you like to the capacity, the stated

capacity absolutely evenly distributed across the
                                                              a


terraces.
                                                                  106




         I am ignoring all the problems about the fact

that the calculations may have been slightly wrong because

the plans were inaccurate.       I don't think it matters to

us   .
         The point that I think is significant is that the

people who look at those it would appear to me that neither

the people who were looking in nor the people who were

within the pen perceived that density as being the

correct density calculated in accordance with the Safety

Certificate and that everybody from fans through to Club;

Officers' Working Party and Police had a visual image

of a totally different packing density certainly for

the centre than the strict calculation and in fact of

course it would be exceedingly difficult to look at any

area and say:       "Well we have got 5.4 people per square

metre here or 3.2" whatever the number might be.

         Mr. Lock    I think put it neatly. He said:   "I know

the difference       between a full and half empty bottle"

and what he was saying      is "I look and if it looks to me

as if that is        full it is full and if it isn't it is not".

         That was in fact the system which operated and it was

the only system which could operate on the evidence because

there were no means of counting the people in.         Once you

discarded Dr. Eastwood's schemes, for whatever reason,

it was impossible to accurately control the numbers in

each pen.

         Dr. Eastwood made great play of those two words
                                                              107




"accurate control".    I think you may remember that.   I

always thought lawyers were pedantic when it came to

words.    I think I have changed my mind and I think the

engineers and the surveyors are infinitely worse, may

be because they are mathematicians they are used to even

more precision than legal people, but it was quite clear

that Dr. Eastwood tended to put great stress on words.

Whether or not that was done with hindsight is a matter

for you to judge.

         I don't want at this stage to come on to the

actual assessment of what people thought about the pens.

I will come on to' that a bit later because I just wanted

to finish off with the Safety Certificate.

         The Safety Certificate clearly stipulated there

should be Stewards and that they should be doing various

activities and it is also patently clear that for whatever

reason there was no provision in the Safety Certificate

that there should be any Stewards on the terraces.      We

heard from several Stewards, including Mr. Thorpe who

was the Chief Steward on the West Stand, that he did not

see it as his role to steward the terraces by having

men or women, for that matter, on the terraces, and he

said, this was not directed at Liverpool it was directed

at any away team, he said he would not put his people

on the terraces.     Whether that is correct or not.I don't

know.     I am not experienced in standing on terraces but
                                                              108




that was his view and iri~Eact he said when he went to a

football match somewhere he was on some terrace and there

weren't any Stewards on those either.    It sounded a little

bit as if he was not pleased by that when he said it.

That was rny impression.   The fact was that there weren't^

      Whether that is a good thing or whether that is

something that ought to have been allowed to continue

is not I think an issue which we can deal with but I

think it is plain that nobody took any objection to it;

that it was clearly within the contemplation of the

enforcing Authority because they did not object.    On

the contrary they wrote it into the Safety Certificate

themselves.   They listed all the minimum numbers and

excluded the terrace.

      Of course it did say "minimum numbers" and I

suppose if you wanted to argue about that you coulc say:

"Oh yes it was 'minimum' but we didn't say that you

mustn't or that you shouldn't".    That is true.   You

can't get away from that.

      There were other duties and obligations under this

Safety Certificate, in particular the testing of the

barriers.

       Dr. Eastwood undertook this task and in fact the

barrier in question which broke had been tested the

previous year.

       There was, as you will remember an enormous amount

of time spent on discussing, well not an enormous amount,
                                                            109




we did spend some time with Dr. Nicholson in the main

discussing the method of testing the barrier and whether

or   not you should re-zero the gauge and matters of that

sort.
        I think if I sum up what I perceive to be the

evidence on this matter it is this:    whether or not

that was the best methoo or not, Dr. Nicholson s opinion
                                               v
in the end was that despite the rust being there, and

there was some rust, that barrier would have withstood

a test load.




                        I think there was a lot of
     I think there was a lot of argument as to whether it

would have withstood the test load without rust and with

rust and whether the bars were simply supported or

otherwise.   You do not need to concern yourselves with any

of that because that is all a lot of technical stuff which I

do not think we need to be too worried about.

My understanding of his evidence was although you could

criticise the method, and you could argue that it was not

the best interpretation, though he said it was a possible

one, and you could say it might have been an interpretation

which he would not. have adopted and one could say that

perhaps one ought to adopt the most stringent interpretation

whenever there were possible interpretations, nevertheless

it was an interpretation open to Dr. Eastwood on the wording

of the Green Guide.

     He also said two other things which I think are

important.   The new Green Guide actually provides for re­

zeroing on the first test so it goes with Dr. Eastwood's

view that you get a bedding in, but it does not allow re­

zeroing on second and subsequent pulls.    The other point he

made was that insofar as vrtiere barriers had gone to zero,

where there had been a deflection and come back fully, the

next pull was never worse.    Do you understand?    Now if

that is right it is an important point because barrier 124.A

did come back to zero on its last pull, whatever the merits

or demerits of the methodology.

     Dr. Eastwood had another obligation, which was to
                                                               Ill




inspect the ground and to issue what were known as

Inspection Certificates.      My impression was that

Dr. Eastwood probably understood the Certificate better than

most and he was right when he said he was not doing an

appraisal, he was carrying out an inspection.      Whether

everybody else understood that I am not so sure, and in

particular I am not so sure whether the enforcing authority

clearly understood it.

     On the other hand, the enforcing authority itself did

inspections.   You remember all this discussion about

Officers' Working Parties and then Advisory Groups.        They

went round either once or twice a year and did their own

inspections and made comments.      In fact on at least one

occasion - 1986 - unfortunately for Mr. Bownes it was not

only that that was the one meeting where the Minutes are

missing, but also in fact the first inspection he attended

and the issue of removing barrier 144 came up.         It was not

suggested by the club, it was not even suggested by

Dr. Eastwood, it was suggested by a member of the Officers'

Working Party - in fact, the Police.      I will come back to

that in a moment.   However, the decision to remove that

barrier was taken by the Officers' Working Party,

communicated to the club and the club in effect did it,

having been asked to do it.      Dr. Eastwood said that his

man, Mr. Strange, was there.      They had discussed it and one

of the things that had worried them was that long drop from

the tunnel down to the end barrier.      He had been along.
                                                              112




He had looked at it and although he could see pluses and

minuses for it, on balance he thought it was acceptable and

therefore he did not raise any objection to it.

     I think it would be very hard to see how either he or

the club in that instance could possibly...      They certainly

could not be reckless and, indeed, I am not saying for a

moment that any of the others were in this regard.     In fact

the impression I got if you listened to the evidence about

the Officers' Working Party, Dr. Eastwood, the Police

involvement, I got the following impression from the

evidence, that a lot of the initiative for change came from

the Police.     They wanted the radial fences.    They wanted

various other matters done which they perceived to be

improvements.     In fact Dr. Eastwood quite clearly said that

he had no concerns about the ground because everything that

had been done, as far as he could see, were improvements.

More barriers ware being put in.     They were stronger.      The

radial fences had been erected.     Various other things had

been done which as far as he was concerned improved the

safety.   I want you to guard against the possibility of

saying that because somebody makes a suggestion then he must

carry the can if other people approve it and it turns out it

may not have been the best idea.     If you were to take that

view it would naan that nobody in his right mind would ever

make a suggestion for an improvement.     Whenever you make

suggestions, obviously you would like to think that people

would consider it, but in all these cases the Officers'
                                                               113




Working Party,     of which the Police, of course, were a

member, but not     the specialist members when it came either

to means of escape or to structure or to the strength of

barriers or to their positioning.         I think we have got to

be very careful that we do not, and there was a very big

temptation I think in the light of some of the questioning,

of saying if you are policing a match you have taken over

the ground.      I do not think that would be a fair and proper

construction to put on the duties of the Police.

        In fact, my impression, if you look at the evidence of

Mr. Bownes, Mr. Butler, Mr. Seaman, Mr. Lock, Mr. Mackrell,

take those as a group, my impression was that Dr. Eastwood

considered that the Officers' Working Party was the arbiter

on safety and that if they approved a particular course then

that was acceptable, subject to his using his head which I

think he did.       Otherwise he would not have gone to inspect

the 144 barrier     suggestion.     He would have just have said,

"Well, they want it.      I am not bothered."      He did not do

that.      He did go and look.

        There was that on the one hand.

        The club were the effectors.      They did the work that

was required of them.      They fulfilled their obligations

by...      Take barrier 144.     It was put to them and they had

to report it back as a change.         They did all that.   They

spent the money in order to do the work.

        My impression of the evidence was that the club were

almost bystanders within their own ground and in some ways
                                                               114




they had to be because they were in no position to argue, if

you like, with the Officers' Working Party.     If they said

they wanted this done, they could discuss it but at the end

of the day although they were the holders of the Certificate

and in law responsible,    they were in a very difficult

position because they had to comply with what was required

and asked of them.

        That, I think, is sufficient with regard to this

aspect.      It reminds you, I think, sufficiently of the

matters but in a nutshell.      Although I think, as you will

hear in the light of the evidence,    the failure of the

barrier within that pen played a role and possibly a major

role in the number of deaths within pen 3, as opposed to pen

4, because that is the major difference between those two

pens.      I know there is a minor one with regard to the

barrier at the top.     The major difference is the fracture

of the barrier and if you look at the location of where the

deceased were - we just saw it on that plan - it is quite

clear that it was around that barrier.      It is also true to

say that it was towards the little gate.

        I think it is impossible, in the light of

Dr. Nicholson's evidence for you to come to a conclusion

there was any recklessness in the way the testing and the

inspections were carried out by Dr. Eastwood.        They may not

have been perfect.     There may have been errors.      In fact

we know the gates did not open the right way.        The 12 metre

rule may not have been strictly adhered to, although
                                                             115




Mr. Seaman was quite clear about that.       He said he did not

think it applied because there weren't any gangways.       You

cannot have the 12 metre rule if there weren't any gangways.

Put it another way, everybody was within 12 metres of a

gangway because a gangway was everywhere.      He did not say

that but that is what it means.       He also said, of course,

that as far as they were concerned those little gates had

never formed part of their computation.      All their

computation had been based on the tunnel and the two radial

gates and the little gates were bonuses.      It did not matter

that they were there.      If they had not been there it would

not have made any difference to them.

     As I was saying, I do not think on the evidence which

you have heard it would be possible for you to conclude, and

this I base mainly on Dr. Nicholson's assessment, that the

testing of the barrier which was done in such a way that it

could be described as reckless, or that the way it was

tested, there would have been an obvious and serious risk of

injury to somebody simply on the basis of the method of

testing of that barrier.

     It is four o'clock and I will stop.      Now tomorrow, one

o'clock, but remember we are going to go on until five

o'clock.




           (The Inquests were adjourned until 1.00 pm

                        the following day)
HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                  Before

 S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

         (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                     At

              The Town Hall,
                Sheffield.

                     On

             22nd March, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, L t d .,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
              SEVENTY SIXTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                    FRIDAY,   22nd MARCH 1991

     THE CORONER:    Before I begin can I say congratulations.

I don't know whether you knew why we had to postpone but

it was a driving test and I felt that we had to allow

this juror to pass a n d indeed he didi     Well don?©.     I

was not going to say anything if he had failed.           No, after

what four months of faithful attendance I did not think it

was right to ask for a postponement.

     Right, now I will press on and if you remember I had

been discussing the issue of the barrier and I think I

had dealt with that and I will noW move forward, I hope

slightly faster today.        I am not quite so tired this after­

noon as I was yesterday evening.

      I want to spend a few minutes on the Operational

Order which has been before you and parts of which we have

looked at from time to time.

      I think summing-up the evidence in respect of that

Operational Order one can say this:        first of all it

was in standard form and followed a pattern which had been

 in existence what appeared for years and certainly it was

 in the same format as the 1987/88 semi-finals and indeed

 you saw one or two other Operational Orders in which we

 sort of introduced little bits and you can see that the

 presentation is the same.

      The Order is drafted in sequential way with an intention

 and it is quite clear that the word safety appears in that

 intention.   It is part of the intention to achieve both
law and order and safety, and whilst I am on that several

of the Officers whom I asked, and indeed quite often in

cross-examination, said that they did not necessarily

distinguish between law and order and safety.

     Of course the two things are not identical.     You

can have a law and order situation where there is no

safety aspect at all.    You can have a safety situation

where there is no law and order aspect and you can have

a law and order situation where there are considerable

safety aspects.

     Take a fight in the park as occurred in 1988.     They

said 1988 was a wonderful match, went off completely

smoothly, they only had one stabbing.    One stabbing is

quite a big thing to the person who gets stabbed but that

is a law and order and safety consideration if you allow

that to spread, so I think it would be wise, and I think

the evidence is there, that the two things are not mutually

exclusive but overlap to a certain extent but of course

not entirely.

     There is no doubt that the Order does not refer in

terms to overcrowding.     There is nothing that we have

heard from anybody to say that the Order contains those

words.

     In fact I did find the word "safety" in it in at

least one other place but it was only a passing comment

and it is not significant, but it certainly does not

refer to "overcrowding".
                                                               3




        There is no specific reference in the Order as far

as we heard in evidence to monitoring fans, nor is there

anything that we heard of which specifically refers to

diversion of fans at the tunnel•

        On the other hand, as I have said* the Order follows

a completely standard format and has been in use for

years.
        You have also got to remember that it is addressed

to Officers in a Police Force who are familiar with the

drafting of orders, of this form, and who as an in­

numerable number of them told us, are (a) used to using

their own initiative, indeed expected to use their own

initiative, so what you have to think about the Order

insofar as you have to think about it at all, and you

may not, is does it actually matter that the words

"overcrowding" "monitoring" do not appear?

        Theoretically you may say it does.   In practice

though does it matter, and the reason why I say this

is because of the evidence of people saying that they

had expected to do monitoring.      In fact as far as I

remember there were only two Officers, one Officer

who in fact shielded behind the Order in the sense that

he said - and that was Inspector Crawford - who said:

 "My job was at the turnstiles and there was nothing

 in the Order to say I should go down the terraces"

 which is true, he was quite correct, but he went on to

 say:     "In any case I could not have done because I

 had my work cut out doing what I understood I was supposed

 to d o ."
                                                             4




    The other person who said he had had no specific

instruction with regard to monitoring as far as I

remember was P.C. Bichard, though he did add, but whether

he had instructions or not, he would have said something

if he thought it appropriate.

     I think nearly everybody else to whom the matter

was put and particularly let's take one example.

Inspector Bullis, he knows nothing about monitoring

there but he was quite clear that if he had seen something

on the terraces he would have acted, and in fact if you

think back to his evidence you will remember that he

did on his evidence, if you accept it.

     The Order, of course in 1989 as I say followed

standard format and was signed by Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield who had only recently been appointed.

     It did have variations in it, mainly of a minor

nature.   The most major alteration was that there had

been a reduction in manpower and that was done after

thought because by looking at what was done in 1988 it

was felt that the numbers of Officers    could be reduced.

I think there was one Serial disappeared but what they

did was they made them slightly smaller.

     In the event, of course, with hindsight we might

have said it would have been good to have had those

70, perhaps another 700, but that would be hindsight.

At the time they were working on what they thought they

needed.
    Mr. Mole when he was here said that although he

did not sign the Order he has no doubt that if it had

been put in front of him if he had still been in charge

he would have done and I think that is an important

factor in thinking about whether or not this Order, was

so unusual that there was something odd about it.




                       It was also
    A

                                                                      6



              It was also, of course, approved formally by
    B    Mr. Jackson, the Assistant Chief Constable and if you think

        •| back to some of the other Officers whom we have heard,

         Superintendent Marshall, Mr. Creaser, various others to whom

         the bits about the Order were put, nobody in fact said that

    £ | they had found anything reprehensible or worrying or

         something that they would not wish to operate under.

         Mr. Lock, of course, who no longer was a policeman at the

         time and who I do not think actually saw the 1989 Order, but

         I think he had seen earlier Orders, also, as I understood

         him, did not really complain with regard to the format.

              In summary then with regard to the Order and in

         particular in regard to its presentation and format, I think

         you may feel that whatever criticism one can now make of it

gj       with regard to omissions, contingency plans which were not

         in it, not covering this, that and the third thing at the

         time, certainly all the witnesses whom we have heard did not

         perceive those matters as giving rise to an obvious and

         serious risk of injury to anybody, much less that they were

         indifferent to it or that they saw it and deliberately went

         ahead and took it.

              If that is right it will be possible for you to exclude

         from your consideration when the time comes people who were

         not present on the day in question, such as, for instance,

         Chief Superintendent Mole.




H
     I have already alluded to the fact that several

Officers in evidence, say, Inspector Bullas, Mr. Murray as

well, Mr. Goddard, Mr. Duckenfield and several others

indicated that if they had seen something which caused them

concern they would have expected to report it.      Indeed the

senior Officers went a bit further and said that there was a

reliance upon the initiative and the capability of the

people within the ground.

     Whether that was a wise reliance one might have to

think about, but nevertheless that was in fact the practice

and that was the evidence, but it is for you to decide what

weight, if any, you put on it.

     I do not want to deal with all the things which could

have been done and which weren't done, but I do want to deal

with this one matter, namely, the postponement of the

kick-off and the principles relating to it.      There seems to

me to be relatively little doubt from the evidence of

Messrs. Mole, Duckenfield, Murray, Bichard and Marshall, and

indeed Goddard, that I can think of and it may be even

Mr. Creaser, I am not sure, that the underlying grounds for

postponing a kick-off in general terms were that if

something happened away from the ground or, as Mr. Mole put

it, which he felt responsible for, such as causing huge

delays on the motorway because of his intensive checking

procedures and where it was clear that the arrival of the

fans had been delayed by matters over which they had no
 control, then that might be a case where it would be

appropriate to delay kick-off.

     The corollary to that, of course, is that simple

 lateness in itself is not a ground for delaying kick-off.

     We were told various reasons why that should be so.

For instance, if you delay kick-off every time somebody is

late, all they feared would happen and you may think that

was a genuine fear, is that kick-off would get later and

later because people would know if they didn't turn up there

would be a delay.

     You have to balance the benefit to the late-comers

against the disadvantages to the people within the stadium

and you also have to balance the known fact that whatever

you do there will always be some who will be late.

Therefore you have to draw the line at some point and say,

"We are going to start whether everybody is here or not."

     If you look at the total numbers of the people who were

outside at, say, ten to three, a rough estimate might be

3,000/4,000 - say 4,000.   A substantial number, of course,

a huge number in conventional terms.   In relation to the

total numbers in the stadium it was 8%, which, if you put it

like that, becomes a relatively small number.   If Mr. Lock

was right that between 2% and 3% in fact never turn up at

most matches, for whatever reason, and another 2% or 3% are

late anyway, you are approaching 1,500/2,000 people anyway

of that sort of order, taking the stadium as a whole.     Of
course, if you only look at the Leppings Lane end and maybe

it would be fairer if I said that, the percentages, of

course, are doubled for practical purposes in relation to

the Leppings Lane end terraces - 4,200 out of 24,000 - that

is one-sixth, which is definitely more than what I have

said, so I don't want to be unfair on that, but you do have

to take the percentages - at least you can think about

percentages but you do not necessarily have to make too much

of them.

     The effect on what happens within the ground is, of

course, quite an important matter because it is one thing to

say that people within the ground would be a little bit

disappointed, nothing more.   It is another if you consider

there may be uproar.   I thought Officers in this respect

were quite fair because they did not actually go into a

great deal of detail as to what could happen.   They merely

said that problems could arise.   If you can get frustration

outside you can also get frustration inside and so it is

clearly a matter which should be considered in normal

circumstances.

     If that is so, then a discussion or a plan to postpone

kick-off only in certain circumstances to me - it is a

matter for you - but to me in itself merely because it does

not go on to say, "But of course if there is danger to life

and limb the different considerations would have to be

applied," does not necessary make it invalid.   In fact, all
the senior Officers said, and I think it is implicit in the

whole approach,   that if a situation arose which necessitated

change from what they had planned, then they would, in the

words of one or two of them, react to it.




           That is the first thing
                                                                .11




     That is the first thing.     Secondly, in order to

postpone kick-off there are several things that need to

happen.     First of all you have got to take the decision.

No, that is wrong.     First of all, you have got to

recognise that it is something that you ought to be

thinking about; secondly, you have got to take a decision;

thirdly you have got to be able to communicate it to those

who are going to put it into effect; and fourthly you have

got to communicate it to those who need to know.        It is

the last point which of course is the crucial one because

if you are unable for whatever reason to communicate the

decision,    then whatever decision you might take is

irrelevant.

     With regard to the question of communication, and the

only people who had to be communicated with were of course

the people outside the turnstiles, I was interested in

this particular aspect, as to whether or not, how

effective if at all, communications would have been.        You

will remember we heard from several people.     First of all

we heard from P.C. Buxton who said that he had received

the message to come to Leppings Lane.     He had picked it up

on the talk-through and he made his way there.     He then

describes various messages which he broadcast, including

messages about not pushing and getting the mounted

Officers, and although I don't think he actually told us

here, Mr. Marshall told us that he heard subsequently that
                                                                  12


Inspector Ellis, whom we- did not hear but who also

broadcast from that land rover, did actually, entirely

unjustifiably because he had no back up for it, say that

kick-off had been postponed.       Those are three things.

        We know, I tbin'fc w e know', that -those messages were

actually transmitted.      This is where corroboration comes

in because we heard from Mr. Bartholomew.        Do you remember

Mr. Bartholomew?      He is the local resident who worked in

the bakery and he was a very interesting witness.         He was

the one who went to stroke the horses with his young lady

and in the end finished up on a slight mound.         He said

that he could hear the message clear as a bell.         He did

not use those words but that is my summing-up of what he

said.     So we have evidence from him.

        In addition to that there were several other people

who said they heard a message from the land rover.         Some

heard one message.      For example, Mr. Wright.did hear a

message about pushing or not going forward, but if you

remember he was the young man whom I asked whether or not,

why did he not stop when he heard the message, and the

sense of what he said as I understood him was, "He didn't

tell me to stop and besides it wasn't addressed to me

personally so I just went forward", but he did hear it so

there is somebody else who heard it.

        Mr. Hewstone heard messages; Mr. Sykes heard

messages; and all these who I have mentioned up to now
                                                            .13




actually heard messages,    they saw the land rover, the^

heard the message and they understood the words, or some

of the words.

     There are several other people like that:     Mr.

Waring, Inspector o-r Chief Inspector Waring, h e heard., ,

messages but he was very close to the land rover, in fact.

Mr. Creaser did, Chief Inspector Creaser, and P.S. Smith

certainly heard it but it is questionable whether he

understood it.     Mr. Wilson, another witness, saw the land

rover but did not hear anything.     Mr. Lackey saw it and

heard it but did not comprehend the sounds.     That is not a

criticism of him by the way, it is just one of those

things.    Mr. Pitt saw it but he did not distinguish

anything either.     Mr. Marshall also saw it and in fact was

unable to tell us what was said though he did describe the

impression he gained was that P.C. Buxton was, I think he

used the word "imploring" people, but he did not hear.

This is, I think, probably a retrospective impression and

I would not put too much weight on it.     The important

thing about it is actually that he either did not hear it

or he cannot remember what he heard.

     In addition to that I asked I don't know how many

more of the supporters whether they saw, heard or

understood what was said from the land rover, and I will

give you just a few names.     I am not going to read them

all out.   There was a Mr. Murray, Mr. Hinton, A. P. Jones,
Stephanie Jones, Mr. Knowle-s, Mr. Gould, Mr. Kenworthy,

Mr. Glover, Mr. McMahon, Mr. Ball, Mr. Hollinrake, Mr.

Twydale, Mr. Cully - you remember Mr. Cully, a very

interesting witness he was - Mr. Abbott, Mr. Lloyd.     I

have just taken a few names out.   All of these were there

at the right time.   It is no use asking people who were

there at half-past-1.   None of these, in evidence at

least, were able to tell us that they saw it, heard it or

understood it.

     It does not, of course, alter the fact that the

decision to postpone the match was never taken, but it

does illustrate may be Mr. Marshall's view, which is

first, that even if that decision had been taken it would

have been ineffective because of the problems with

communication.

     In addition to the land rover, of course, there were

also tannoys outside the Ground and we heard from the

people in the Control Box that arrangements were made or

instructions were given for tannoy messages to be passed

at the Leppings Lane end to request people not to push,

and even fewer people heard it but at least three admitted

to hearing it.   One was Mr. Boardman.   Stephen Boardman, I

thought personally, was a very good and impressive

witness.   Mr. Waring referred to it, and Superintendent

Mackay who was standing near Gate C most of the time.       He

was one of the Detective Superintendents who had nothing
                                                             •15



as .s_uch to do with t h e   he was there to look out for

mal deeds.    He did not catch anybody in the event, he told

us, but that is what he was there for.     So he heard it.

     The only reason why I mention that is because it

confirms again that some sort' of message wass' iir fact

passed to those crowds and the question of course is that

if a decision to postpone the kick-off had been taken

would it in fact have been effective?

     I might as well deal with this all in one fell swoop.

We have had quite a bit of discussion as to why Mr.

Duckenfield thought about postponing kick-off at 2.30, and

whether or not this was connected with the discussion and

comment when they looked at the screens at 2.30 and could

see that there was a substantial number of people outside.

Mr. Murray told him that he thought that people would get

in and at around that time Mr. Duckenfield says, and Mr.

Murray confirms it, and Mr. Bichard I believe also says

that he overheard some sort of conversation regarding

kick-off postponement, said words to the effect, "What is

our policy?   What is our understanding?   What is the

arrangement with regard to the postponement of kick-off?” ,

and Mr. Murray told him what I have just said.




                                           Both of them
     Both of them I think went on to say that they treated

postponement of kick-off as flexible and not as inviolate

policy.     You may feel that, in fact, the basic principle was

the policy and what you were being told was,     "Yes, that was

our policy but we might be prepared to change our mind if

circumstances dictated it.      Mr. Duckenfield could easily have

said they were related and I, for one, would have nothing

particularly reprehensible about that because if you are

looking at a crowd and saying,     "Can we get them in?" it does

not necessarily take much thought to think,     "If we cannot get

them in or something goes wrong what shall we do about

postponing kick-off?" and he did not say that in fact.      He

said he could not remember any specific connection but it may

well be that whether he can remember it or not one thought

may have sparked the other.

     He also said that he did consider the possibility later

on and his description of later on was words to the effect he

had a vision or recollection of a semi-circle of

photographers near the players' entrance and the players were

either just out or were about to come out and he discarded

the idea.

     You also heard, of course, from Sergeant Goddard about

PC Buxton.     In fact PC Buxton made that request.   He said,

"Postpone the kick-off" and when he came through Mr. Goddard

replied,    "It is too late.   The players are already on the

field", and that was the end of the matter.      He could not do

any more than that.
    A
                                                                                    17
                 There are two things about th i s .   M r . Murray quite

         clearly described Sergeant Goddard as a reactive man and~he

         responded to matters quickly.       When we saw him I thought that

    B|   was quite a good description.       Superintendent Murray, very

         properly I thought and honourably, with regard to this

         particular comment of Sergeant Goddard's which probably

         exceeded his authority to say "Too late" but Mr. Murray

         accepted it in Court here.      He said,   "I was next to him.     I

         heard him.     I could have countermanded him if I had wanted

         to.     I d i d n ’t because I thought that decision was right".       I

         must say I liked that.      I thought that was an honourable

         thing to do but whether it is honourable or not is neither

         here nor there.

                 What I think important is, what time was it when the

         request came through because that is a much more significant

         factor.     If Sergeant Goddard was right and there is no

         evidence to say he is not and, in fact, it ties in with what

         Mr. Duckenfield says, that the players were on the pitch then

         the gates, Gate C at least was already open for at least two

         minutes.     The main opening I mean at 15.52, players come on

         the pitch at 15.54, and that is two minutes.         Apart from the

         fact that he may have got his reasoning wrong he probably was

         right that it was too late to postpone the kick-off at that

         time.     It might well have been an option if it had been taken

         at an earlier time, that is true, but at that time it is up

         to you, of course, entirely when you weigh the evidence, it

         may well have been too late.




H
                                                                           18

               I now want to turn just very briefly to the rest of Dr.

       Nicholson's evidence.     I have already dealt with the barrier -

       and the only thing I did not mention was his leaning crowd

    B| model.     Do you remember that?   It was a very interesting

       idea.    The point about it is that it is a mathematical model.

       Sbmebddy lias sat down and worked out and said,   "if you lean a

       piece of metal at 10 degrees and it weighs 70 kilograms and

       you stash so many behind all leaning at this angle, how many

       do you need to break a barrier which will break at a certain

       strength?"    Then you just count how many people you have,

       both this way and across and you then see whether you can fit

       them into the gap that you have.

            What he was saying was at the densities which we had you

       could fit that number of people in and so the barrier could

       have broken even if there had been no movement.    That was the

      point of it.     Whether that is true or not nobody knows

      because until you actually get your bits of metal and lean

      them you cannot really tell.     You heard Mr. Toulson and all

      this argument as to whether one had allowed for the length of

      the feet and where was the centre of gravity and so on.        You

      can see what tremendous mathematical problems there are in

      working it out quite apart from the fact that it assumes you

      have a completely homogenous unit all leaning at 10 degrees

      all at the same time.

           It was interesting because it demonstrated something

      about the barrier and that is why I think it was useful.        Dr.

      Eastwood, of course, pointed out that he had been to places

      where barriers had it much lower, I think 2 kilonewt'ons, and




H
                                                                       19
why on earth those did not break, if that model is absolutely

right, it is difficult to explain but I do not think we need

concern our heads about it.

      Dr. Nicholson did two other things as well.       First of

all, he worked out how many people had entered through

turnstiles A to G and how many had entered through Gate C.

Do you remember how he described it?       They had actually

counted.        It must have been a thankless task but that is what

they did and they compared the entries.       They had a

yardstick.       They could tell whether they were doing it right

because they knew how many people had come in according to

the computer count through the turnstiles.       Not, of course,

through the gate because that was uncontrolled.        By and large

their counts tallied pretty accurately with the computer

counts except for one turnstile which, when they examined it,

they discovered had a fault on it.       So they took their figure

which was higher.

      What they worked out on the best estimate, and they gave

us three figures, was 9,734, the maximum that would have got

through.     The count was actually 9,267 and then they added

what looks like about 500 on for possible errors and then

they said that the absolute maximum it could have been would

have been 10,124.       Let us just take the best estimate of

9,724 because it is near enough.       They did not count the

people who came in through Gate B.       That was because they

could n o t .    They were no pictures and you cannot do it unless

you have the video evidence.       They did not count the people

who came in through Gate A either for the same reason.          Gate
    A
                                                                      20
        B numbers we do not know exactly but Mr. Ridge, who was the

        gateman there, estimated them at around 500.



    B




                                         /Gate A we will.




H
                                                            21




     Gate A we will come to in a little while but there

is some dispute as to where they went.

     Mr. Hurst you will remember said - he was a Programme

Seller - he said they were diverted into the North-West

terrace and terracing concourse.

     Sergeant Higgins who formed a cordon saids      "No,

they were not, they went straight down behind the

North Stand".

     It is an irreconcilable difference because

Sergeant Higgins was quite clear that they had their

cordon across the exit into the terracing; Mr. Hurst

was quite clear that they didn't.

     Although it is irreconcilable I was not entirely

convinced by Mr. Hurst's account for two reasons:      first

of all his timing was not terribly accurate.     Secondly -

in fact in the beginning it was abysmally wrong, he said

2.15 but he then when we showed him his statement, as we

did with many people and I don't blame him for getting

his timing wrong, it is two years on - but secondly I

was not entirely convinced for two reasons:      first of

all if the people who were going through Gate A were

in fact people outside turnstiles 1-16, which they were,

they were supposed to go either into the Stands or to

the North Stand, so there was no particular reason

for diverting them.   That is the first thing.

     The second thing is what was going to happen to

the people who were coming through the turnstiles anyway?
                                                             22




    Mr. Hurst dealt with it.   He said they were sort

of dammed up and held back or they wormed their way across

the flow, but it strikes me as odd that if you are taking

people in through an area which is directed towards

Stands and turnstiles that people will, just   if they

have a North Stand ticket - just go somewhere else

without saying a word.   Because they may not have had

tickets and indeed if Mr. Cobb is to be believed, do

you remember Mr. Cobb, he was the gateman there who

gave the most graphic account of what was going on

outside his gate, he certainly described a substantial

number of fans who were shaking his gate and who were

waving cash at him, you know, with a view to getting in,

so there may have been a mixture there, we don't actually

know how many.

     If you take 500 say through Gate B and I don't know,

say another 500 through Gate A who finished up on the

North-West terrace and the terrace, if you add that to

the best estimate you get about 10,700 which is over

capacity but not so greatly over capacity, it is less

than what it used to be before the Safety Certificate

came into force.

     It is interesting because it raises the question

as to what about all these ticketless fans?    Where were

they or how many were there?   If you remember we spent

a good bit of time thinking about ticketless fans as

well.
     Ticketless fans:      again a very difficult question

in this particular disaster.     There seems to be little

doubt that there were quite a number about and indeed

to a certain extent it is to be expected at any big match

and they said so*   If you have tickettouts...then you

are going to have ticketless fans and vice-versa and

there were some and we know    one was arrested, do you

remember, and they told us how many tickets he had, I

have forgotten now, about £700 and 34 tickets, something

like that and there may have been more, so there must

have been some ticketless fans.

      A ticketless fan is actually only significant

if he gets into the stadium without a ticket, on the

assumption of course that he is not using forged tickets

or that people are not going in with forged tickets

and there was not any evidence that that was occurring.

      If I am a ticket tout and I have 100 tickets and

I meet 100 people who have not got tickets and I give

them to them then I have not multiplied, I have not

increased the allocation, I have merely redistributed

it from those who ought to have come in with those

tickets to those who are now advancing upon the

turnstiles with them.   The fact that it may cause

congestion, block the footpaths, cause law and order

problems in effect does not have anything to do with the

capacity in the stadium.     Ticketless fans is simply

significant if he gets in without a ticket, in other
                                                               24




words if you have a huge influx of people who should not

be there because they have no authority to enter the

ground, the authority to enter the ground being the

ticket.

      Now as I say I have had a little look at this

because it interested me to a certain extent and there

were a lot of people who said they were approached,

Mr. Hewstone.     I will just pick one or two names.

You may find that I tend to pick the same names because

where there is no controversy there is no reason why

we should not pick them.     Mr. Creaser saw them.     He

estimated them at around 200.     I think Mr. Marshall

estimated them at about 600, you remember.     That was

the highest estimate that we had from anybody.       Various

people estimated them between 150, 70, 20, all different

sorts of numbers.     What you must not do is add them all

up because one ticketless fan may be seen by 100 ticket«*2

people and indeed we have heard from several people

say, Ruth Cobb the Officer near the Penistone Road, *h«

said ticketless fans were actually walking against the

stream and I think Mr. Hewstone said that as well because

if you think about it that is what you want to be, you

want to walk against the stream in order to approach

people and says     "Have you got a ticket?   Have you got

spares?" or whatever it is that you want to ask,

so not only can't you say, sum them, but in addition

we had at least one witness who told us, his name
just escapes me, it may come back to roe in a little while

but they were in a group of five and one of them did not

have a ticket and all five of them went out looking for

this ticket, so you had five people saying "Spares", they

only wanted one ticket, so the problem of deciding how

many true genuine ticketless fans there were is one which

I don't think we will be able to resolve satisfactorily

except to say there were, I am sure, some.

      I will come perhaps in a little bit more detail

to this in a moment or two.

      So you might ask if there were a lot of ticketless

fans and if they all came in or some of them came in

through the gates, how is it that the capacity was not

exceeded or not exceeded to any substantial extent?

If we use Dr. Nicholson's figure it was not exceeded at

all, that is disallowing Gates B and C.

      How come that that should be?   You may think that

the answer to it is that in fact ticketed people were

actually kept out and we know that is in fact the case,

at least when we say "we know" we have heard evidence

- you may not believe it - but we have heard evidence

and that was Sergeant Lomas and I think one or two

others but certainly Sergeant Lomas said that when he

came down to the ground after the call had gone for

people to get in, and I think Inspector Waring said

it as well, they shut the gates and they would not let

people in and so there were latecomers or if you like

real latecomers who were kept out.    We don't know
exactly how many but that might be an explanation for

this anomaly.

       Be that as it may of the 10,000-odd people that

should have come through the turnstiles 2,240

according to Dr. Nicholson came through Gate C and

they came through at a considerably faster rate than

they   would have done if they had come through the

turnstiles.     I am not    talking now about them rushing

in or anything like that, that is not what I am saying,

I am merely saying because of the aperture of the gate

and because there was no obstruction by a turnstile

or anything else, people could enter faster. I think

it is probably about 3-1, so for those five or six

minutes when that gate was wide open there was not

only a substantial number coming in but they were

coming in at a comparatively fast rate in relation to

the turnstiles.

       Don't misunderstand me.       I am not talking about

people running in headlong or anything like that.        I

think the evidence if you look at the video and indeed

all the evidence for virtually everybody there was an

initial rush, which was not surprising, and you can see

it actually on Dr. Nicholson's graph there is a little

blip on it and after that the inflow was steady but

it was substantial.        That is what he told us with regard

to that.

       The other thing he did was he did sums as to how
                                                            27




many people were in Pens 3 and 4 and unluckily for us

the quality - the photograph is over there, we will give

you that the big one to take in with you so you can see,

it is turned the wrong way now but you remember it, it

is a big enlargement - unluckily for us the photograph

which he had to work with for 14.52 which would have

been a most interesting comparison, the quality of that

photograph was not of a standard which enabled him to

say with confidence that the figure which he calculated

from it was accurate, and the figure at 14.52 that he

did work out for Pen 3 was 678 and for Pen 4 was 821.

      I repeat:   Dr. Nicholson was not happy with those

figures and did not want reliance placed upon them and

what he was in effect saying was that the figures

probably are on the low side.   He was not saying that

they were too high.   I think what worried him was that

he had not, because of the angle and the obstructions

and things, he could not be sure that he had actually

managed to get all the noses.   You remember he was

counting the noses.   Nevertheless you could take those

as minimum figures with that restriction but don't

treat them as gospel, but he did count the numbers in

the pens at 15.03 or was it 15.02, anyway, 15.02 I

think, and the figures he came up with was 1,576 which

gave you a density of 8.4 on average for Pen 3, and Pen 4

he calculated at 1,115 and I think the density was

comparable.   Do you remember he discussed that.
                                      /I am sorry ....
I am sorry, that is wrong, the pen 4 number was 1,607.

Clearly on his figures the capacity - there were no

capacities for the pen, do you remember that?    There was a

capacity for the terrace - 10,100 - but there wasn't a

specific capacity for each pen.    Of course you could sit

down and work it out because, if you got a ruler and

measured it and worked out how many square metres, how many

barriers, what allowances for slope, and so you could work

out what the capacity would have been if that had been the

total terrace.    However, at the time there wasn't one.     If

you applied a 5.4 number of people per square metre then the

capacity was exceeded by around 45%.

     Indeed, I think when he wa*s being cross-examined by

Mr. King with regard to figures, he confirmed that the

bottom - do you remember, he did it in horizontal sections -

the top three rows they could do fairly well, but the bottom

one they made a guess.   They said, "We will take a packing

of 10," because they tried 10 and they had found you could

get 10 people into a square metre without any particular

discomfort and they thought that was a fair figure.

However, if you increased that to 16 per square metre, which

apparently is the absolute top limit you could get into that

space - obviously a lot more than 5.4, three times as much,

then the total number of people in pens 3 and 4 had gone up

to about 3,800.   That would give an even higher level of

overcrowding.
     Now the reason that I have spent a few minutes on this,

although Dr. Nicholson wasn't very happy with his figure on

pens 3 and 4, at 14.52 of 680 and 821, which were the two

figures in round terms, that is 1,500.     If you were to

subtract that figure from your 3,800 approximately, which

would be the maximum you would have in that pen at that

time, it leaves you 2,300, which is remarkably close to the

total number of people who came in through Gate C.

     If you were to accept the view that the majority of the

people who entered when Gate   C was opened, and do not

forget, of course, people were coming in through the

turnstiles as well and the turnstiles were working at that

stage at about 1,000 an hour, again Dr. Nicholson showed us

that on the graph, between 800 and 1,000 an hour and there

were seven of them.   You can work it out for yourselves.

If you accept the proposition that the majority of people

went down the tunnel then you may feel that Dr. Nicholson's

figures for 14.52 are not that far out.   If, of course, you

take the view that the majority did not go through, then you

are back with Dr. Nicholson's original estimate.

     It is very important to think about this.     You may not

be able to resolve it but at least you ought to ask

yourselves the question, because it becomes terribly

relevant when you come to the issue as to what the pens

looked like when people were observing them, particularly

the track Officers.   It is obvious that, isn't it?       If you
 took this view, which I have just summed, if you like, what

 the figures seem to show, then you may form one view as to

what the terrace looked like.         We have got photographs as

well and if you add it all up together you may be able to

make some judgment as to what it looked like at the time,

together with - a point which I have not yet got to - the

evidence of the people who were actually within the pens.

We will deal with those in a little while.

      If I can just summarise and then we will stop for ten

minutes.     What Dr. Nicholson is saying is this:      a

substantial number of people came through Gate C, 2,240 on

his best estimate.      Altogether through Gate C and through

the turnstiles about 9,000-plus.         The capacity of the

terraces at 15.02 were substantially exceeded, whichever way

you look at it.      The packing of the terrace at 14.52 was

different.    He was not entirely happy with his figures, but

he did look at some photographs and he did agree that

although he was not willing to estimate numbers, that it

looked different, but you can do that for yourselves.          You

do not need Dr. Nicholson to do that for you.

     He also dealt with the barrier and its testing which I

have already dealt with.         That is Dr. Nicholson’s evidence

- important because it is independent.         We will have ten

minutes.
                             m


                       (Short adjournment)
        Before I move on to what I was about to do, I think I

ought just to mention and go back and retrace my steps to

the Safety Certificate.          I have already dealt with it to a

certain extent but I just want to refer to Mr. Bownes and

Mr. Butler whom we heard for about three and a naif days

altogether.

        Mr.    Bownes is or   was, I do not know what his present

position       is, Chief Licensing    Officer.   He was in one of the

departments of the Council and when South Yorkshire Countv

Council disappeared Sheffield became the responsible

Authority and the safety at sportsgrounds just landed on his

desk.         It is another licence and he has got to deal with

it.      I have no doubt he did to the best of his ability.

However, it was not the only licence he was dealing with,

that was perfectly plain.            He had many, many other tasks to

do.

        The    second thing   is, of course, that although he wasn't

a qualified lawyer he         was in a legal department so not

unnaturally he would approach a document as most of us would

do who are lawyers, which is to say, "Let's look at the

wording, and if we don't like it we will amend it."              In

fact at a relatively early stage, 1987, he decided, very

sensibly, to write around and find out how many other people

drafted their certificates, with a view to upgrading this

Certificate.         His emphasis was, and he quite clearly told

us this, was on the wording.            He wanted to get the text
right.   He was not particularly interested in the schedule

and, of course, in some respect the schedule is the most

important thing in the light of what we now know.

     He was in the further very disadvantageous position in

that he had taken over after five years' run.      The

terracing was divided by lateral fencing and there was

nothing on the Certificate to show that it had been amended

from its original form.    It is true there was correspondence

in the file about the installation of the lateral fencing

and so on, but he probably took - and I cannot see how you

can blame him for this - the view that if the previous

Licensing Authority had approved the situation, had not felt

it necessary to make a change to the Certificate, why should

he when he took over?     He very sensibly, initially at

least, took the view, "We change nothing until we know what

we are doing," or words to that effect.     Then, as I say, he

was trying to get this wording right.

     It took a long time, and in fact it had not been done

by the time the disaster occurred.      Now I am not saying for

a minute that if it had been done it would actually have

made any difference because if all that would have happened

would have been to change the wording and put the old

schedule in, we would have been in exactly the same position

as we are in today, or as it was then.     Of course there is

a new one now, needless to say, with a new schedule.
    A
                                                                       33




               He, of course - I will call him a lawyer.      He is not
    B   technically a lawyer, an administrator would be a better

    •|word, and so he was dependent upon input from the Officers'

        Working Party;    of which he was a member as well because he

        attended meetings, if you like, a scribe, administrator,

        secretary, chairman, though he did say it was his

        responsibility to be in charge.     His department was the

        senior one, if you like.     Nevertheless, he was in this

        situation that if he did not get the information fed to him

        there was nothing he could do.     If he went round the ground

        and looked at it and people said that looked OK, he was in

        no position to say it wasn't.     If there was a discussion

        that a barrier should be removed he had no expertise to say

        it shouldn't.    I suppose he could have insisted on the

        Certificate being amended, but it would not have altered the

        facts on the ground.    He had to accept what people told

        him.    He had basically the Fire Service, Mr. Butler, or

        people in that part of the Local Authority.        It wasn't

        always Mr. Butler.     In fact we were a little unfair to

        Mr. Butler, I think, on reflection.    He wasn't the roost

        senior person we could have got, but we did, and in a way he

        had quite a hard time with us.    There was that, the

        engineering side if you like, the input from that.        There

        was the Fire Service and there was the Police.       That is

        basically it.




H
     He did make some changes.   He changed the visits from

twice a year to once a year, for reasons which are not

entirely clear to me apart from that presumably saves time.

Also I think he tended to get people to go individually

rather than collectively and to communicate either by

meetings or by writing.

     Well, that is good in some ways and bad in others

because you lose time and you also lose interplay.




      Although he would not accept
                                                          •35




Although he would not accept it when I put it to him, my

overall impression was that there was a risk that things

might fall between two stools because it was difficult to

know where the demarcation line was.   They did try, they

had schedules and they said, "That is your primary

responsibility.   Consult us on this", but it is not an

easy task when you are doing a complex matter such as the

requirements under the Safety Certificate, or the Act, to

make sure that nothing gets overlooked.

     .1 think it may well be that mistakes were made with

regard --   certainly what we now seem to think is pretty

plain, that these lateral fences do segment the terrace in

a very decided way, does not as far as I can tell seem to

have impinged itself with' any great moment on anybody in

that Officers Working Party, or Mr. Bownes, and I say this

because if it had then no doubt they would have taken some

steps to say hang on, we can't do this.   I admit that both

Mr. Butler and Mr. Seamen took the view that the Police

were supposed to man those gates, but I have already

reminded you a little bit of that evidence so I am not

repeating it.

     Now, apart from the fact that Mr. Bownes dealt with

it and whenever he was asked what would have happened he

said that the Council would do this or the Council would

do that, or the Council would do the third thing, the

Council of course are strictly speaking the elected
                                                           .36




representatives, who work in committees and in council

meetings, and to whom papers are passed up by Mr. Bownes

or the people in his department, and then they take

action.   As far as I could see from the evidence which we

heard, apart from two or three initial communications

acquainting the Council with the fact that they were now

responsible under the Safety in Sports Ground Act and that

various administrative and reform matters would be put in

hand, but as I say it looked mainly towards legal drafting

rather than anything else, the Council as such had next to

no knowledge of what was going on.

     In some ways that does not surprise me because if you

think about the Council being a group of elected

representatives, in a specialist matter like safety in

sports grounds it is very difficult to see what useful

contribution they can make, apart from saying yes or no,

unless they happen to have a real expert in the Council

who says, "Hang on, I can see something here which is

wrong", it is difficult to see what —     they have to rely

upon their staff.    I don't see how they can avoid it.

     The point that I want to make with regard to the

Council is this.    If that is right, that they were not

aware of the details of what was going on, and if Mr.

Bownes was not the directing mind of the Council, which I

am certain he was not, then I think it must follow that

the Council as such, and indeed the City of Sheffield,
                                                              .37




cannot itself be held to have been reckless in respect to

this particular event.

     Now what about the rest of them, Mr. Bownes, Mr.

Butler, the people in the Officers Working Group, the

people who ac.ted2    In a .nutshell i,t seems ta rae quite

clear that all of them, and I have already mentioned Dr.

Eastwood yesterday, but all of them including the Police

who were associated with this Group, did not prior to this

event see the Stadium or the way it was constructed, or

the signing or indeed anything else as constituting a

serious and obvious risk of injury to anybody.       They did

not as far as one can tell and from the evidence, ever

contemplate the possibility that people might enter

through exit gates.    That was not within their

contemplation, and you may feel that was not only not

within their contemplation, it was not really foreseeable

realistically.   If that is so, and despite whatever

criticisms one might want to make about slowness and

falling between two stools and people perhaps interfering

to a greater or lesser extent more than they should have

done, taking decisions as to moving barriers and so on, it

might have been wiser to have dealt with it in other ways,

it seems to me that all these people who were not on site

on 15th April are, apart from anything else, too remote in

a causative sense to be considered, when you come to

consider the issue of whether or not any of the deceased
                                                             •38




died by way of unlawful killing or being unlawfully

killed.

     I want to make it absolutely clear that if I say

that, why on earth am I spending time talking about all

this to you, and the reason is of course that we a r e n o t

actually just thinking about unlawfully killed.     I told

you right at the beginning that a coroner's inquest is a

fact finding exercise not a fault finding exercise, and

not only is it right therefore that we should find out

what the facts are, it does not matter whether or not

somebody is to be blamed, even if nobody was to be blamer*.

you still want to find out the facts, and so it is only

right that one should deal with that.     Secondly, even as !

mentioned to you if you were to consider say accidental

death and misadventure, it is important to know what nai

gone before because that is something which you may hav*

to take into consideration when you weigh that particular

verdict, if you get to it.

     The third and may be most important point of all i*

that just because I say "x" or "y" should be excluded fro*

your deliberation when it comes to thinking about

unlawfully killed, does not mean to say that the

construction of the Stadium, the fact that there was a

Safety Certificate, that there were numbers fixed, that

the terraces were treated as a whole by all these people,

that nobody had seen or foreseen any particular
 difficulty, that may well be very, very important when you

 come to consider the issue in respect of anybody whose

 conduct you could consider in such a way as to ask

 yourself the question, or the seven questions which Lord

 Justice Watkins listed, the main one of which, if you

 remember, is was this person reckless, did he do or omit

 to do an act which was both obvious and where there was an

 obvious and serious risk of injury, and when he did that

 act or omission was he indifferent to it, or did he

 recognise the risk but nevertheless go on to take it?

 Just so that you don't worry about the legal definition, I

 am going to repeat this to you later on sometime, very

 slowly, so that you can write it down.   Not all two hours

 of what I said, just the core, the seven bits basically,

 so that you have got it with you if you want it.     You

 don't have to write it down if you can remember it, but if

yyou want to write it down I will give you the chance.

      I now want to move on.   I think that is enough on

 that, and I want to just talk for a moment or two about

 Dr. Nicholl.   Dr. Nicholl was the statistician - do you

remember him?   He came on the 14th.   I am not going to

weary you with all the figures.   There is absolutely no

need for me to do this, but I am going to summarise for

you as briefly as I can the substance of what he said.

The first thing I want to say, because I know this is an

 important point, the word alcohol is going to be mentioned
                                                              .4 °


and it is not always popular but it ha& played a part in

these proceedings and it is absolutely essential that we

deal with it correctly and properly, and that we give it

no more and no less than its appropriate weight in the

story as a whole.

     What I want to say with regard to the point about

alcohol is this.     Dr. Nicholl you remember chose 80

milligrams per 100 millilitres as the demarcation point.

In fact, everybody has taken that figure - Dr. Forest did

as well - because we all know what it is.       We all know

that below that limit you are allowed to drive a car and

above that limit you are not.       It is easy, that is all

that figure tells us.     What it does not tell us is to what

extent —      no, start again.    It is definitely not illegal

to walk around the streets with say 100 milligrams or 120

milligrams.     It may be if you are rolling drunk then

somebody might arrest you for that, but there is nothing

illegal or improper even in having, so long as you are not

driving, in having more than 80 milligrams per 100

millilitres in your blood.       So I do not want you, just

because we have used that as a cut off point, to say well

anybody above 80 is so inebriated that he is awful, but

you have to recognise it as simply a useful demarcation

point.

     I have often taken the view, and I may be wrong on

this, that the reason why one has a demarcation point at
80 is because at that point it can be .statistically shown

that there is certainly a fall off in quality of response

and manoeuvrability and so on, but it does not necessarily

mean that it is perceived by the driver.     In other words,

he may well feel okay in himself and yet objectively, if

he were to be tested, you would be able to demonstrate a

falling off, and that is why after no doubt a lot of

research somebody chose that particular figure.

     Dr. Forest when he was here and he gave us all the

figures on the people who had died, was asked as to what

he thought about the levels, at what level did it become

significant, and he replied, as all good scientists do,

with excessive caution.    In fact, it is fair to say that

there is actually very little research on the behavioural

aspects of alcohol.   I think that if I had been able to

find a really good expert on this subject I would have had

him, because I would have been interested quite apart fror

anything else.   It is only fair to say that there is not

very much work that I have been able to discover, in fact

I have not been able to discover any.

     What Dr. Forest said was this.     First of all he said

that give or take a smallish man and all things being

equal, 2% pints or so equals about 80 milligrams.




                          Then he was asked what effect
                                                                   42
       Then he was asked about the effect this might have and

his response was that people vary enormously; that studies

done by the Road Traffic Research Laboratory had shown that

people with blood alcohol content between 20 and 40 had some

impairment to their ability to respond to a novel situation,

and so in f act levels considerably lower1 than 8(T milligrams.

On the other hand, he had met people with 200 to 300

milligrams of alcohol in their blood and who on casual

conversation you would not have known there was anything

wrong with them at all.     He also gave us an example, on the

other side of the coin again, of one young mem who died due

to alcohol problems with less than 80 milligrams.     So, it is

exceedingly varied, the effect.

       Therefore, when we look at the figures and say,    "So many

had more than 80 or so many had less than 80", be careful how

much value you put on it.    You are the jury and so your own

experience and common intelligence is why you are here.      You

can bring to bear some of your own knowledge of people you

have seen.    I hesitate to say it, yourselves, if you have had

a certain amount to drink.    I say that because I do not want

you to make a mistake on this.    All right?   So what have we

got?

       First of all. Dr. Nicholl dealt with age and sex

distribution.    In a nutshell, what he was able to demonstrate

from the figures was that there was a difference between the

group of people who had been identified as entering the

stadium before 2.30 from the group of people who had been

identified as entering the stadium after 2.30, excluding 13
                                                                 43

where nobody knew what time they had come.     So he basically

worked on a slightly smaller number and what he had done, if

you remember, we had them split into Gate Cs and so on but he

had compared the various columns and he had found that all

that group were homogenous.     They were all basically the same

class.   The interesting thing he found was that the earlier

group tended to have more ladies in and more of the really

young people.     That is not to say, of course, there were not

really any group of young people in the second group as well

but statistically speaking there were more in the early

group.

     So there was a difference in age distribution and you

can remember he did some clever tricks by excluding women and

so on to see if it was ladies or really young ones who caused

this difference and he said, "No, it didn't.    Even if you

excluded those and excluded the obvious different ones there

was still a difference between the groups".     He also showed

that there was a difference between the likelihood of

somebody having had a drink as comp cored between those two

groups and it is not really entirely surprising if you think

about it because if you are outside on what was a beautiful

day until say 2.30 and then you come to the ground, unless

you happen to just arrive in your car the chances are that

you are going to have a drink somewhere because you are going

to be thirsty, if nothing else.    So it is not entirely

surprising.     This is the interesting thing, that he was able

to demonstrate this statistically.
f




                                                                                44
                  The other thing he was able to demonstrate because of

             this statistical methodology and because of the figures which

             he worked out was that a surprising number of the people who

        B|   died had entered after 2.30 and that relatively few, 19

             positive ones, had been in early.    Now I find that

             interesting because one's first thoughts about when one

             thinks about what happened is that it was the people who were

             in the pen who died and, in fact, that does not appear to oe

             the case.    That may be quite an interesting and significant

             finding when we have a look at the evidence a little bit

             further.    Have you understood what I have summed up for you

             as to what he said?

                  The last point he made was that provided no one had died

             from alcohol poisoning - and nobody had because we heard from

             the pathologist on that - then it was possible in view

             statistically to take that group of people and relate it as

             being a representative sample of the crowd as a whole.      What

             that means is that you can take, say the 19 people who came

             in early, and you can say that they represent;   they are

             similar in distribution, age, sex, alcohol intake and what

             have you to all the people who came in before 2.30 and

             similarly for the ones who came in later.   Now that is also,

             if that is correct, and my understanding also of his evidence

             was that he felt that the statistics were fairly sound but,

             of course, statistics are only statistics, which is why I

             said to you earlier that you must take things with a degree

             of caution but that is what he said and there was no reason

             why he should say - that is what he worked out and it is a




    H
matter for you to decide to what extent, if at all, you

accept i t .                              ~

      I will remind you of some of the evidence which to a

certain extent supports his findings or, putting it another

way, his findings support some of the evidence which various

people have given to us.    Have you understood what I have

said about Dr. Nicholl?    I do not want to say any more unless

- yes, I do want to say one other thing.       We spent a lot of

time discussing how many people have had no alcohol, whether

the majority had had a drink or not and so on and, of course,

it all depends how you add up the figures, does it not?         If

you want to add the under 80 milligrams into the people who

had over 80 milligrams then you get a higher percentage of

people who had had a drink, if you turn it the other way

round and say,   "So what, you can't really complain because

they would even have been allowed to drive a car?” then you

get a figure going the other way.

     I think that the easiest way of thinking about this is

to ignore that middle group when it comes to saying what is

what because that is the movable feast.       You can put it   in

wherever you want to place your argument and we sure not       here

to argue about niceties.   I think you can summarise his

evidence that of the later entrants, the 2.30 pluses, 43 per

cent had had nothing to drink or negligible amounts - I call

that nothing - and 22 per cent were over 80 milligrams.         So

that is a fifth in round terms of the people who were there

who died who had had more than 80.    Of course,    some may have

only been 81 but then some of the ones under 80 may have been
                                                                       46

79.     So we will ignore that.   The early entrants, the

percentages are that 68 per cent had had nothing to drink and

5 per cent were over 80.     So you can see there is quite a big

difference in those two groups.

        It is very interesting because you may recollect

Superintendent Mackay, h e w a s the Detective Superirit^ndtent

who was standing somewhere around, and he was asked about

alcohol and people drinking and he gave an estimate.        He

said,    "I thought about a fifth” , about a thousand, I think he

said people,    "had had perhaps a little bit too much to

drink".     That is remarkably close to Dr. Nicholl's figures

and Mr. Mackay did not, of course, have those figures.           Dr.

Nicholl did not do any work on this until fairly recently.

That, I thought, was quite interesting.

        I now want to turn to the events of the day.   I will do

it as briefly as I can.     We did not, in fact, deal with it in

so many words but there was the possibility that the reason

that people arrived at Leppings Lane after 2.30 was because

they actually got to Sheffield so late.     In other words,

there were such delays on the roads or whatever that they

were just delayed.     As in every situation there were people

who did arrive late.     You may remember once I think I twigged

this point I asked nearly everybody,    "What time did you

leave, what time did you arrive, what time did you get to

Leppings Lane?" and I asked in fact nearly everybody but I

was more interested in the ones who came by coach.

        Out of about 20 which I have written down, I am not

saying I have got every single one,'seven of these coaches
                                                                47
arrived after two, and one is five past two, but there were

some who did not get in until 2.40.   So clearly there were

some that got in quite late but the rest of them, 13 out of

those 20 that I know of, arrived before two.   In fact, in one

of them there was a group of five and that was Mr. Langley

who was a coach driver.   He was a very interesting witness

because he gave a very clear and calm account really of his

approach to the ground and getting through the turnstiles

then he gave that very, very moving and graphic description

of what it was like within the pen.   It was not much use f^r

finding out times and so on but it did give feeling to the

situation.   That was Mr. Langley.

     So if those figures sure right - and those are all the

figures we have got to work on - then a large number of the

coaches did come before two o'clock either to Sheffield or to

the environments.   If somebody stops off at Barnsley and gets

there at twelve then I treat that as if it were Sheffield.

In fact, if you look at the individual people, again a large

number of people if you remember, they were either in

Sheffield or within its environment relatively early.




                                        /That is not to.
                                                          48




That is not to say that there weren't some who, for

whatever reason, were delayed and arrived in town so

to speak late.

      Irrespective of what time they arrived in Sheffield

it seems incontrovertible that the large number' of

people got to the ground at 2.30 or after and you can

demonstrate this.   You can certainly demonstrate it from

the number of people who entered the turnstile.       Do you

remember   Dr. Nicholson produced a graph.    It is a straight

line and you read it off.    At the   bottom is the time and

the cross side are the numbers and you can work out from

that exactly what time somebody, you know how many people

had been through.   Less than half, it would appear, got

through by 2.30 so the definition of the other half

or plus were outside and that seems to be the evidence

of nearly everybody who had anything to do with the

organisation of the ground.

      Sergeant Lomas, do you remember him?      He was the

chap up    Catchbar Lane.   I did not think his estimations

were all   that good.   I think like everybody else

estimating numbers may not necessarily be his strong

point but he used a graphic expression, if you remember.

He said "it looked as if a tap had been turned on at

2.30, as if the crowd just suddenly came down" and

certainly if you look at the video whatever might have

been happening at the turnstiles, however slow or

otherwise it might have been, that did not affect the
                                                           49




numbers of peole whom you can see coming down the roads.

        You have got the videos? you have got the

compilation; you have got the split screen video and

you have got the shortened version and the photographs

in those bundles where you can look at them whichever

way you wish.

        Indeed not only is that what Lomas; Creaser;

Marshall; Waring; the mounted Officers say, but in

addition to that a large number of the fans say it of

the ones whom we have had.    They say, you know:    "We

got to the ground at 2.30.    We got to the ground at

2.35.    We got to the ground at 2.40."   They may say,

for whatever reason, but that was a time they got to

Leppings Lane and I don't think it is necessary for me

to remind you by name because I don't think it would

help you much if I read you long lists of supporters'

names saying that is what they said.      You will remember that,

I think, quite clearly from the evidence, the import was

the same.

        There is considerably more variation and argument

as to what extent if any alcohol had been consumed by

those people.

        Mow it is important to remember that Dr. Nicholls

is only working on a sample, so when one thinks about

what other people have had to say, you can measure their

evidence against the statistical analyses and vice-versa.

        I thought it was quite interesting because you
may remember perhaps we had a few too many, but we had

quite a few Licensees in the beginning and the upshot

I think of all their evidence was this, barring one and

we subsequently had somebody else along to give us an

adjustment to the figures, but if we exclude that parti­

cular bit of evidence the evidence of all the Licensees

was that consumption was in the range of 3-4 pints, on

average; that the behaviour of the fans was good, it

might have been boisterous and so on but they were

excited and apart from one Licensee who was in a small

pub who said:    "I was not displeased to see them go"

and even he did not say they had done anything particularly

heinously wrong, he just thought that perhaps if they

stayed a little bit longer they might have another two

pints and that might have been too much, so he was happy

to see them go and it was only a very small pub on the

outskirts I think, Mr. Knight, but the vast majority

of the publicans had no real complaints.    It is important

to recognise that.    On the other hand their pubs were

full.

        We also heard from a whole load of people who

live in the neighbourhood or who were in the streets

and of course what one person perceives as boisterousness

another person perceives as aggression and I tried to

match, if I can use that term, some people who felt

there was absolutely nothing to be seen and others

like Mrs. Guilland-Cumming, she found the atmosphere
                                                                51




threatening.    Make of that what you will.      I don't

think that it is     terribly significant.   It may be

that   she just is   not used to large crowds.

       We also asked quite a lot of people asto whether

they   saw people    carrying or drinking out of    cans and

we got a distribution from those who said:         "I did not

see a single one" which you may treat with a certain

degree of caution, I think.      It may be that they did

not see a single one but it is highly unlikely that

there was not a single person drinking any alcohol, to

those who said they saw at least 50% and we got a nice

spread of opinion.

       Of course you don't walk around thinking:         "How

many people are carrying cans?      I must count them all

u p ” and Mr. King on several occasions, quite rightly,

managed to demonstrate that very well, but if you take

it overall I think the upshot of it was that there were

clearly people who were in pubs and were drinking; there

were clearly people who had gone to off-licences who

were drinking; there were clearly people who were walking

down the street who were drinking.      I think the exact

percentage is not that important but if we take

Dr. Nicholls as a yardstick, a fifth would probably be

about right and that is in fact, as I have told you,

what Superintendent McKay estimated, which I think was

very smart of him.

       It was also very smart of Mr. Creaser because
                                                            52




he described the people whom he saw as "3 pint men" which

fits in exceedingly well with what I have just told you

the people who were selling the drinks were saying, and

it also fits in exceedingly well with Dr. Nicholson’s

figures, if you think about.

       There were of course some who had more.   I can

mention, there are several people whom I could mention.

There was one young man, perhaps I won't mention him by

name, but he had on his own admission two pints and six

cans and he was one of those young people who when he

entered through Gate C (a) had to hold on to his friend

and   (b) was terribly concerned about his footing.

Now he attributed that to the fact that he was being

carried along by the crowd.    That may be so but of course*

it does not fit in very well with a lot of the other

evidence which was that within the concourse area

there was not a big surge of people, unless he happened

to be right in the beginning, but it might well go alor.*

with the possibility that eight pints   or thereabouts

has something to do with your ability to stay steady.

         Do you remember that little girl who seemed to

spend all her afternoon running in and out of her

house?     She saw people who obviously had had a bit too

much to drink.

         Now the difficulty is that to try and determine

what effect, not the people who had had a bit too much,

we know another one, was it P.C. Best he had to go and
arrest somebody*   He said he had to do it for his own

safety, he just had to take him away because he was

so disruptive, but nobody else could stand him there

any longer, but I am not really concerned about those

people, the. real problem is trying to decide whether

or not that percentage, and let's take it as say 20%

and you may not accept that figure, you can discard it,

you can says   "No, I don't agree with that.   I think

it was less.   I think it was more" but let's to make

my life easier say 20% and let's take it that they were

the "3 pint people".   What effect if any did that have

on their behaviour and in particular on their response

or otherwise to direction and on their mood in the

sense of increasing their frustration; decreasing

their frustration; increasing their aggressiveness;

decreasing their aggressiveness, or what effect did

it have?

      The best that one can do is one can marry together

the evidence of Dr. Forest, which as I say is ambivalent

in many respects but he does say it depends on the person,

plus, and this is where you have to make the fine judgment,

the evidence of Mr. Marshall and Mr. Creaser and Mr. McKay

and other people, Mr. Sykes, who were making judgments

and assessments as to the effect that this had played,

the effectthat alcohol had played on this particular

group.

       Mr. Marshall was quite clear.   He did not say
the whole lot were drunk.     On the contrary, he said there

was a minority, a significant minority he said, but a

minority he said who were affected by alcohol.

      I think Mr. Hale asked one of the Officers:     "Is

it the man who is really drunk who is the problem or is

it the man who has just had a relative amount which does

not incapacitate him but which makes him perhaps a little

bit less amenable to somebody telling him:     'Don't do

this or do do that?'"

      You have to think about that and when you think

about it you can also think about the other people whom

we heard about.    We heard from, what is her name, the

name just escapes me, the carpenter, the lady in

Leppings Lane.    She obviously had a very bad experience

with the behaviour of some fans.     It does not really

matter whether there were 50, 100, 200, it is neither

here nor there, she had a bad experience.      Others did

as well.   We heard from various others.

      On the other hand we also heard from Mr. McGauley,

do you remember him?     He was the one with the baby in

the window in Wadsley Lane.     His description of the fans

was totally different.      In fact if he is right these

fans were exemplars of good behaviour.      He saw absolutely

nothing wrong at all.     He saw no alcohol.   He saw no

misbehaviour.     On the contrary, he contrasted it in

a most favourable way with the behaviour of other people

in his area.


                                   He was just up the road
        He was just up the road from where Sergeant Lomas was,

who told us almost the exact opposite.      You have to decide

when you weigh all these people's evidence together whom you

believe, basically, with regard to that.      In the end we

are, I think, talking of what appears to be a minority

within this group of people who were outside Leppings Lane.

The big problem is what effect, if any, can that minority

have on the group?      We have all had experience that if you

get one person in a group who is loud or misbehaves or does

something, that one person can actually cause a

disproportionate amount of disruption and that is the

problem.       You may well find that you get caught up in a

situation which may not necessarily be of your making but

which you cannot do anything about because of activities of

various other people.

        I could give you names - I don't know how many I have

got - of people who could smell alcohol in the air, people

who said they saw nothing, who said they were happy, but I

do not think we need go through it.      Perhaps I will just

mention a couple just so that you know I haven't grasped

this bit of the summing up entirely out of the air.        I have

mentioned the licensees.      Olive Mayhew I thought was an

interesting one.      That is the petrol pump lady.    She was

confused in many respects, but the one thing she did know

was how many cans she had to pick up and how many black

bags.      Also she used a very interesting word.     I thought
it was probably the best word that anybody used.       She said

it gave them courage.     I understood what that meant.        I do

not know whether you did as well, and that may well be

significant.

     Then there was Mr. Bartholomew again, whom I have

mentioned.     He saw people.    There was Louise Jane Hinton*

She was a fan.     She described people as being happy.

There was somebody called Kevin Carroll.       He saw people

with cans but he said nobody was visibly drunk.      Stephen

Boardman who was one of my favourite witnesses.       He was

young, innocent in a sense, and I thought he gave very good

and concise evidence.     He said that a few fans were

drinking from cans, or words to that effect.       As I say, I

could go on and give you more, but I am not going to.

     I have already dealt to a certain extent with

ticketless fans and the difficulty of estimating their

numbers, but I am now working my way through the day

basically.

     On that day it is clear there were some there.       It is

exceedingly difficult to work out how many, as I have

already said, in my view.       The best people whom we could

have had would have been the turnstile operators.        If we

could have had hard evidence from them, because after all,

except for the people who went through the gate, everybody

else went in through a turnstile and the majority still went

through turnstiles.     We did hear quite clearly from various
people that people went through these turnstiles, towards

the end anyway, they jumped them and various things

happened.      The first thought is, "Goodness, me, they have

all got to be ticketless.      Why should they do it

otherwise?"       However, if that is correct, and you may feel

the evidence is that the people near the front really had no

choice but to go forward, rightly or wrongly, people with

tickets may have been included in that group who jumped the

turnstiles.

     That is why when I was questioning the turnstiles

operators I tried to squeeze out of them how many of them

offered money, because if somebody offers you money then

they are not likely to have a ticket in an all-ticket match.

It was difficult.      For instance, one of the turnstile

operators said he thought 150 to 200 went through without a

ticket.     When I pressed him he said maybe 30 to 50 offered

money.      Another one said that 70 went through in his

estimation, and of those only 20 offered money.        Now I

think those are more realistic figures.      There was another

turnstile operator who said 150 went through, and I have not

got a note as to how many he claimed offered money.

     Even if you add all these together, the maximum -

forget about the money side - you are still only talking

about 300 or 400 people.     That is a lot but not a huge

amount out of 24,000.
     The other thing we spent an awful lot of time on was

the question of filters.     Do you remember?    In 1988 things

were totally different because people had been filtered and

checked for tickets and not allowed to approach the ground.

The strange thing is that nearly all the people who were

engaged in the policing exercise were not aware of this as a

routine thing, but we had evidence from various people.

There was Dr. Flenley, for example.      He said in 1988 when

he came down Catch Bar Lane he was checked.      In fact he

said the road was blocked by barriers but when I quizzed him

a bit harder he said it could not have been because there

was traffic flowing and so it could only have been the

pavement

     Then there was Mr. Jolly.    He also said he had been

stopped.   In fact, there was a young man called, I think,

Steven Barrie - Mr. Barrie anyway.      He said he saw people

turn back at Penistone Road roundabout in 1988.      I was not

entirely happy with his particular evidence because h e did

not go down Leppings Lane.    That year he was going to the

other end of the ground, so I was not sure whether he had

really seen it.

     There were others as well.      Mr. Thomas said it too,

that he had seen people at Catch Bar Lane who were held, who

were milling around.   I think that was the term he used.

When I pressed him he said they went away.
                                                                59



      Then there was Mr. Lloyd, T. W. LLoyd.      He said he had

his ticket checked and as Mr. Jolly said, he had his ticket

checked, and he also said people were turned back.

      However, most of the people who claimed they had their

ticket checked in 1988 did not actually see anybody being

turned away, because they had tickets and so they went

through and presumably most of the other people also had

tickets and went through.

      As I say, Inspector Waring, Chief Inspector Creaser,

and   indeed Mr. Marshall and Mr. Mole,   said that they were

not   aware of any formal ticket filtering system.

      Perhaps I   ought to mention one other person and that

was   Mr. Hutt.    He said his ticket was checked at the

perimeter gate.

      You have to assess this evidence to the best of your

ability.      If all of them are right then there were tickets

checks at Catch Bar Lane, ticket checks at Penistone Road,

tickets checks at the perimeter gate, quite apart from the

turnstiles.       To assume that everybody had their ticket

checked at three locations - at least two locations - plus

the turnstiles, unless people were coming in very, very

small numbers, that seems exceedingly difficult to achieve.

That in fact was the argument of the Officers.       If you want

to do it properly then you need an enormous numoer of

people.    Indeed, if you are checking tickets and also

searching for alcohol and also checking for weapons you need
    A
                                                                      60



        far more people, far more manpower, than turnstiles, because

    ® j i t must take longer to ,do that than allowing people through

     •I a turnstile with a ticket.

                Also - and this is my personal view - I question in

        fact whether, as indeed the Officer said, if they had no

    C ] power to stop people going down because they have no

        tickets, which they haven't.      So long as you are behaving

        yourself they cannot actually stop somebody going down the

        road.      It is very questionable whether you should ask them

        to do it.      I also find it questionable whether if a person

        has come from a great distance, say, Liverpool, having spent

        a good bit of money on travelling if when he is asked by an

        Officer, "Have you got a ticket?"      "No, you haven't, go

        away," he will just turn like a lamb and disappear.

                Therefore, even if it were done, the effectiveness of

        it, I am not sure.     However it was certainly the evidence

        from a lot of the fans that that did happen in 1988 and did

        not apparently in 1989.    What did happen in 1989, at least

        we know in one place it happened, Penistone Road and Catch

        Bar Lane, Ruth Cobb - not the gateman Cobb, the

        Policewoman Cobb whose job initially was to park the coaches

        in Clay Wheels Lane and then she with her Serial came down

        and they did set up what I think a lot of these fans are

        describing.     They stood on the pavement, as I understood

        her, and as fans passed them, they said, "Drink up here.

        Any weapons?"     However, she said they did not check for




H
tickets.    In fact her answer to that question was that

nearly all the people who did not have tickets were coming

the wrong way.      She was the lady who said they were coming

up the hill.

     Sergeant Lomas, who was at the other end, at Catch Bar

Lane, he clearly said they did not check for tickets in 1989

because he did not think there was any need.      He did not

see how anybody without tickets could possibly get into the

ground because they had to pass the turnstiles.

     In addition, although nobody was checked for tickets as

far as one can tell from the evidence in 1989 on the ground,

that is not to say that tickets weren't actually checked

because particularly on the coaches quite a lot of people

said that when the coaches were stopped - not all coaches

were stopped, but those which were stopped, quite a lot of

those people who were on the coaches said that Officers came

on board.      In some cases they merely asked.   In some cases

they just checked for alcohol but in other cases they seemed

to have done a pretty thorough search, including requests

for tickets.     As I say, whether they were justified in doing

that, and what they could have done...      In fact I asked

Mr. Mole what they could have done.      What can you do if you

find a ticketless fan in the coach?      Unless you have a

whole coach full.     However, that   is so unlikely to happen.

However, for some    reason they did it anyway.

     Now I am told I must stop for a few minutes.      What
time can we start on Monday?
     MR. ISAACS:      Sir at whatever time you say.   If you

think half past nine or nine o'clock.

     THE CORONER:      Is it inconvenient if we were to start

at half past nine?      I mean, it may be inconvenient, but is

it feasible?

     MR. ISAACS:      Certainly from my point of view, and if

it is not feasible to anybody else no doubt they will say

so, but half past nine is...

     MR. KING:      Sir, in consideration of the late start we

had today I see no objection to starting at 9.30 on Monday.

     THE CORONER:      Is it all right with you?   We are going

to go on until five today.     If at all possible I want to

finish so you have got a reasonable amount of time on Monday

to be considering your verdict.      The trouble is I have got

to take a decision within five minutes as to whether or not

you are going to go out on Monday, but if we can start at

9.30 on Monday I think we just about stand a chance.      We

will have a break now.

                       (Short adjournment)
     THE CORONER:      It has been mentioned to me that the

9.30 start is going to be difficult for some people.      I

have also been reflecting on it, and if I try and get you

out on Monday it will mean either that I have got to rush

and feel pressurised, err'"when I come to do each individual

deceased I will have to do that at a gallop, and I don't

want to do that.     I want to do it properly, so to speak,

or decently at least.     I think I will not aim to let you

go out on Monday, I will let you retire on Tuesday, so

that is the day to bring the toothbrushes in case of need.

That does mean that we do not have to start at 9.30 on

Monday.     Shall we start at 10?

     MR. KING:      I would have thought that 10 o'clock was

sensible.

     THE CORONER:      Let us say 10 o'clock.   No

toothbrushes on Monday then, but Tuesday instead.      You may

not need them but the point is that I do not know how long

you are going to take so I have to assume the worst, that

you will not finish, in which case you will have to stay

overnight somewhere.

     I was talking about the filtering and the fact that

it did not take place in 1989.      Whatever you might think

about that, as I say I have got my own personal views, and

in fact I explored them to a certain extent with Mr.
                                           ♦

Marshall and one or two others as to whether it was a

feasible proposition to do it, but apart from the
                                                                 * 64




    searching that we discovered on the coaches and which I

    have already mentioned to you, what I called the chicane

    at Claywheels Road/Penistone Road roundabout by Ruth Cobb

    and her crew, and she was not the only one who said that

    happened.     There was Ms. Lackey r the gentleroa»-1 have

    already mentioned, the coach driver, he saw it and I think

    there was another person, at least one other who went

    through it and actually saw it work, so it did occur at

    that place.

         There does not appear to have been any particular

    formal checks for tickets prior to the turnstile entry.

    Bearing in mind that each year you get different people

    doing different jobs, you are bound to get variance and I

    would find it very difficult to believe that failure, if

    it was a failure and I am not saying it was, to check

    tickets at a distance can be causative of a disaster

    inside the Stadium.

         We now turn to the immediate vicinity of the Ground

    and this is both more emotive, to a certain extent, and

    also begins to become much more relevant.      If I can just

    deal with the turnstiles 1-16, which we did look at very

    slightly because I wanted to get an over view of what was

    going on, but we heard from at least one Police Officer, I

    think it was P.C. Horsfield, and he described how he had

    considerable problems once he had closed the outer --- his

    perimeter gates.     As you know there are dozens, well not




H
                                                               '65



dozens but a good number of perimeter gates.     On the

section which leads to A-G there are at least three sets.

There is the big double one, there are the River Don side

and there are the ones nearest to the centre wall.        It

was, I thought , sometimes very diff icult, to .actually wo«k

out when somebody said a gate was shut or a gate was open,

which one of these various gates they were talking about.

Horsfield certainly seemed to have said that (a) people

were climbing over and (b) in the end he could not hold it

and the gate opened and people entered into the area

outside 1-16.

     Also Mr. Cobb gave pretty graphic evidence of what

was going on outside his gate and he and I think Mr. Hand-

Davis and I think Mr. Marshall and possibly others as well

- I am not sure about Mr. Creaser - described how the gate

was moving backward and forward.     Gate C, apart from Mr.

Thorpe who thought that the gate was in danger, but the

people who were actually at the gate did not perceive any

danger in relation to Gate C but Gate A was, of course, in

a different position.     If you think back to the model or

when you look at the plan, you will see that Gate A is

right next to the turnstiles so people who are heading

towards the turnstiles are automatically at the gate

whereas Gate C is round the corner, so to speak, and out

of the way.     Gate B is another gate, that did not seem to
                                                          '66




be moving, nobody mentioned that, but certainly Mr. Ridge

said there was a lot of banging which was unusual.

    Whatever the situation, when Sergeant Higgins got

there - not ex-Sergeant Higgins the other one, the

Sergeant Higgins who came with Inspector Delaney (we did

not hear Inspector Delaney but his name was mentioned),

the evidence is that they were sent round to Leppings Lane

but they never got further than Gate A because Sergeant

Higgins said when he got there there were not any

Officers, or not very many, and he stayed because he could

see assistance was required by the gatemen.   He, in fact,

radioed through and said "We have got to open the gates or

somebody will be killed".   It is very interesting that he

should have said that, bearing in mind that Mr. Marshall

had said more or less the same thing in relation to all

the gates, or at least in relation to the crowd outside.

Sergeant Higgins was only interested in his one gate,

namely Gate A.

     We have heard a lot of --- there are discrepancies

between his account, Mr. Cobb's account, and his account

and Mr. Hurst's account.    Mr. Hurst was the programme

seller immediately behind Gate A.    Mr. Cobb, if you

remember, did not like the idea of the gate being opened

when he was asked, and he said he would not do it until he

had sent the man away and told him to come back with

authority, because he was worried - Mr. Cobb was,- that
                                                             '67




the people would get into the North Stand, or

alternatively they would get behind the North Stand where

they would not be able to see anything, so he was not

happy about opening the gates.     What he wanted was he

wanted it sorted        from the front, but in the end he was-

overruled.     Hr. Higgins said, "I didn't go away, I just

told him he had to open the gate and he was a little bit

reluctant but     in the end he did do it".   So in that   sense

the accounts coincide but there is     this slight

discrepancy.    I don't think this particular discrepancy is

of any moment but I just draw it to your attention.

     There is     also the discrepancy as to where the people

went, because     Mr. Hurst, as I have already reminded you,

thought that they had been diverted - I have reminded you

of this haven't I, or have I just thought of it?       I will

remind you again.     Mr. Hurst the programme seller said

that he could see the two lines of Policemen but they were

diverted into the concourse area which led to the North

West Terrace and the Terracing, whereas Mr. Higgins said,

"Not at all, we had our line which actually blocked off

that gate and they were diverted towards the back", or

"towards the North Stand".     I did remind you, and I said

that was really an irreconcilable problem and I was a

little bit doubtful about Mr. Hurst's account.       Of course,

in the end that is clearly a decision for you, insofar as

it is relevant.     It is not terribly relevant apart from
building up the picture and also when you piece together

what was going on in the Control Room, namely that at a

point in time a request appears to have been made for

people to be sent to the North Stand in order to cope with

people coming in.    If that in fact happened then- it is

much more likely that Mr. Higgins' account is right

because there is hardly any point in sending people to the

North Stand to cope with a potential in rush if you have

diverted them somewhere else.

     I don't want to deal with the Control Room side at

the moment apart from just mentioning it at this stage.

     In'fact, the odd thing is that in some respects there

seems to have been more, certainly if you look at the

gates, more - I will use the word violence.    I don't want

you to take that in the wrong way but if the gate is being

moved in and out, it is being pushed by some means or

other.   There seems to have been more of that in

turnstiles 1-16 area than there was at the A-G end,

certainly at the gate areas.    I also find it a bit more

difficult to understand, we know that the number of

turnstiles allocated for the 10,000-odd people was only

seven, and even if we take 1,000 an hour, which was the

rate which appears to have been the assumed rate, it would

still have taken, what, an hour and a half or so to get

them through, assuming that they had all come nice and

evenly spaced.   The other lot were, of course, slightly
more.     They were 14,000 people but they did have 16

turnstiles and that would have meant that it should have

been possible to get those through in less than an hour,

so why was it you might ask yourself,    that there was such

a crush and all these problems outside those turnstiles as

well?     That might help you when coming to assess the

evidence as to what time people arrived, which I have

already dealt with and I remind you that in this respect I

think the pictures do actually help, particularly the

videos.

        If you turn to the other half, so to speak, the bit

that we are really interested in, the A-G section, I have

already said that there was a limited number turnstiles

and that has been criticised and it does not take very

long to demonstrate that at "x" number per turnstile you

can only get so many through and therefore if you have

more than half or less than half, or whatever figure you

happen to choose, and whatever time you happen to choose,

you can or you cannot get people through on the assumption

that the rates will be 750, 1,000, it does not matter what

rate you work out.




                                   I think one has to be
                                                                     70
      I think one has to be realistic in these circumstances.

 If it is true it is necessary or that the only way this match

could have been staged would have been by segregating the

supporters so that one could only use the Leppings Lane

turnstiles then the inevitable consequence is that you have

only got a limited number.      If it is right, as it appears to

be, that in 1987 and in 1988 when capacity crowds attended,

when the same turnstiles were used, we have heard not one

word of evidence that there were any problems outside the

turnstiles in either of those two years.        So it is difficult

I think to - or, if you like, you may ask yourselves the

question, if that is true then was it such an unreasonable

assumption to take it that this year the turnstiles would

work in exactly the same way as it had done in 1988 and 1989?

There is argument as to the filling of the terraces and

whether 1988 was actually identical with 1989 and I have

already alluded to that, and I will no doubt come to it

again, but we have heard absolutely nothing to suggest apart

from this one point that fans were filtered at a distance *ud

that their tickets were checked.

     From the 1988 video it would appear that the perimeter

gates outside A to G, the middle ones, and the Don the other

side, appear to have been shut for longer so that people

tended to go only straight to the funnel bar rather than have

freer access.

     Those seem to be the major differences,        it is a matter

for you to decide but the question you have to ask yourselves

is w h e t h e r 'those two differences could account for the
                                                                71
differences in the performance of the turnstiles between say

1988 and 1989.    I venture to suggest you may feel that they

cannot but, as I say, it is a matter in the end for you.      In

addition,   leaving aside the question of whether or not a

crush might develop if you have the outer gates open, which I

will come to in a moment, if the flow of fans is steady, say

if you look at the video of 1988, I do not think it would

make any difference how many gates were open because the

number of fans who were entering, it would appear, were

spread over a longer period of time.   It is the same number

but dispersed so far as one can tell more evenly.

     A lot has been said, and a great deal of time, was spent

on questioning Officers as to two matters basically (1)

whether the perimeter gates were shut too late and should

have been used as filters and (2) whether or not fans should

have been stopped at a distance to the ground and presumably

held so that you would block off not just Leppings Lane to

traffic but block off Leppings Lane to pedestrian traffic and

that you would let people through in segments from a distance

up to the perimeter gates presumably, on to the turnstile

area and so on.

     The third thing which was canvassed at great length with

several of the witnesses was whether the problem should have

been tackled from the rear or from the front.   In other

words, do you peel the people off at the back if you have got

a crowd or do you try and persuade them to move back from the

front or from the side I suppose.   The first question then
                                                                    72

that you have to deal with, and you have to consider the

evidence, is the closure of the perimeter gates.

       Do you remember Mr. Gillam?   He was the security

officer.    When he first came along I initially was not so

sure about his evidence because he seemed to say that the

gates were shut at 2.30 and stayed shut until 3.       The one

thing that he was very impressed, if you remember, was that

he said there was this young Police Officer who stood in

front of a gate and that was it.     He said,   "I don't know how

he did it because I was scared when I was on the inside" or

words to that effect.

       I think in common with anybody who gave any time

information who had not actually looked at a watch or had

some outside yardstick, he was almost certainly wrong with

regard to his timing but there were Officers who stood

outside the gate.     I think it was an Officer called PC Taylor

who may well have been the one, we do not know, but he said,

"I went out and I closed the gate and I stood outside it".

There were others, Mr. Scholey, Sergeant Proctor and Mr.

Best, who went up and made attempts to shut the gate.      The

problem is, was that too little and too late?      Before you

say,   "Yes, it was both too little and too late", you have to

ask yourselves the question as to whether or not there would

have been any point in shutting the gate before 2.30 if there

was no problem.     If there is no pressure for people to enter

there is hardly any point in having barriers.      You only need

a barrier when you realise that you have got more than you

can cope with within a certain area.
                                                                   73

       In fact, the fascinating fact about the turnstile area

is that it is almost      a mirror image of the terraces, the

tunnel and the concourse if you think about it.       If you think

about the terrace it has got a perimeter fence with a little

gate   in it, then you    have got your terrace, then you have got

your   tunnel and then you have got the concourse which is a

big open space.    Think of the area outside.     You have got

turnstiles which is a wall with little holes in them.        You

have got the terrace which is the area within the funnel bar,

you have got the narrowing which is the tunnel, and you have

got an open expanse which is Leppings Lane.       It is, I

suppose, not very surprising because of the way things are

constructed but it is actually      in some ways a     mirror      image.

It is not only that but it       has actually got a    radial      gate a

the back if you want to draw the analogy a little bit

further.

       The problem, of course, with the turnstile area is

exactly the same as with the terrace.       There is no counting

mechanism.   There is no way of knowing how many people you

have got in the area.      People are just coming down the road

and somebody at some point       has to make a judgment or

assessment that "There are       too many people in   here. We had

better shut the gates".      Just let me finish the sentence and

then we will stop.       In fact, I will not finish the sentence

because I have lost my train of thought.       We will finish it

on Monday.   We will come back to this business of the

perimeter gates and the turnstile area.       I think one of you

is not feeling well, is that right?
     In fact we have finished earlier than we thought.   I

hope you feel better soon.   I was going to say definitely by

Monday but I hope you feel better very much sooner than that.

So shall we start then at ten o'clock on Monday and

toothbrushes for Tuesday morning.

                (The Jury retired from Court)

         THE CORONER:  I am sorry but I was warned that she
   was not feeling very well and the Sergeant said he
   would keep an eye on her for me if he thought she was
   wilting and she was.    So I thought it was wiser to
   stop.   I do not thirk there is anything we need to
   discuss or do and so I wish you all a very nice
   weekend.   The plan is still to finish before Easter and
   I think we will still make it with the Jury out on
   Tuesday morning and that will give them enough time
   hopefully.

(The Inquests were adjourned until 10 am the following Monday.)
