HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER
         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                  Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                    At

              The Town Hall,
                Sheffield.

                    On

            10th January, 1991




         TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




   From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
        Official Shorthand Writers,
    55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                         INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                               Page

STATEMENT BY THE CORONER                         1


     R. MARSHALL Sworn

           By The Coroner                        2


SUBMISSION BY MR. KING                          63

ARGUMENT                                        64

FURTHER SUBMISSION BY MR. KING                  76

ARGUMENT                                        80

STATEMENT BY THE CORONER                        95
                                                      1




            TWENTY-SEVENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS
              THURSDAY, 10th JANUARY, 1991

      THE CORONER: Good morning. What we are going to do
just so that you can understand because it will be a bit
different today. In a moment or two we are going to look
for Superintendent Marshall and we will ask him to take the
oath. We will show him a number of pages which bear
signatures and all we will ask him at that point is to
identify the signature, that is all.
      When that has been done Mr. Jones is going to read
what is termed as "the recollections", it is a sort of
statement. It is technically not but it has been incorporated
into the PACE documents so we will read that first. Don't
worry about the technicalities, it is just 30 pages of typing
and he will read that or thereabouts.
      In addition to that he will also read about another
ten pages of the supplemental, a voluntary statement made
by Mr. Marshall and whilst I am on that, and this is more
to the lawyers, I have used my red pencil already because
you will hear when you hear the PACE statement that a
supplemental document was put in consisting of 19 pages.
We are only going to read from page 9 onward. This is
because I have looked at it and 1-9, although Mr. Marshall
adopted what was said, was not actually written by Mr. Marshall
and what it contains is not relevant to deciding who went
where and how, so I am going to exclude it. I am mentioning
it now so that you can understand why do they say 19 why
have we only read 10?   Okay, my decision.
      The third thing which I want to mention which I was
reminded, you may hear during the reading of the various
documents and also when you see the video references to
the number of people who had alcohol levels above certain
limits.
      Two things about that. The figure which I think is
mentioned is 21 above a certain limit. The correct figure
is actually 15. Mr. Marshall will correct that in due
course, but that was a mistake or a misreading by various
people at the time of other documentation. I mention it so
that you don't fix it in your mind and say it is 21. In
fact it is going to turn out to be 15 or thereabouts, so
once we have read all this we will break for coffee.
      Then we are going to switch the video on and by and
large we will be taking it in 45 - the video just actually
goes on and on - but we will be taking it in 45 minute
sections because that is when the audio tapes were being
changed and we will stop at the end of each 45 minutes and
we will pause and we will have coffee or tea or stretch
your legs, whatever you want to1do, because it is hard work
just sitting and watching and watching and we will work
our way through the rest of it.
      We should be finished today with all this. Hopefully
we will just be able to get Mr. Marshall back into the box
for two or three minutes or perhaps at the end of it just
to ask him one or two questions and then we will carry on
with Superintendent Marshall tomorrow as far as is appropriate
and as far as is necessary and as far as we are able.

       Can I just say one other thing so there are not any
 misunderstandings about this. I will be directing you in
 due course when I do my summing up. Reference is made     I
 have already mentioned the alcohol and I have already
 mentioned the limit and the cut-off point is being taken
 as 80 mgs., I can tell you that because that is the level
 for driving. It does not follow that because that is what
 people have used as the yardstick that that is significant
 as far as we are concerned. It is what has been said an<^
 I will try and give you some guidance as to what I feel about
 that and at the end of the day you will use your mind as to
 what the evidence is and what significance if any it has.
       Superintendent Marshall would you be kind enough to
 come forward?

                       ROGER MARSHALL Sworn

                         By THE CORONER:

. Now you are Superintendent Roger Marshall, aren't you? - A.
  That is right sir.
. Mr. Marshall, because you are a party whose conduct may be
  called in question you have the privilege under the rules to
  refuse to answer questions which are incriminating. You have
  no right to refuse to answer questions which are merely in­
  convenient or which might give rise to civil liability or
  which you would rather not answer because you just would
  rather not, but if the question is an incriminating question
  then it is a privilege which you have to say: "I don t want
  to answer that question". It is a right but not an obligation.
  You are of course entitled to answer each and every question
  which you are asked. I am telling you this now so that you have
  it in your mind as far as the evidence is concerned. If as
  we go along I spot a question or even if I ask you a question
  which I consider to be potentially incriminating I would try
  and remind you of the privilege, but it is quite possible that
  I may not spot an incriminating question so you must bear
   the general point which I have now made in mind. Is that
   clear? - A. Yes sir.




                             Q. Now what ....
                                                                               3


                                                              R.   MARSHALL




        0 . Now what I would like you to do if you would is merely
             to look a the signatures on the recollections which we
             have got and just confirm whether those are your
             signatures.  If you would just flick through the pages
    B        and make sure, because I think they are all signed,
             aren't they?

                  MR. JONES:   Yes, sir, I have got a statement here
             which is a recollection, not under the Criminal Justice
             Act, which is undated and which carries certain
             signatures.

                     THE WITNESS:    Yes, sir.

        Q.        THE CORONER:       Those are your signatures? - A.
             Yes, sir.

                  MR. JONES:   Sir, it is 24 pages and each one
             carries a signature at the bottom.

                  THE CORONER:   Would you be kind enough to pass
             the other document down as well and we might as well
D            deal with the signatures once and for all.

                  MR. JONES:   Sir, can we give the first
             recollection the "C" number 349.

                     THE CORONER:     349, yes:

        Q. Those are your signatures as well? - A. Yes, sir.

                  MR. JONES:   Sir, that is pages 9-19 and each one
             of those carries at signature at the bottom.  It is
             dated 6tn June.

                     THE CORONER:     Yes, 6th June, 1990, I assume?

                     MR. JONES:     6th June, 1990, sir, and this    will be
             C350.

                  THE CORONER:   Just before you start reading I
             want to say one other thing to the Jury.  There  will be
             several people where we have taken this type of
             statement and where we will be hearing evidence in this
             sort of way.  Not everybody will have documents to look
             at.  Not everybody was videoed, that is the first
             thing, so if we happen to be playing an audio tape as
             opposed to a video that may be because it was not done.
             Secondly, the videoing was done - I will say as an
             extra - it isn't witnin the rules of the Criminal
             Justice Act and therefore we can only use it or show it
             if the party wants it.  It is entirely their privilege.




H
                                             R. MARSHALL




     I thought it would be convenient to show the video
for various reasons.   For a start we are used to
watching TV, a lot of us, rather than listening to
radio, which is similar to listening to the audio tape,
but the point I want to make to you is whether we look
at the video or whether we look or listen to audio, or
even whether we read from the document, that makes no
difference.  You draw no inference, favourable or
otherwise, as to the mode in which the evidence is
presented to you, particularly bearing in mind what I
have said with regard to the video that everybody is
entitled to say,   No, I don't want it used".  So do not
draw any adverse inferences if I am not showing the
video in respect of somebody else, because everybody is
entitled not to have it shown, and in some cases it was
not even done.   It is very important this because
otherwise it is unfair, and I don't want that.

     Mr. Jones would you start reading?

     MR. JONES:   Yes, sir.  The recollection is headed
"Roger Marshall, Superintendent, Ecclesfield Divisional
and Sub-Divisional Headquarters, 321 The Common,
Ecclesfield, Sheffield".  The recollection reads, sir:

    "I have 27 years experience as a police officer.
    I have held a supervisory position for 21 years.
    I have policed football matches at Sheffield
    Wednesday Football Club, Sheffield United Football
    Club and Barnsley Football Club for a total of
    nine or ten years on and off.  I policed most
    major marches and demonstrations in the City
    Centre of Sheffield between 1983 and 1987.   I have
    policed 4 semi-finals - all at Hillsborough.   I
    have policed all disputes involving the National
    Union of Mineworkers, and sundry other disputes.
    I enjoy big occasions and believe that firm but
    fair policing is the key to successfully managing
    big crowds.

    In April 1988 I was a Ground Commander at
    Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield, when
    Nottingham Forest Football Club played Liverpool
    Football Club.

    I worked inside the ground and apart from minor
    problems of drunkenness, theft, and the discharge
    of a pyrotechnic during the match, the game passed
    off without serious incident.

    The earlier rounds of the 1988-89 FA Cup
    competition produced the identical fixture and it
    was learned in March 1989 that this would, once
    again, be played at Sheffield Wednesday's football
                                                      5

                                        R. MARSHALL




ground at Hillsborough:  the match to take place
on Saturday, 15th April 1989, kick-off 3.00 p.m.

As a Deputy Divisional Commander I expected to
play a key supervisory role on the day, and my
then Divisional Commander, Chief Superintendent B.
L. Mole, discussed with me at a fairly early stage
the question of my duties.  I had worked mostly
inside the ground in 1988 and therefore I agreed
this year to perform an outside duty, taking
charge of the policing of the Liverpool fans.

In due course meetings were set up which were
attended by police officers from F* Division and
elsewhere, along with representatives of the Local
Authority, Public Transport, Ambulance and the
like.  Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, who was
to take over the Division on Chief Superintendent
Mole's transfer, was also present.

A planning/logistic's team was set up, headed by
Chief Inspector Beal and Inspector Sewell:  they
commenced to prepare a detailed Operational Order
to cater for the match.

Shortly after 6th April 1989 I received from
Inspector Sewell a detailed Operational Order,
setting out the minutiae of detail associated with
the game.

During the ensuing week I read the order through
and noted my own role and responsibilities.

I noted that I was to be in charge of Sector 2
(Liverpool) and that I would be assisted by Chief
Inspector Roy Waring, Section 2A; and Chief
Inspector Roger Purdy, Section 2B.

I have known both officers many years and worked
closely during the late 1970s with Chief Inspector
Purdy.  Both officers have police experience of
working in the Hillsborough area and had performed
duty at the ground before.  Both officers had, to
my knowledge, good and valid experience at major
public order events.

Both officers had my full confidence.

Sector 2 was split into two other Sectors, 2A and
2B.  Sector 2A was the area to the south of the
Leppings Lane area (for which Chief Inspector
Waring was responsible); Sector 2B for the north
west area (for which Chief Inspector Purdy was
responsible).
                                                     6

                                       R. MARSHALL




The chain of command devolved to Inspectors, of
which there were three in Sector 2A and 4 in
Sector 2B.

Additionally I was responsible for coach searching
in two locations, i.e. in Oughtibridge Village,
about two miles from the ground (Inspector
Wardle); and Tankersley, about six miles from the
ground (inspector Morton).  Also, 6 mobile "Tango"
units under the direct control of Inspector Walker
and Inspector Robinson.




            /I was not actually
                                                  7


                                              R. MARSHALL


I was not actually in charge of the serials of police
officers employed on turnstile duties at Leppings
Lane. These were part of the Ground Commander's -
Superintendent Greenwood - responsibilities, but it
was always my intention to be in the area of the
Leppings Lane turnstiles as the crowds built up. I
noted that Chief Inspector Creaser was in charge of
this particular area, aided mostly by 'F' Division
Inspectors, Sergeants and Constables. The officers
involved have a wealth of experience in handling
football crowds and most officers were known to me
personally.
I had thus no qualms that given a normal situation
the number of officers involved was right and struck
the correct balance between the maintenance of law
and order - the necessity to search fans for
offensive weapons and detect crime without an
oppressive police presence - at what should have been
a pleasant afternoon of sport.

At 10 am (1000) Friday, 14 April 1989, (140489) I
attended a Senior Officers' briefing at the Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club. All Inspectors and the two
Chief Inspectors working with me in Section 2 were
present. Chief Superintendent Duckenfield gave a
detailed briefing from a prepared brief, and this was
complemented by a briefing by Superintendent Murray,
who was to be in charge of the police control post.
Inspector Sewell then gave details of administration,
meals etc.

When these officers had concluded their address I took
my Chief Inspectors and Inspectors to an area off the
North Stand where I personally briefed them in detail
as to what I required from them. I had earlier
prepared notes of what was required of us
collectively and what I required from them
personally, and I spoke to these notes I have kept
these notes and they are available for inspection. I
provided an opportunity for questions and asked Chief
Inspectors Waring and Purdy if they had anything to
add. Some questions were asked.

Some of my Inspectors were from 'A' Division and 'C'
Division and were not totally familiar with the area.
I therefore took them to a transit van and with PS
Fidler took these officers on a guided tour of the
locality and pointed out certain areas of concern,
such as Leppings Lane roundabout, coach and minibus
parking, pubs and off licences.

I asked all the officers to ensure that they red the
Operational Order and were familiar with its contents
prior to attending at Hillsborough the next day.
                                                    8


                                             R. MARSHALL


Later that day I received from Inspector Sewell a
miniaturised Order, which I condensed so that I had a
pocket sized overview of the duties involved in my
sector of the operation.

I added to this the colour coding of the tickets for
the various sections of the ground. I have retained
this document. At 8.10 am (0810) Saturday 15th April
1989 (150489), I came on duty at Hammerton Road
Police Station. The day was fine and sunny. The
weather was warm and ideal for a major sporting
event.
At 9.20 am (0920) I left Hammerton Road Police
Station with Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Mr
A Hymas, a Force Press Officer. We went to the
entrance to the police area at the rear of the North
Stand. Other officers were congregating there and
were, in due course, moved into pre-arranged seating
in the North Stand.
At 10 am (1000) Chief Superintendent Duckenfield gave
a briefing. He was followed by Superintendent
Murray, DS Charlesworth and Inspector Sewell. Each
officer spoke about particular aspects of the
policing of the event.

At the conclusion of the general briefing Serial
Inspectors were invited to brief their Serials in
accordance with their general and specific
instructions contained in their orders.

I spoke to Chief Inspectors Waring and Purdy and re­
affirmed what I considered to be the salient points
of our duty i.e. searching, coach reception and
general standards of behaviour. I told the officers
that I would patrol on foot throughout the Sector and
they could expect to see me out and about right up to
kick-off. I distributed a one-sheet overview of
Serial deployment, along with a list of pubs in the
locality where the landlord had been seen and asked
his intentions, i.e. either to close or operate a
selective door.

At about 10.15 am (1015) I went into the gym where I
consumed a snack meal and took the opportunity of
speaking to most of my Sector Inspectors
individually. I distributed copies of the document
mentioned above. Manpower at my command was 2 Chief
Inspectors, 11 Inspectors, 30 Sergeants and 227
Constables. This did not include the Mounted
Officers, Dog Handlers; or the Chief Inspector, 2
Inspectors, 4 Sergeants and 40 Constables who would
be working outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles prior
to kick-off.
                                                 9


                                             R. MARSHALL


About 10.45 am (1045) I commenced foot patrol in the
Leppings Lane area, checking that barriers had been
placed at the ends of streets opening on to Leppings
Lane. The purpose of the barriers is to prevent
access by fans and minimise the nuisance to local
residents caused by fans (a) using the back gardens
and ginnels as toilets; and (b) trying to climb over
walls and fences to gain free access into the ground.
Most of the barriers were in place and each set was
manned by 2 Constables. I met and spoke to all these
officers and asked them if they knew what their
duties were. All appeared to know what was expected
of them.
Inspector Selwood was in charge of this area and we
met briefly and discussed what to do about an Audi
car which was causing an obstruction in the mouth of
Vere Road.
I then continued to Leppings Lane roundabout and on
into Penistone Road North and Claywheels Lane: all
the time meeting and speaking to policemen and women
but checking that they had been briefed as to their
duties. I paid particular attention to the
Claywheels Lane coach reception Serials (Serials 34
and 35 - PS Sherratt and PS Lindop respectively) as a
key role was required in respect of them so far as
ticket checking and standards of behaviour were
concerned.
Some fans were already moving about at this time and
going from public house to public house looking for
those which were open. I remember sharing a joke
with the manager of the newly refurbished Travellers
Inn in Penistone Road North. The pub was closed and
the car park was thus available for use. Our joke
concerned how much he could charge to allow fans to
park on it. All this area was well policed and I was
happy that everyone seemed to know what they were
doing.
I then patrolled back towards the ground and into the
Middlewood Road area. I continued as far as the main
shopping area, all the time meeting and speaking to
police officers about their duties. In the shopping
arcade I met and spoke to two officers and the
security manager of the precinct. We discussed
possible problems involving stealing from shops, as
had occurred in 1988 (000088). I then popped my head
round the door of Thresher's Off Licence in
Middlewood Road. Two female staff were working.
Thefts had occurred there in 1988 (000088) and I
therefore assured them that the police were not far
away if there was trouble.
                                                 10


                                             R. MARSHALL


There were already substantial numbers of fans
wandering about the streets and I was saddened to see
that most were openly drinking alcohol from cans and
litre bottles. Many were carrying four packs and I
was asked by a group of fans where they could find
pubs that were open. All the fans I encountered were
Liverpool supporters. I spoke to one man who was
drinking from a can of strong lager and had another 3
cans in his possession. I expressed the view that
were he to drink all the lager he had in his
possession he might later have difficulty getting
into the match.
I patrolled back towards Wadsley Lane, arriving there
about 12 noon (1200). Crowds were now starting to
build up. Many Liverpool fans were wandering about
and I was being asked where open pubs could be found.
Again, many fans were openly drinking cans of beer
and lager. Fast food outlets were very busy indeed.

About this time I heard some radio traffic concerning
two public houses. The first was the Fox Inn in
Foxhill which was said to be very busy indeed. This
was not surprising as the landlord had publicly
expressed his intention in the Sheffield Star that he
had obtained an extra 10 barrels of beer for
consumption by Liverpool fans. The pub had
apparently been drunk dry in 1988 (000088). I
radioed control and asked that officers visit and see
the landlord and warn him about serving drunks.
The second pub was the Horse and Jockey in Dykes Hall
Road, where 100/200 persons were said to be drinking
outside. Again this concerned me. I contacted a dog
van at the junction of Middlewood Road and Wadsley
Lane. PC Roger Pearce was a passenger in this van,
which was being driven by a Dog Handler from
Nottinghamshire Constabulary. I spoke to PC Pearce
and directed them to go to the Horse and Jockey and
monitor developments.
I then continued patrol along Middlewood Road out of
city as far as Barnett's Off Licence. This was
closed and was being guarded by a male constable and
a female constable. I spoke to both officers. I
then crossed the road where I saw the manager of
Willis' Supermarket. These premises also have an off
licence facility. I spoke to the manager who gave me
the erroneous impression that drink was not being
sold.
I then continued my patrol, walking down Leppings
Lane, past the turnstiles and into Penistone Road
North. The time was now about 1 pm (1300). A lot
more fans were wandering about. I adjusted the
points of two groups of officers, firstly to prevent
                                                  11


                                              R. MARSHALL


coaches entering' Leppings Lane for unloading
purposes; and secondly to prevent obstruction outside
a fast food outlet near Leppings Lane roundabout.




                         /I met Inspector Millett...
                                                12


                                         R, MARSHALL


I met Inspector Millett at the end of Claywheels
Lane and we arranged for a policewoman, who was
directing coaches into that road, to be given a
fluorescent waistcoat to increase her visibility and
personal safety.
I continued towards the Wadsley Bridge railway
station and en route I met Chief Inspector Purdy.
There was some radio traffic that Mounted Officers
had stopped a transit van full of fans and this was
parked on the Comet car park of Kilner Way.     The
Mounted Officers suspected drink was on board and
required assistance.    There were a lot of police
officers about but as we were not far away ourselves
I decided to go to the scene.     On arrival at the
car park I saw a nondescript minibus which was
filled to capacity with mostly male fans.     They
were truculent and all appeared to have been
drinking.    They were not drunk.    I took charge of
this situation and with other officers invited each
of the passengers out of the van one by one.     With
the exception of the female all were searched, as
was the van.    I remember one of the males claiming
to be an ex-policeman from Cheshire and he provided
his service number.    The search was negative and I
gave the people some advice about their behaviour
and directed them towards the ground.     I permitted
them to leave their van in Kilner Way rather than
remove it to Wardsend Road.    With Chief Inspector
Purdy we returned back along Kilner Way.     The
Gateway Supermarket was doing a roaring trade at its
"off licence” section with a queue of fans buying
drink through a door.    There is a large grass verge
outside Halfords at the Junction of Kilner Way and
Halifax Road and I estimated that 100-150 persons,
mostly male, were lying or sitting on the grass
drinking from cans and bottles in the bright
sunshine.    At this time there was no trouble and
despite what seemed to me to be far too much
drinking going on fans were well behaved.

I continued back down Halifax Road towards
Claywheels Lane.   I remember seeing a coach
stopping in Halifax Road and fans disembarking.    I
went across to this coach with Chief Inspector Purdy
and spoke to the driver.   He assured me that his
passengers knew where they could rejoin the coach
after the match as they had all been before in 1988.
There was not much I could do about this situation
at that stage so I let it go at that.
I returned to the Claywheels Lane area and by radio
checked with the Serial Sergeants that coach parking
was going to plan.   There were no problems and room
                                                13


                                         R. MARSHALL


for another 15-16 coaches at this stage.    I
continued into Middlewood Road where I met Inspector
Humphries.   We discussed the progress of the
operation to date.   There was then some radio
traffic that youths were causing a nuisance in
Wadsley Lane by urinating in gardens.    Again I was
near to Wadsley Lane so I decided to patrol in that
area, and with Inspector Humphries I walked up the
road.
There were not very many Liverpool fans about.
Many were drinking.    They were mostly male.    Some
fans were picnicking in their cars.    We encountered
two youths walking down Wadsley Lane.    One had a
half full pint glass, the other had a half-full
half-pint glass.    I asked them what they thought
they were doing.    Both mumbled a reply to the
effect that the had had a drink at the pub.     I
suggested they return the glasses to the pub and
after a little hesitation they accepted this advice
and turned about, ostensibly to return to the Horse
and Jockey.   We followed them for a short distance.

On arrival at the end of Marlcliffe Road I saw the
off-licence was very busy indeed.   About 30 males
were standing or sitting on the pavement outside.
All were drinking a variety of intoxicating liquor.
I saw some drinking wine.   The majority were
drinking beer, lager and cider.   Some of these
persons were clearly intoxicated and I spoke to two
or three youths about their behaviour.   At this
point a "Tango” van drew up, under the command of
Police Sergeant Miller.   I told him to keep an eye
on these youths and also the crowd drinking outside
the Horse and Jockey.
With Inspector Humphries I returned back down
Wadsley Lane towards Middlewood Road.    As I passed
the Park Hotel (which had closed for the day) I saw
groups of fans.    They were drinking on the pub
forecourt and were chanting football slogans.    I
told them to shut up and save their shouting for
inside the ground.    There were five constables
nearby and I told these officers to keep an eye on
them.   I returned once again back along Middlewood
Road to the top of Parkside road.    It was now busy
with fans, and cars very much in evidence.    I saw a
large group of skinheads moving along Middlewood
Road and I followed this group for a time.

Shortly before 2 pm (14.00) I heard some radio
traffic that the special train had arrived at
Wadsley Bridge Station and that the passengers and
escorting Serials (Serials 36 and 37) plus Chief
                                                    14

                                              R. MARSHALL


     Inspector Purdy and Mounted Officers were en route
     to the Penistone Road turnstiles."
     THE WITNESS:   I think that should be the Leppings
Lane turnstiles.
     MR. JONES:   "I patrolled towards the turnstiles,
     pausing en route to clear youths from the roadway
     outside the Four Lanes Cafe.   I instructed two
     constables to prevent the overflow of fans into the
     road.
     Leppings Lane was now becoming increasingly
     congested.   Crowds were building up.   There was
     considerable open drinking going on and the fast
     food outlets were very busy.   There were no
     problems at this stage and in my view there were
     ample police officers in the area to help and assist
     fans to find the right entrance and carry out the
     preventive role described earlier.
     Fans were entering the ground.   A lot were stood
     around.   I saw four or five F Division CID
     officers, all dressed in casual clothing.   Their
     brief was to keep an eye open for criminal activity,
     ie. pick-pocketing, and I was pleased to see them in
     that area although I did not acknowledge their
     presence.
     I was now effectively the most senior officer in the
     vicinity of the turnstiles, although Chief Inspector
     Creaser was in charge up to the point, assisted by
     Inspectors Sykes and Purdy.
     Serials 16, 17, 18, 19, 4 Sergeants and 40Constables
     were on duty, along with Mounted Officers from South
     Yorkshire and Merseyside.
     The area was busy, noisy and colourful.   The crowds
     were not a lot different from a normal match day at
     that stage, although there were many more people
     about.   The majority seemed to be from the
     Merseyside area.
     It seemed that many fans had come without tickets to
     get in.   I heard many passing to and fro asking
     other fans for "spares".   This to-ing and fro-ing
     was constant and there seemed no desire or urgency
     on the part of fans to gain entry to the ground.

     Foot Officers, in accordance with our usual
     practice, were stationed outside each turnstile
     chatting to and searching fans as they queued to
                                                 15


                                         R. MARSHALL


pass through the stiles.   Other officers were
actively encouraging fans to enter the ground.

Mounted officers were actively shepherding people
into the turnstile area to get them into the ground.
I was not anxious at this stage and as I surveyed
the scene I considered events were proceeding to
plan.   I remember discussing with Inspector Sykes,
the most senior and experienced of the Inspectors,
how we would handle the non-ticket holders post kick
off and we agreed that we would try to contain them
in Leppings Lane and, as has happened in the past,
they would probably find someone with a radio on
which they could listen to the game.   I did not
wish fans to roam the roads around the perimeter of
the ground at will or unsupervised as this has
caused problems in the past for local residents.

By 2.15 pm (14.15) Leppings Lane was full of fans
moving in both directions.    I estimate the numbers
at about six to eight thousand.    They were spilling
off footpaths into the roadway and making movements
of vehicles difficult.    Many fans continued to
drink from cans and I continued to hear people
asking others for spares.
My own position was in Leppings Lane roadway itself
at ground level, where I continued to monitor
events, talking to policemen and fans.    The traffic
situation gradually deteriorated and by 2.25 pm
(14.25) it became apparent that we would have to
close Leppings Lane to motor vehicles.    Inspector
Sykes and I discussed this and I contacted match
control asking that the road be closed at Leppings
Lane roundabout and at Catch Bar Lane.    My request
was acknowledged but for some reason was not
immediately effective.    Traffic continued to come
along Leppings Lane from the direction of the
roundabout and some service buses came down from
Middlewood Road.    I walked up Leppings Lane to the
traffic lights at the junction with Catch Bar Lane
where there was a queue of three service buses being
held up by a constable.    The constable asked what
he was to do and I told him to let the buses go
through.    I then radioed match control and repeated
my request that Leppings Lane should be closed but
added that they should contact Mr. Bert Middleton of
South Yorkshire Transport and advise him that buses
would need to be diverted away from Leppings Lane.
These measures are not usually necessary on normal
match days.    I left a constable on duty at the
junction and walked back towards the turnstiles.
Most officers were not actively suggesting to fans
                                               16 A


                                        R. MARSHALL


to enter the ground.   The time was about 2.30 pm
(14.30).
I continued to actively involve myself in crowd
control, especially in the vicinity of turnstiles A
to 6.   These consist of three double turnstiles and
one single turnstile and feed spectators directly
into a large concourse at the rear of the West Stand
and Terrace.   All the turnstiles were open and were
admitting a steady stream of fans into the ground.
I saw Inspector Purdy to the right of the turnstiles
and he was keeping an eye on the queues.   The Stand
area turnstiles 1 to 16 were all working and again a
steady stream of spectators were moving through.

The crowd outside the turnstiles at this stage
appeared reasonably good humoured and I was neither
frightened nor anxious for anyone's safety.    I
heard nothing from match control other than
continuous radio traffic describing relatively minor
problems here and there inside and outside the
ground.   However, as time progressed the situation
at the turnstiles began to deteriorate.

At one stage I remember moving on the outskirts of
the crowd outside turnstiles A to 6 to the
relatively free area beside Gate C.   The crowd were
contained by an open, chest height, steel barrier
and Gate B.   This is a fairly narrow area.   I saw
Inspector Purdy watching movement and also Detective
Superintendent McKay and PC Bocking, who were
observing the crowd for pickpockets.   There was a
lot of pushing and shoving going on which was
causing discomfort within the press, and four or
five Mounted Officers were within this part of the
crowd, trying to maintain order.




          I recollect that I entered.
                                                       16B

                                 R. MARSHALL




I recollect that I entered the crowd myself and shouted
loudly to people to stop pushing and shoving as this
was hurting people at the front. I used phrases like,
"Don't worry, you'll all get in"; "Don't push", etc. etc.
Sadly this had very little effect and I pushed my way back
out through the press to the rear of the crowd. I believe
that my actions were filmed by a BBC TV cameraman who had
been standing on the parapet of the river bridge, for as
I forced my way out of the press the camera team passed
me walking down the road towards the rear of the South
Stand. The taller of the two men, who I do not know but
have seen regularly at incidents in Sheffield previously,
said words to the effect that I would have a better view
if I went to the position he had occupied on the parapet
of the bridge.
I took his advice and went to the bridge and climbed onto
the parapet. From this position I could see over the
heads of the crowd and the only area which was obscured
in part was the aperture of Gate B. The time was about
2.40 p.m. (1440).
A vast and progressively more unruly crowd was now assembling.
It was a volatile and seething mass of people. They were
pushing and shoving as more and more people continued to
arrive in the area. At one point I saw a youth of perhaps
II or 12 start to scale the facade above the West Stand
turnstiles. He reached the top and a great cheer went up
but he clearly did not enjoy what he saw on the other side
and returned back to the crowd.
My attention returned to the area in front of turnstiles
A-G. I saw inspector Purdy standing on top of the steel
barrier between the queuing area and the road to the South
Stand. He was balanced like a tight rope walker and was
shouting and clearly doing his level best to maintain a
semblance of order. The Mounted Officers were in the
thick of this press and were clearly having the most
difficult time. Their horses were struggling and I saw
anxiety written on the face of more than one officer.

The crowd build up continued to increase and it seemed to
me that tempers were becoming frayed.
I tried to radio control that I needed assistance quickly
and a tannoyed announcement over the turnstiles loudspeakers
to urge people to queue in orderly fashion and also that
P.C. Buxton, who normally drives a Landrover equipped with
a public address facility, to come directly to Leppings
Lane to assist me. I did not get an acknowledgement from
control, although I heard P.C. Buxton come over loudly
and clearly saying, "I'm on my way". I cannot now say
with certainty how long it took for P.C. Buxton to arrive
                                                      17

                                 R. MARSHALL



but I recollect looking over my shoulder at some stage
and seeing P.C. Buxton speaking into the microphone in
the Landrover which was in the road in Leppings Lane:
I could not hear what he was saying due to the noise of
the crowd.
Having no acknowledgement of my request for a tannoy I
guessed that some technical fault had affected the radio
system. I therefore changed my multi channel set from
Channel 25 (the match channel) to Channel 35, which is
Hammerton Road Channel, and asked the controller to pass
on my request for a tannoyed announcement to ground
control by telephone. I subsequently learned that this
was passed at 2.44 p.m. (1444) and actioned, but I cannot
remember ever hearing what was broadcast.
Over the next few minutes the scenes outside the turnstiles
deteriorated very rapidly indeed. An enormous crowd
continued to converge on the turnstiles. There was
total confusion as many did not know which area they had
to queue in to gain entrance, and the signs above the
turnstiles are rather poorly marked. Very many seemed to
be under the influence of drink. Fans at the rear pressed
forward with total irresponsibility and disregard for the
safety of others. The best efforts of Foot and Mounted
officers failed to deter them. There did not seem to be
much movementi through the turnstiles and it seemed that
people were fighting each other to go through. Some
started to climb over turnstiles. I saw one fan actually
traverse a ledge over the river on the outside of the
bridge to bring him nearer to the turnstiles. Some
scrambled on the river bank itself.
As I watched I felt someone pushing at my ankles and I
interpreted this as an attempt to push me off the bridge
into the river. I jumped down and remonstrated with a
man. He appeared drunk. I remember he was wearing
sunglasses and these fell off his face, only to be
crushed underfoot by others in the crowd. I could only
remonstrate with this man and he was soon swallowed up
in the crush. By about 2.45 p.m. (1445) the crowd was
jammed against the turnstiles in all areas but the press
was worst against turnstiles A-G. Fans were swarming
over the gates, parapets and facade of the turnstiles.
I recollect seeing Inspector Bennett on the roof above
turnstiles 1-16. He did not send the fans back down
into the crowd. The turnstiles and gates were effectively
under seige. There was absolute bedlam. People were
kicking and fighting each other and clearly many were
absolutely terrified. The Mounted officers were absolutely
valiant but their work was of little avail. Inspector
Purdy gesticulated to me and I climbed from the parapet
of the bridge and forced my way to the right hand of the
blue heavy steel perimeter gates. He joined me and we
spoke to each other through the gates.
                                                       18

                                 R. MARSHALL


Inspector Purdy told' me that people at the front of the
crowd by turnstiles A-G were being crushed and asked me
to open gates. He was not specific as to which gates
he thought should be opened but his anxiety was apparent.
It confirmed my perception, unprecedented in my experience,
that this was no ordinary crowd of fans but an enormous
press of people determined to enter the stadium come what
may. I was, nevertheless, unhappy to agree to the request:
to implement it would lead to uncontrolled access to the
stadium and negate all our efforts to prevent hooliganism
inside. I told him that we would have to hang on. He
responded by saying that unless gates were opened people
would be crushed. The look of extreme anxiety remained
on his face. I took account of the fact that this was
an Inspector speaking to me and I made my mind up
immediately that the only practical way, to prevent deaths
outside would be to open the gates. I nodded to Mr. Purdy
and told him I would contact ground control. He returned
to his position by the steel barrier and I pushed my way
back to my vantage point on the bridge parapet.

The situation was unchanged and was worsening by the
minute. It had outgrown our capacity to manage it
effectively. The situation was unprecedented in my
experience.
I saw a beer can thrown from within the crowd jammed in front
of turnstiles A-G. It hit a Mounted officer and the contents
ran down his coat.
I radioed ground control and asked for the gates at the
Leppings Lane end of the ground to be opened. There was
no acknowledgement.
Initially I thought my own radio was defective so I jumped
down from the bridge and pushed my way across to Inspector
Ellis. I asked him for his radio, which I remember was
an old Burndept type. I called ground control in Inspector
Ellis' presence and repeated my request for gates to be
opened at the Leppings Lane end. There was no acknowledgemen

I again returned to my vantage point and scrambled onto
the bridge parapet. Once again I believe I changed channels
to 35 and asked the staff at Hammerton Road Control Room
to pass on my request to open gates. I believe my message
was acknowledged but as I changed back to the match control,
radio cover had clearly resumed. I repeated my request
that the gates at Leppings Lane should be opened and said
that unless it was done quickly someone would be killed.
It is difficult to put into words now the scene of which
I and other police officers were a part. Radio messages
were almost inaudible due to the noise. The situation
at the turnstiles was obviously frightening as more and
more fans pushed to gain entrance. There was no semblance
of queues, neither was there any self-discipline or order.
                                R. MARSHALL



About 2.48 p.m. (1448) I saw C Gate opened slightly from
within the ground. This was not immediately apparent to
the crowd in the turnstiles area A-G as the gate was
invisible to them from where they were standing. A
trickle of people passed through the gate. I saw
Inspector Purdy physically pulling people from the press
under the barrier and thrusting them bodily through the
gate.
A Mounted officer was by the gate, as were numerous foot
officers, and it seemed to me that the action of opening
C Gate brought a little respite to the area in front of
the turnstiles, but this lasted only seconds as the
crowd was topped up by others still pushing in Leppings
Lane.
After a short period C Gate was closed. Large numbers
of persons were still flooding into the area. The crowd
now spilled out over the road to the South Stand.
Mounted officers then, of their own volition, succeeded
in closing the heavy blue steel perimeter gates, clearly
with the plan in mind of relieving the crush on the
turnstiles. These officers stationed themselves behind
the gate. Fans continued to climb over the walls and
parapets of the turnstiles in large numbers, but whether
this was to prevent their being crushed or to gain free
entrance to the ground, I cannot say.
The heavy steel perimeter gate was being shaken and was
clearly coming under enormous pressure. I believed that
it would only be a matter of time before it was knocked
down completely and the thought crossed my mind that
our horses would be impaled on the points of the metal
rails of which the gate was constructed.
About 2.52 p.m. (1452) the gate burst open and the Mounted
officers were brushed aside. A crowd of people surged
through into the turnstile area and service road.
 I remember looking across at Gate A which provides access
 to the North Stand. I had not earlier seen this gate
 opened. It was under pressure and was being shaken by
 a large press of people. I radioed ground control and
 asked for the North Stand gate to be opened, and after
 a short time this was done. Fans entered but I cannot
 say now in what numbers. I noted there were police
 officers on both sides of the gate and they seemed to
 be quickly in control of the situation. The desperate
 push to enter the ground continued in the front of
 turnstiles A-G. The Mounted officers were still trying
 to control the situation. About the same time Gate C
 opened again and simultaneously there was a roar from
                                R. MARSHALL



inside the ground. This excited the atmosphere even
more. A large number of fans - I cannot say how many -
entered through the gate. I cannot say to what area of
the ground they went.
Some still went in through the turnstiles but the crush
visibly diminished.
I did not see Gate B opened at any stage.
Shortly after 3 p.m. (1500) there was a radio message
passed that there was trouble inside the ground and a
general request was made for every available officer to
assist.
There were still large numbers of people in Leppings Lane
so I sent about 30 men inside: the remainder stayed in
the vicinity of the turnstiles.
There was further radio traffic that there were injured
people inside the ground.
It quickly became apparent that there had been a serious
incident on the Leppings Lane Terrace and soon the
concourse at the rear of the West Stand was thronged
with fans coming from the tunnel. Some were carrying
injured comrades. These persons had the appearance of
having been crushed.




                          Some casualties
                                             R. MARSHALL




    Some casualties appeared dead, although I could
    not say how many or from what area they had come.

    All police officers present responded immediately
    and we tried to bring order to a scene of
    pandemonium and chaos.  Many officers were trying
    to resuscitate people, using mouth to mouth
    resuscitation and cardiac massage.

    Whilst officers were trying to save lives of fans
    the conduct of other fans was deplorable.  A
    drunken man swore obscenely at me and I was spat
    upon.

    We were joined at the back of the West Stand by
    many other police officers, then, by first one,
    then a growing fleet of ambulances.   Ambulances
    could not enter through Gate C so as best we could
    we tried to get casualties down through the
    concourse to the roadway by the gate.   They were
    there separated into three groups - those
    apparently dead, those seriously injured, and
    those less seriously hurt.  At some stage I spoke
    to a senior fireman and asked him for some sheets
    to screen bodies which were being placed in the
    road.  I recollect asking for the major incident
    boxes to be brought from Hammerton Road Police
    Station to the ground.

    All officers present were employed attempting to
    bring some order to the very difficult situation.

    I learned that the match had been abandoned and
    when this became public knowledge fans started to
    drift out of the ground.

     I was   directed to report to match control, and
     about   5.15 p.m. I was transported to Headquarters
     where   I briefed the Chief Constable and the Deputy
     Chief   Constable regarding these events."

That concludes the recollections,   sir, and it is signed
by Roger Marshall.

     THE CORONER:   I would like to get the reading
done before we break for coffee.  Before you start, can
I just say you will find that this is a voluntary
statement, and I think it may make reference in places
to the paragraphing of the letter which I have
excluded.  That is a little bit confusing but I can't
do anything about it.

     MR. JONES:     Sir, it is C350 and I turn to page 9.
It is headed:
                                                R. MARSHALL




     "Voluntary statement of Superintendent Roger
     Marshall".

It then reads:

     "Page and Paragraph numbering is consecutive to
     those of the letter dated 6tn June 1990, referred
     to below".

     MR. KING:   Sir, are there any copies of this
document for the parties?

     THE CORONER:   No, there ar e n’t.    I am sorry, but
it isn't quite as long.

     MR. JONES:     It then reads, sir:

     "I have already provided much information
     concerning the events of 15th April 1989 ...."

     MR. KING:   I wonder if the Officer could then
read slightly more slowly than he did the first time?
I mean no criticism of the Officer at all.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.If you find that   we are going
too fast all you need to do is to stand up or to
indicate in some way.  Are you having difficulty
hearing?

     MR.   KING:    No.

     MR.   JONES:    I will start again:

     "Voluntary statement of Superintendent Roger
     Marshall".

It is page 9 and reads:

     "Page and Paragraph numbering is consecutive to
     those of the letter dated 6tn June 1990 referred
     to below".

     "I have already provided much information
     concerning the events of 15th April 1989 at the
     Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, Leppings Lane
     end, where I was in charge outside the ground.

     I refer to my statement of evidence supplied to
     the investigating force and to the transcript of
     my evidence at the Taylor Inquiry.  I also wish to
     refer to the letter from my solicitor to Chief
     Superintendent Foster dated 6th June 1990.
     Because of the need for expedition, it now seems
     unlikely that that letter will be forwarded to the
                                           R. MARSHALL




    complainants, through their solicitors. It also
    seems unlikely, given their vested interest in the
    civil proceedings, that the complainants would be
    prepared to give ground, at least until their
    civil proceedings have been disposed of. That is
    a pity, as I genuinely feel for them in their
    bereavement, but I hope that subsequent events,
    including the present World Cup events, will
    persuade them that it is not easy as they suggest
    to control crowds without tear-gas and riot
    shields - and not even then!
    For ease of reference, I propose to my number my
    following observations consecutive to the 42
    paragraphs of my solicitor's letter of 6th June."

There follows the paragraphs, sir, and I will read
them:
     "43. I am prepared to acknowledge that the
     statements mentioned above contain a true and
     accurate statement of my evidence given fresh
     after the event but subject to the comment that I
     was rigorously cross-examined at the Taylor
     Inquiry by the Judge and by counsel for interested
     parties who were all concerned to show that the
     fans outside the ground in the half-hour or so
     before kick-off at 3.00 p.m. were good-natured and
     orderly, with a few exceptions, and that they were
     nothing out of the ordinary for the police to
     control. As a consequence, everything that was
     said to me and the reception of my answers was
     slanted by the impression that the crowd on that
     day was not the sort of crowd that everyone had
     become accustomed to seeing at football matches,
     i.e. unruly and fighting with each other or the
     opposite team's fans, and that consequently it had
     no part whatever to play in the tragedy.

     44. Scant evidence was placed before the Inquiry
     about the actual behaviour of those fans in the
     time leading up to their approach to the
     turnstiles. I believe that an unnecessarily
     legalistic view may have been taken - that
     particular fans could not be identified as being
     in a particular condition or as being in the crowd
     which caused the crush and that any evidence about
     them would have been inadmissible or prejudicial.

     45. I am not at all happy about this approach.
     The fact is that many of the fans who caused the
     crush were under the influence of drink to some
     extent - some of them quite badly. I believe that
     a Court - particularly a jury - could properly
                                       R. MARSHALL




take into account the behaviour of large number of
fans not only on this occasion but on virtually
every other occasion on which fans in large^
numbers attend football matches* I make this
statement because the allegations made against me
- that I could have dealt with the large number of
fans on the day in some way which would have
caused them to approach the ground, the turnstiles
and eventually the stands inside the ground in an
orderly manner, is pure speculation and
hypothesis. Consequently, I consider I am
entitled to refer to many other similar events to
show that any such hypothesis is contrary to all
known experience of football matches and crowd
behaviour and that there is not the slightest
evidence to show that the crowd at Hillsborough
was so different from normal as to make the
hypothesis likely to be true. In fact, almost all
 the evidence, including the suppressed evidence,
 is to the contrary - it was not an unusually well-
behaved crowd. Although there were many family
 groups and people who could have been expected to
 be well-behaved, I refer elsewhere to the effect
 that even small numbers of self-centred, brutally
 selfish persons can have on a larger group. From
 my observations - from about 2.35 p.m. onwards -
 this crowd was bound to react with considerable
 hostility if attempts had been made to control it
 by force.
46. I say that on the day the crowd was not
amenable to any form of instruction from the
police - partly because of the fact that any crowd
which is intent on going somewhere will not take
kindly to being held up or stopped in any way -
particularly when kick-off time is approaching and
they fear they are going to be excluded from the
ground - and partly because there is a great deal
of evidence that this particular crowd had
significant numbers in it of
(a) people who had been drinking heavily and
(b) people who had no tickets and could therefore
only gain access by creating such a crush that the
police would have to open the gates to relieve
that crush and they could therefore slip in.

47. Although there were plenty of people after
the event with tickets saying that they had got in
without showing their tickets, it is not
surprising that none of those without tickets went
on television to say how they had managed to beat
the system*
                                                     25


                                       R. MARSHALL




48. Any experienced policeman knows that such
tactics are used regularly. I believe that the
problem was greater than usual on that day.
(a) because there was what may well have been a
genuine grievance against the Football Association
for choosing Hillsborough as a venue for the
fixture, knowing that it would result in
allocating Liverpool less tickets than they ought
to have had. The allocation also made it more
expensive for Liverpool, who had 14,000^
(approximately) seated and 10,000 standing,
whereas Nottingham had 6,000 (approximately)
seated and 18,000 standing.
(b) because it was a hotter day than the previous
year and they stayed outside the ground drinking
for longer than they did the previous year.

(c) because, having been the previous year, many
of the fans would think that there was not as much
need to arrive early because they thought they
knew their way around the ground. The previous
year, being the first occasion, they had generally
come earlier so as to be able to find their way.

49. I am entitled to refer to other examples of
crowd behaviour to defend myself when it is
alleged that it would have been such a simple
matter to filter or control this crowd.

(a) At the cup-final, that very year, when the
dead were so recently being mourned it ought to
have been in everyone's mind, I allege that some
thousand Liverpool fans stormed gates at Wembley
trying to force their way in without tickets.
Evidence of that fact was available (from a senior
Home Office source and corroborated by a senior
Metropolitan Police Commander) to the Taylor
Inquiry but was suppressed as being probably too
prejudicial. If we are speculating as to whether
a small number of police could have controlled the
crowd on the day of the disaster, I have no
hesitation in saying that they could not have
controlled them because such a crowd can only be
policed with its consent. I saw enough with my
own eyes to know that that crowd had clearly
rejected the measures which were in place to
facilitate entrance to the stadium.
(b) There is a fundamental misunderstanding by
many people as to the function of the police at
large gatherings of people. The police can only
do certain tasks such as searching for weapons
                                                     26


                                       R. MARSHALL




(the necessity for which is itself a commentary on
the difficulties which some do not appear to
appreciate) and to act as traffic directors etc.
Once a crowd of any size takes it upon itself to
go out of control, there is very little that the
police can do about it. This has been seen time
and again and should not need too much stressing.




         (c) As recently as
                                                     27


                                            R. MARSHALL


  (c) As recently as Saturday, 16th June 1990
  (160690), at the World Cup in Cagliari where there
  had been a total ban on alcohol sales (which the
  South Yorkshire Police were not allowed to impose at
  Hillsborough) a crowd of only 1,000 fans was
  approaching the ground at some distance. The police
  attempted to slow them down or stop them by placing a
  road block across the road backed by large numbers of
  police - way beyond anything the police had available
  at Hillsborough. The crowd, as at Hillsborough, was
  alleged to be good-humoured. The result was a riot
  with fans and police injured and the chasing of
  suspects through the streets with considerable
  disruption to the local population.
  In the event, only nine fans were found to be worthy
  of keeping in custody for identifiable offences.
  50. This leads me to my next contention, which is
  that no evidence was before the Inquiry concerning
  crowd behaviour in general and the effect on a crowd
  of only a small number influenced by drink or by some
  other motive leading to a rejection of authority. I
  have made some enquiries and believe that an expert
  will be able to show that a comparatively small
  number of persons can influence a crowd out of all
  proportion to their number. I know from other
  evidence and from my own observations that the
  proportion of people who were in drink or for other
  reasons refusing to accept authority on that day was
  much higher than 'just a few'. I do not quarrel with
  Lord Justice Taylor's description of them as a
  minority, even an unruly minority, but it was a very
  influential minority.
  51. I also refer to the Trafalgar Square riots.    I
  annex, as an indication of how false is the
  hypothesis...
     THE CORONER:   If people leave the Court I want them
to leave quietly. You are free to leave. You are free to
stay but you leave quietly if you do when we are taking the
evidence.
    MR. JONES:   I will start that sentence again:

  "51. I also refer to the Trafalgar Square riots. I
  annex, as an indication of how false is the
  hypothesis that the crowd at Hillsborough was good-
  humoured and therefore amenable to police direction,
  a statement issued on behalf of the defendants in
  Trafalgar Square claiming that they too were lively
  and good-humoured. We all know what the results were
  when the police tried to control that crowd.
                                         R. MARSHALL


521 I said, time and again in my evidence, that
although the crowd had apparently been good-humoured
up to about 2.35 pm (1435), the mood then changed or
developed and deteriorated dramatically. I knew from
my own observations at the time and from the evidence
related to me by many other persons that one factor
in the crowd's behaviour was the considerable
quantity of alcohol which had been consumed by many
of them. I said then - and I repeat now - that the
crowd as a whole was determined to get into the
ground and showed no restraint whatever, even when it
was obvious that people in front were in distress. I
realised that it was not the sort of crowd advance
that we see regularly when there is a pitch invasion
or a confrontation between two rival groups but it
was an advance of an army which could not be stopped.
There was plenty of available space behind them and
at the sides for them to have relieved the pressure,
but they just kept coming on, despite tannoy warnings
and all the efforts of the foot police and mounted
police. If physical barriers could have stopped
them, they would have stopped at the perimeter gates
or at the turnstiles. In fact, they forced the
perimeter gates open, carrying a police horse and
several policemen with them, when we tried to close
them to relieve the pressure. The large inner steel
gate (Gate A) was being shaken deliberately - not
 just moving under the pressure of the crowd. The
gate was being shaken in a deliberate attempt to
force it open.
53. On the suggestion that has been made that we
could have filtered the crowd in some way further
away from the turnstile area:
(a) To my knowledge no such filtering had been
carried out the previous year, 1988, (000088) despite
suggestions to the contrary by some people. The
video clearly shows buses and cars moving freely
along Leppings Lane right up to the time of kick-off
in 1988 (000088). There was no filtering or holding-
up of the crowd on that occasion. The crowd merely
came earlier and in a more orderly fashion.
Furthermore, any interference with the free passage
of people along Leppings Lane, at either end, would
have aroused considerable resentment from the local
residents and business population who use this road
in considerable numbers to and from their homes,
shops etc. Leppings Lane is a main thoroughfare in
the city, the closure of which entails a substantial
detour for vehicles and pedestrians. The practical
difficulties are considerable. There are so many
side streets and other entrances to Leppings Lane
which the fans would have sought out if they had seen
a road block at the ends.
                                         R. MARSHALL


(bj It would have needed an enormous body of men,
far more than we had available on the day to cover
both ends of Leppings Lane - not just a few more men
but enough men to control a riot situation, including
dealing with prisoners. We had no way of knowing
that we would be faced with such a situation and had
planned only for an ordinary sporting occasion - as
we had done many times before. That was not
complacency. We have a system of obtaining
'intelligence' reports from the Liverpool Police. We
received no reports whatever that there was any
reason to believe that the crowd would be any
different from the previous year. The teams were
exactly the same. They were allocated the same ends
of the ground and the same proportion of tickets. The
game was a sell-out on both occasions, so the numbers
with tickets must have been the same.
(c)   I tried to prevent vehicles from passing along
Leppings Lane when the crowd was so great that I
feared a road accident involving fans. The exact
time is in dispute. I still think it was later than
the Inquiry accepted (2.17 pm) (1417). In any event
the attempt was unsuccessful - we had enough men to
control vehicles, let alone pedestrians and
supporters.
54. I believe there must have been many more without
tickets on the day of the disaster. When I was
approached by Inspector Purdy who asked me to
consider opening the exit gates to allow speedier
access into the stadium there were still thousands
outside the ground in Leppings Lane as the video
shows. I was worried about the build-up outside the
ground and the numbers were so great that I thought
the terraces must be nearly empty - there were so
many outside. I had no information from inside the
ground as to the numbers that had been admitted. It
was a reasonable assumption for me to make at the
time. However, with the benefit of hindsight,
although there was some room in the side pens, I
believe that an overall assessment should show that
it would have been impossible to accommodate all
those outside the ground, even if they had been
packed in an orderly fashion and it therefore follows
that there must have been a substantial number of
fans outside the ground without tickets. They would
have had no prospect of gaining entrance in the
ordinary way. One way they could have gained
entrance was by causing a situation in which the
police had no option but to open the gates. Although
there is a great deal of speculation about this whole
matter, this is precisely what happened.

I will deal with the complaints individually,
although many matters are covered by the notes I have
                                                          30



                                                R. MARSHALL


      already made. I apologise for any repetition but it
      is inevitable in such a complex matter. The Inquiry
      itself went over the same matters time and again.
      The allegations are too important to me for me to
      take any chance of missing any point which tends to
B     discount the sweeping allegations which have been
      made.
         THE CORONER:   I think we will stop actually. It is a
    convenient point. It always takes longer than one thinks.
    We will pause and have our coffee now. My usual quarter of
    an hour.
                        I Short Adjournments

         MR. JONES: Sir, copies of the statement have been
    supplied to the Bar and for their information I am on page
    14 and I had just concluded paragraph 54:
       "The allegations are too important to me for me to
       take any chance of missing any point which tends to
       discount the sweeping allegations which have been
       made.

       Complaint by Mr. Hicks -
       Failed to prevent a dangerous build-up of supporters
       outside of the gates.
       55. There was a lack of equity in the allocation of
       turnstiles. Nottingham Forest had 60 turnstiles
       available for their fans, Liverpool had 23. I had no
       control over this allocation. The need for
       segregation of fans, of course, arose from their
       previous behaviour.
       56. The turnstiles allocated to Liverpool were
       inadequate to allow the ingress of the number of fans
       outside the ground at 2.35 pm (1435) in time for the
       kick-off at 3.0 pm (1500) - even if they had been
       well-behaved. It is understood that the Health and
       Safety Executive estimated that at the rate which the
       turnstiles could accommodate, many of the fans would
       not have gained access by 3.30 pm (1530) but for the
       opening of the gates.
       57. It is arguable that if all those without tickets
       had stayed away, the number would have been so much
       less that the turnstiles could have coped.

       58. No intelligence was received from Merseyside
       police that the crowd would be unusual.

       59. The police planning and manpower were based on
       the 1988 (000088) game which was uneventful.




H
                                          R. MARSHALL


60. In the event, the numbers that arrived between
2.35 pm (1435) and 3.00 pm (1500) could not have been
controlled by the manpower available without the
crowd's full co-operation - which was not
forthcoming.

61. There was no co-operation from the fans because
those fans who were prepared to co-operate were
unable to do so because of a significant element
whose reason was coloured by the amount of alcohol
they had taken combined with their determination to
gain entrance to the stadium. The presence of this
significant element and the sheer size of the crowd
thwarted the efforts of the police officers to
control them. The crowd could easily see the
injuries and crushing which was being caused to those
in front near the turnstiles but it was still unable
to control itself and hold back.
62. All officers were correctly briefed and deployed
- for a sporting occasion. The excessive drinking
and the sense of grievance of those who had not been
allocated tickets were unusual and created a climate
which would have led to serious disorder and
inevitable confrontation if extra police had tried to
prevent them from gaining access to the ground. Any
attempt to separate such fans from the genuine, sober
fans with tickets would have been bound to lead to a
riotous situation. Arguing with a drunken man needs
no explanation of its futility. Arguing with a man
with no ticket is equally futile because he always
has an explanation - his brother or his mate waiting
for him at the turnstiles with his tickets, for
example. The inability of the fans themselves, as
well as the police, to be able to differentiate
successfully between the genuine fan and the
troublemaker is what leads to the common riot
situation when each side (police and spectators)
blames the other and protests its own innocence.

63. Control of the Leppings Lane turnstile area was
vested in the hands of very experienced senior police
officers who, along with the sergeants and
constables, had been hand- picked by Chief Inspector
Beale and Inspector Sewell because of their enormous
experience of controlling football crowds. South
Yorkshire had even gone to the extent of obtaining
mutual aid from Merseyside Police who supplied
mounted officers whose task was to police the
approach to the turnstiles. These turnstiles were
used to policing Liverpool fans at Anfield Stadium
and they too expressed to me the view that the
behaviour of the crowd in Leppings Lane was
unprecedented. If they could not control the crowd,
no-one could.
                                                 32


                                         R. MARSHALL


64. Equipment failures undoubtedly contributed to
the confusion but I was able to communicate my views
by alternative means. Any suggestion that the crowd
could have been controlled by overwhelming force,
even if it had been available, is pure speculation.
All evidence available tends to show that a crowd in
this condition of a combination of excitement,
alcohol and unswervable intention to get into the
ground could not have been controlled by any means
which would be acceptable to the British public.

Complaint by Mr. Hicks - continued
Failed to control movement of supporters after the
opening of Gate C.
65. The opening of Gate C did relieve the pressure
outside the turnstiles. To that extent, it was a
safety measure which succeeded. When the gate was
closed again, the pressure outside was reduced so
much that it was controlled. Even the fans who went
through the gate did not pose any immediate threat to
safety. If they had continued at a walking pace (as
the video shows they started off) and had had
adequate signposting or other direction to the
emptier parts of the stand, there might still have
been no difficulties. It has been assumed that fans
went into the centre stand behind the goal because of
sheer accident or lack of control. That is not
necessarily the case. Many fans consider that the
premier viewing position is behind the goal and may
well have continued to crush into the centre stand
even though they could see that there was space at
each side. Even then, there might have been no
tragedy if the corroded barrier had not collapsed.
Most of the deaths were in front of that barrier and
it seems obvious that that was the final cause of the
tragedy coupled, probably, with the desire of many
fans to get behind the goal come what may. It must
be remembered that almost 25 per cent (21 out of 88)
of the dead male fans had in excess of 80 milligrams
per cent of alcohol in their blood and it is
understood that these persons entered the stadium
through Gate C and then found their way to the front
of Pen 3.
66.   Without trying to evade responsibility by
saying that it was someone else's job, I must say
that once the fans were inside the ground, they were
out of my jurisdiction. I must make it clear again
that I believed on reasonable evidence that the
Liverpool area of the ground must have been fairly
empty when there were so many fans still outside the
ground. They did not rush in through the gate in a
disorderly fashion and I had no reason to anticipate
that they would crush into the central pen in
                                                 33


                                          R. MARSHALL


excessive numbers. It highlights the difficulties
when it is considered that Inspector White, who might
have been able, due to his considerable experience,
to influence matters inside the ground, was absent at
the relevant time dealing with a prisoner.

Complaint by Mr. Hicks - continued

Failed to respond to the developing tragedy and were
slow to effect a rescue operation

67. This is a very vague allegation which is almost
impossible to answer factually. All I can say is
that I did everything within my power as quickly as I
could and as soon as the full extent of thisdisaster
became apparent.   It was like Hell on earth.  I was
personally in a state of shock and was surrounded by
white-faced, shaken police officers who were doing
their best. It took a great deal of effort on my
part to get a grip on myself and start giving what
orders I could to alleviate the situation. I have
told the Inquiry that at that time I felt that the
whole disaster was my personal responsibility and
that I have killed all those people. Once again, the
fans cannot stand outside this matter as if they
played no part in it. During these terrible moments
some fans responded with decency and altruism.
Others, sadly, acted very badly during the rescue
attempts, vilifying my officers and making their job
even harder to do. I can only forgive Mr. Hicks for
making such an outrageous allegation against me and
my men by reason of his own extreme distress at the
time the complaint was made. I would hope that now
that he knows more about it, he would withdraw this
allegation.




                          /Complaint by Mrs. McBrien.
                                               34

                                        R.: MARSHALL


"Complaint by -Mrs. McBrien
You failed to prevent a build-up of Liverpool
supporters at the turnstiles in Leppings Lane by
inadequate policing arrangements.

68. this is the same as the allegation by Mr. Hicks
and I have already dealt with it fully.

Complaint by Mrs. McBrien continued
You should not have requested Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield to open the gates under any
circumstances and thereby giving unlimited and
uncontrolled access to the football ground by
supporters.
69. I am sorry for Mrs. McBrien and can readily
understand her feeling that the fans causing the
crush should have been allowed to suffer the
consequences of their own misconduct rather than be
allowed to continue their actions inside the ground
with the consequences we all now know, including the
death of Mrs. McBrien’s son.   Unfortunately, I had
no means of knowing what would happen inside the
ground.   I believed that there was adequate room
for all the fans - there had certainly been enough
room on previous occasions.   I could not anticipate
that a corroded barrier would break, causing extra
crushing at the front of the pen.   Although I
complain about the findings of the Taylor Inquiry in
many ways, the judge and counsel for all parties did
assure me that in the circumstances I had no
alternative but to ask for the gates to be opened.
It was another part of the chapter of accidents,
which had many parts, that Gate C was opened first.
If one of the other gates had been opened, there is
at least a chance that many of the fans would have
gone to other parts of the stadium instead of the
centre pen.   Even then, however, it cannot be ruled
out that the choice of the centre pen by many fans
was deliberate and was bound to lead to crushing,
which the barriers ought to have contained.

Complaint by Mr. Jones
You failed to control and filter the crowds away
from the immediate vicinity of the turnstiles even
after 14.17 hours (14.17) when it was obvious you
had lost control of the turnstile area.   In any
event, you should have acted by 14.30 hours (14.30)
at the latest.
                                         R. MARSHALL


You gave no actual order to restrict the approach of
those fans or after 14.30 hours (14.30) to actually
stop fans entering Leppings Lane.
70. I do not agree that we had lost control of the
area by 14.17 hours (2.17 pm) (14.17).   Even at
2.30 pm (14.30) it was not unduly alarming.   The
real problems arose from about 2.35 pm (14.35).

71. However, it doesn't make much difference
because, as I have said at length earlier, it would
not have been practical to try to control the crowd
at a greater distance from the ground.   The numbers
involved from 2.35 pm (14.35) were so great that
they would have overwhelmed any filters or barriers
at the ends of Leppings Lane in exactly the same way
that they overwhelmed the officers in the immediate
vicinity of the turnstiles.   The most likely result
would have been an angry break-through of thousands
of fans, which would have resulted in them arriving
at the turnstiles at a run and in a greater state of
excitement, with even worse results.   As it was,
the crowd could not be contained by a wrought-iron
perimeter gate which was much stronger than any
temporary barrier we could have placed at the ends
of Leppings Lane.   The crowd brushed aside the
perimeter gates, when we tried to close them, taking
a mounted policeman and his horse along with them.

72. This crowd was unstoppable without hundreds more
policemen with access to riot gear and other
equipment and would have totally altered the nature
of the occasion which should have been a pleasant
afternoon of football.   Numerous occasions since
then at home and abroad have shown how difficult it
is to stop any crowd which is determined to get
through.
73. I did not give an order to my men to try to do
the impossible simply because it was impossible.
We tried to restrain them as best we could.    In the
end, the only way was to do what the police in
Sweden did only a week or so afterwards, despite
having said in advance that they wouldn t do so, ie
to open the gates and risk the fans without tickets
getting in, in the hope of avoiding trouble outside
the ground.   As I have said before, what happened
next was the result of many accidents coming
together.   On many other occasions, the only result
would have been that fans without tickets would have
had their way once again.   The breaking of the
barrier was the final event which caused so many
deaths.   I had no means of anticipating that event.
                                                R. MARSHALL


     I have read through the above before signing it.
     It is a true record of my answers to the allegations
     brought against me and I understand that it may be
     used in evidence in respect of the complaints made
     against me by the complainants and in any criminal
     proceedings which may be instituted against me in
     respect of the events at Hillsborough on the 15th
     April 1989
     It is dated the 19th of June, 1990 and is signed by
     Roger Marshall, Superintendent."
     THE CORONERs    Thank you.    Superintendent Marshall,
can you   leave thewitness box?
     We     are going to look at the video now.  Before we
start I     think Mr.Beechey is going to explain something
to us.
     MR. BEECHEY! Yes, sir.    The small inset you can
see on the bottom right hand side of the picture is where
in the interview room we have used two cameras.   The
main camera is the pan, tilt and zoom camera, but the
bottom picture is where we have used a fixed, wide angled
lens camera and that shows everyone in the interview
room, whereas the top camera doesn't get everyone in
because of the size of the room.
     THE CORONERs   So the top one is the one we are
really watching, but the bottom one indicates any
movements within the room if any occurred?
     MR. BEECHEYs     That is correct, sir.
     THE CORONERs    On the video there are pictures of
videos.    In other words, pictures on a television
screen.    Obviously the definition of those will not be
as good as if we had the originals but I think they will
be good enough for us to understand.
     (The    video was shown to the jury as followss

     "MR. FOSTER: This interview is being video and
tape recorded and is being conducted at an interview room
at Furnival House, Furnival Gate, Sheffield.   I am
Detective Chief Superintendent Foster of the West
Midlands Police.   Mr. Marshall would you introduce
yourself with your date of birth as well please.
     MR. MARSHALL:   Yes sir.   I am Roger Marshall and
I'm a Superintendent Deputy Divisional Commander of
Sheffield North Division.   I was born on the 28th of
August 1943 (28081943).
                                              R. MARSHALL


     MR. TOPE:   I am Detective Chief Inspector Kevin
Tope of the West Midlands Police.
     MR. HALEs   Yes Vincent Hale, Solicitor for Mr.
Marshall.
     MR. BROWNs   Police Constable Stephen Brown of the
West Midlands Police.
     MR. FOSTER:   Thank you.   The time now is 1118 on
the 19th of June 1990 (190690).   At the conclusion of
the interview Mr. Marshall I will give you a notice
explaining exactly what will happen to the tapes.   Do
you understand?
     MR. MARSHALL:   Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:   On the 15th of April 1989 (150489) a
disaster occurred at Hillsborough Football Stadium and 95
people died.   Following a Public Inquiry Report the
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire consulted with the
Director of PUblic Prosecutions and as a result West
Midlands Police were requested to do a criminal
investigation.   The investigation came at the same time
that certain members of the public decided to make
specific allegations against named police officers.
You're one of those officers and you have already been
served with Regulation 7 Notices dealing with those
specific complaints.   The nature of those complaints and
the particular duty you were performing at Hillsborough
would suggest that you may have contributed to the deaths
of some of those that died, also that you may have failed
to perform your lawful duty as a police officer on the
15th of April 1989 (150489) at Hillsborough. I will
explain the specific allegations to you in interview, but
do you understand the nature of this interview which
raises both the criminal and discipline matters.    Beforfe
you answer I need to formally caution you, you do not
have to say anything unless you wish to do so but what
you say may be given in evidence.   Do you understand the
purpose of the interview?

     MR. MARSHALL:   Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:   Thank you.   I'll remind you that you
are not under arrest and you need not remain here unless
you wish to do so.   In addition, you are entitled to the
legal representation which you have present in the forro
of Mr. Hale, and there is if you did require it a legal
aid notice there for your guidance.   Do you understand
what I've just said then?
     MR. MARSHALL:   Yes sir.
                                             R. MARSHALL


     MR. FOSTER:   You gave evidence initially at the
Public Inquiry of which there has been a transcript.    Do
you agree with that?
     MR. MARSHALL:      Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:   You also provided to that Inquiry a
written statement or recollection which was given to the
West Midlands Police.
     MR. MARSHALL:      Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:       You accept that?

     MR. MARSHALL:       Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:   You*ve also provided to me today a
document of 19 pages, 19 pages and a separate document
headed "Check list for all defendants two sides, which
you have asked to be considered, one by me but also by
the Director of Public Prosecutions and any other
persons, and you have accordingly signed a caption at the
end of that which says that you understand it may be used
in evidence.   Do you agree?

     MR. MARSHALL:       Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:   Thank you.   Perhaps to start off with
can we just agree that I un... you know that you re
shown on video at at various times during...

     MR.   MARSHALL:     Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:    ...the 1989 (000089) match.   Can I
just ask you to view Document number 136 on the video and
just confirm for me at this stage that that the shots I m
doing include yourself.    It may well be that some time
later you may want to refer to them or I will, it just
clears it at this minute that there's no doubt.
     For the benefit of the audio we are now actually
looking at at that document which shows the video a"d
should show Mr. Marshall that.   I should explain with
this particular video that we are seeing that there is no
time and we can't give a specific time to it.   It s a
BBC hand-held camera that although the operator gives a
time of when he started it and it runs for six minutes,
he cannot say that it ran continually for six minutes
from that time.   Can you fast forward PC Brown to the
point where we think Mr. Marshall is shown.

(PC Brown fast forwarding video tape)
                                                     39


                                              R.: MARSHALL


     For the benefit of the audio we*re still going
through, we've now found that*   You agree with us that s
yourself.••
     MR. MARSHALL:   Yeh.
     MR. FOSTER:   Mr. Marshall on that part.   Thank
you.   I don't think there's another part to that.
Thank you.
     Would you tell me your length of police service at
the, at the moment and your present posting please.
     MR. MARSHALL:   Yeh I joined the, I joined the West
Riding Constabulary as a Cadet in 1960 (000060) and
became a Constable in 1962 (000062).   My present posting
is Deputy Divisional Commander of Sheffield North
Division.   I took up that posting in 1987 (000087).




                 MR. FOSTER:   Thank you.   Could you.••.
                                       R. MARSHALL



      MR. FOSTER: Thank you. Could you tell me your
experience of policing Hillsborough since you've been in
the South Yorkshire Police.
      MR. MARSHALL: Yes the first occasion I got involved
with policing football matches at Hillsborough was in
1977 (000077) and I did three years experience working
actually Hammerton Road Division where the Hillsborough
ground is located and then I moved on to other postings,
eventually coming back to Hillsborough in 1987 (000087).

      MR. FOSTER:     1987 (000087).

      MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.
      MR. FOSTER: Does that mean that you were not present
at the 1981 (000081) Semi-Final when I think we already
know crushing occurred on the Leppings Lane terraces?

      MR. MARSHALL:     I was not present.

      MR. FOSTER:     You were not present?

      MR. MARSHALL:     No.
      MR. FOSTER: Thank you.      Were you on duty at the
the 1987 (000087) Semi-Final?

      MR. MARSHALL:     No.
      MR. FOSTER: No. So the first time that you actually
come on to semi-final work at Hillsborough is in 1988
(000088).
      MR. MARSHALL: I did police one semi-final and I think
that was one between Arsenal and Liverpool, but that would
be round about 1980'ish (000080) I think.

      MR. FOSTER:     ints ....
      MR. MARSHALL: I'm not, I'm not too sure of the date
but it would be ....
      MR. FOSTER:     Prior to the 1981 (000081) incident?

      MR. MARSHALL: Yes. The reason it stands out in my
mind is I, I arrested a chap on the Spion Kop who'd actually
fired one of these pyrotechnic flares straight into the
North Stand, and that's why it star... it stood out in
my mind.
      MR. FOSTER: And we ... we're satisfied that's
previous to the 1981 (000081) final?
                                                              41

                                        R. MARSHALL



      MR. MARSHALL: That was certainly prior to, prior
to 198... 1981 (000081) because in 19... in 1981 (000081)
I was promoted Chief Inspector and I went to Barnsley, and
served a short period at Barnsley, went to the Police Staff
College on the Junior Command Course and then was posted
into the Research and Development Department (interruption)
so I was, I was away from operational policing between
about 1980 and about 8... '81 (000081) and '87 (000087).

      MR. FOSTER: I see thank you. There was following
the 1981 (000081) game a debrief which occurred that that
brought up the problems that had happened in 1981 (000081)
which I know you're aware of now, but can you tell me the
first time that you were aware as a police officer of the
problems of 1981 (000081).
      MR. MARSHALL: The first time I was aware of it was
when I read the papers ---- two or three weeks ago.

      MR. FOSTER:        Two   or three weeks ago?

      MR. MARSHALL:        Yes.
      MR. FOSTER: C.... just going back to the perhaps
the Public Inquiry last year then, was it, did you hear
of it at the Public Inquiry at all?
      MR. MARSHALL:        I heard of it in, yes, I heard of it.

      MR. FOSTER:        You   heard of the problems.

      MR. MARSHALL:        Yes.
      MR. FOSTER: Are you aware of what South Yorkshire
Police did following the 1981 (000081) problem?

      MR. MARSHALL:        Only, only after I heard it at the
Public Inquiry.
         MR. FOSTER:     Only after ...

         MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.
         MR. FOSTER:     that?    So you had no previous knowledge
of it?
         MR. MARSHALL:     No.
      MR. FOSTER: Okay. The, the document that related
to it which I, which was brought up there was literally
a debrief minute document. To your knowledge had you
ever seen that document at all?

         MR. MARSHALL:     No.
                                                         42

                                   R. MARSHALL



      MR. FOSTER: No. It is a document that, for example,
is on file at firstly, South Yorkshire Police Headquarters ..

     MR. MARSHALL:     Mm.

      MR. FOSTER: on their Football Policy file that's
been in exis    in existence since the commencement of
the Force, and secondly, at the 'F' Division Headquarters
on a separate football file that's Divisional file. Would
you not have seen the document at either of those two?

     MR. MARSHALL:     No I didn't see that.

      MR. FOSTER: You didn't see that document. Thank
you. Di... are you are you happy and familiar with the
document that I'm talking about or would you, would you
prefer to see, see the actual document itself now?

      MR. MARSHALL:     Well I've not seen the document ...

      MR. FOSTER:     No.
      MR. MARSHALL: until, until I looked through the
football files some weeks ago ...

      MR. FOSTER:     Okay.
      MR. MARSHALL: in respect of I, I think it was a
Wolverhampton match.

      MR. FOSTER:     Mm mm.
      MR. MARSHALL:     Wolverhampton Wanderers.

      MR. FOSTER:     Okay, so you you --
      MR. MARSHALL: I wasn't I wasn't obv          I wasn't
aware of the existence of a problem ....

      MR. FOSTER:     Mm.
      MR. MARSHALL:     until I heard it at the, at the Public
Inquiry.
      MR. FOSTER: Thank you.   (Pause) As a result of,
of that particular problem in 1981 (000081), the radial
fences were introduced over a period of the next few years
at different stages. Did you have knowledge of those
fences being put in and the reason why they were put in?

      MR. MARSHALL: No because I had nothing to do with
Hillsborough Football Ground after 1981 (000081) until
1987 (000087).
                                                            43

                                         R. MARSHALL



         MR. FOSTER:     Not even obviously in in conversation
or ...

         MR. MARSHALL:     No.

      MR. FOSTER: general, general chat. Thank you.
A... appreciating that you weren't there in 1987 (000087)
for.for that Semi-Final, there has been a suggestion to us,
in evidence, from a witness, that there was overcrowding
on the terraces in in the 1987 (000087) Semi-Final. Would
you have any knowledge of that at all?

         MR. MARSHALL:     No knowledge.

      MR. FOSTER: Thank you. We we do know that in 1988
(000088) when you were actually posted inside the ground
as Ground Commander ...

         MR. MARSHALL:     Mm.
      MR. FOSTER: from witnesses, that people were injured
on the terraces and it's suggested that overcrowding was
the cause of of those injuries. Did you, were you aware
of that on that day of that semi-final?

         MR. MARSHALL:     No.

         MR. FOSTER:     Not at all?

         MR. MARSHALL:     Not at all.
      MR. FOSTER: No. Can you tell me, one, were you
aware of it before I just said it and if so when the first
occasion was?

         MR. MARSHALL:     No I wasn't aware of it.

         MR. FOSTER:     Not not aware of it at all?

         MR. MARSHALL:     No.

      MR. FOSTER: Thera, there is a debrief situation
that takes place at the end of each ...

         MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.

      MR. FOSTER: game like that. If police officers
under your command had dealt with say injured people or,
or from the St John's Ambulance that they had found out
that people were injured, would you have expected those
sort of things to come out in debrief so that you would
be aware?
                                                      44

                                 R. MARSHALL



      MR. MARSHALL: Yes because if there had been injured
people then the instructions would be, and always have
been, for the nearest police officer to accompany the, the
casualty with the St John's Ambulance ....

      MR. FOSTER:   Mm mm.
      MR. MARSHALL: man to the first aid hut by the
policeman, take the individual's name and address and
and see to it that if if the chap was being taken to hospital
then his next of kin was informed or if he was, if he was
a walking wounded then, then something could be done for
him to help him on his way.
      MR. FOSTER: So the ... in normal procedures you
would have expected to have found out about that sort of
thing if it was quite extensive certainly?
      MR. MARSHALL: Right, bee      because those, those
facts would have would have figured in the debrief along
with the the other routine information so far as the
number of prisoners which had been taken for football
offences and so forth.
      MR. FOSTER: From your position inside the ground
that you you've got a responsibility then, is there any
way in which perhaps through the debrief someone else
could have learnt a bit do you think without you learning
of it. In other words, perhaps another Superintendent or the
say the match Commander who I know then was Mr. MOLE. Do
you think it is it at all possible that you wouldn't have
been aware of that?
      MR. MARSHALL: It it may have been possible but ....
I cannot remember attending any any formal debrief after
the 1988 (000088) Semi-Final, but I, I would have been
aware of it. If people had been injured I would have been
aware of it at the, at the time and I've no recollection
of anybody be., being injured as a result of crushing
during the 1988 (000088) Semi-Final.
      MR. FOSTER: Okay then, that's fine. I mean the --
there is obviously the possibility that injured people
have gone off themselves and and gone to hospital which,
which I understand and and maybe ...

      MR. MARSHALL:   Yeh.
      MR. FOSTER: the policemen weren't involved. It
was really just trying to find out whether you, you had
that knowledge of it.
      Taking away the injury side in 1988 (000088) was
there anything that happened inside the ground on that
                                                     45

                                     R. MARSHALL



occasion that would have alerted you to any problem of
overcrowding on those terraces, that suggested there was
a problem?
      MR. MARSHALL: I can't remember anything, and and the
only, the only thing that I can remember of significance
was the, the fact that Liverpool supporters managed to
get tickets on the, on the Kop which had been which was
reserved for the Forest supporters.

      MR. FOSTER:     Mm.
      MR. MARSHALL: Now if you're familiar with the ground
looking at the, looking at the ground behind you now, if
I can just point that out ....
      MR. FOSTER: For the benefit of the audio Mr. MARSHALL
is now pointing at a large map on the wall. Again if you
want to stand up Mr. MARSHALL and ...
      MR. MARSHALL: Yeh, I, I'm fine and that, that be
myself, well because in this area here there's a elevated
pen.
      MR. FOSTER: Can I just, I have to do this Mr. MARSHALL
Mr. MARSHALL is presently pointing at an elevated section
of the terrace.
      MR. MARSHALL:     At the Spion Kop.

      MR. FOSTER:     At the Spion Kop --

      MR. MARSHALL:     Yeh.
      MR. FOSTER: which is adjacent to the North Stand
near where it's marked Turnstile 77 to 88.
      MR. MARSHALL: Yeh. Now, now this, this actually
gives a misleading impression because that is the roof
this, this rec... rectangular ....

      MR. FOSTER:     Yes.
      MR. MARSHALL: structure which I'm pointing to now,
in actual fact is the roof of the Spion Kop so it gives
a misleading impression. In fact this area here is a
terrace which is connected to and is adjacent to the sloping
steps to the

      MR. FOSTER:     So ---
      M R . MARSHALL:   Spion Kop.   Now then ---
                                                            46


                                    R. MARSHALL



      MR. FOSTER: Th     what you've just explained there
is you've looked at the, what is virtually a rectangled
shape marked 'Spion Kop' saying that that is the roof
area.
       MR. MARSHALL: That that's the roof area of the Spion
Kop.   In actual fact this area here ....

       MR. FOSTER:    Yes.
      MR. MARSHALL: was was the area which we had designated
to put the Liverpool spec--- spectators into, the people
who had managed to get, either by one way or another, Kop
end tickets for the, for the Spion Kop, and there there
was a problem in relation to maintaining segregation between
those spectators ...

       MR. FOSTER:    Mm.
      MR. MARSHALL:      and the, and the, and the Forest
spectators,
       MR. FOSTER:     Mm.
      MR. MARSHALL: and it was necessary to put a, a
substantial police presence as a human barrier between to
prevent fighting and disorder ...

       MR. FOSTER:     Now was --
      MR. MARSHALL: and that was, that was the one thing
that stood in, stood out in my mind as a, as a memorable
incident.
      MR. FOSTER: And I take it that was because, I'll
say so here, was that because they obtained tickets for
the wrong end of the ground, in other words they they
obtained Nottingham Forest tickets or was it that that part
of the ground was set aside for them ...

       MR. MARSHALL:     No.
       MR. FOSTER:     with specific tickets.
      MR. MARSHALL: No that was not set aside, that was
a contingency plan ...

       MR. FOSTER:     Yes.
      MR. MARSHALL: which was designed to cope with those
individuals who managed to obtain, who managed to obtain
tickets for the, for the Spion Kop. Now how they'd obtained
them having, clearly I can't make a judgment on that, but
                                                        47


                                   R. MARSHALL



that's, you know and I know that if, if certain types
of spectator managed to mix then the inevitable confrontation
leads to, leads to violence and public disorder.

      MR. FOSTER: So if we look at the question in over­
crowding terms, that didn't present an overcrowding problem
but it's the only problem that you can rec... recollect.

      MR. MARSHALL: That's the only problem I can recollect
in 1988 (000088) yes.
      MR. FOSTER: For 1988 (000088). Thank you. I think
you just said to me a little bit earlier you don't remember
going to a debrief after the '88 (000088) game. Did you
hold a debrief yourself after the '88 (000088) game, for
your own officers that that were under your command ....

      MR. MARSHALL:    No.
      MR. FOSTER: there? Is that because there is the
system whereby they are debriefed by Inspectors and they
produce a written debrief which is assessed?

      MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.
      MR. FOSTER: Thank you. If there were no problems
in 1988 (000088) do you feel there was any need to then sit
down as a group of senior officers and actually go through
what, what appeared to be a successful operation?
      MR. MARSHALL: Yes, because Mr. MOLE who was then
the Divisional Commander was a very, he was a very very
experienced man in terms of running big semi-finals and big
matches, and to the, to the extent that he was a visiting
speaker at the Police Training School at Bishop ... at
Bishopgarth in Wakefield on, on football and it was, it
followed that he would always have a debrief after a game
on such as the 1988 (000088) Semi-Final as we keep —

      MR. FOSTER: Right, so it's only because I, I thought
that earlier you said you don't remember attending the
debrief.
      MR. MARSHALL:     I don     I don't personally remember
attending them.
      MR. FOSTER:     No but he, but he would have held one.

      MR. MARSHALL:     But but there would, there would have
been a debrief,

      MR. FOSTER:     Yes.
                                                        48

                                      R. MARSHALL



      MR. MARSHALL: but, but I might well have been off
duty an' if I had nothing to contribute to that ....

     MR. FOSTER:     Mm.
      MR. MARSHALL: then then, then I wouldn't have been,
I wouldn't have made a point of being present but I may
have been present,

     MR. FOSTER:     Yes.
     MR. MARSHALL:         but I can1 remember.




                            /MR, FOSTER:   Thank you.
                                                    49

                                               R. MARSHALL




     MR. FOSTER:   Thank you. Dealing again with 1988 and
I know that this matter has been put to you before, there
is, there was the suggestion that the tunnel, the central
tunnel to those pens three and four was closed off ...

    MR. MARSHALL:      Mm.
     MR. FOSTER:   at some stage and I know that you've
already said that you were unaware of that.

     MR. MARSHALL:     Mm.
     MR. FOSTER:   If, if police officers had done that,
do you think again that you would have been aware of it?
Is it the sort of thing that they would have come to you
and told you afterwards?
     MR. MARSHALL:   Yeh they would, they wouldn't have,
they may not have told me personally, but I feel sure that
that would, that would have featured in, in one of the
written serial debrief notes. I feel sure that that would
have happened.
     MR. FOSTER:   Yeh cause if, if we look at the, the
effect of closing those tunnel ... those gates as was
suggested, I think you've got a view on that.

     MR. MARSHALL:   Yeh I, I do because the gates
themselves could not effectively be used to close off the
tunnel, simply because the, again you're going to have to
bear with me while I stand up and actually demonstrate,

     MR. FOSTER:     Mm yeh.
     MR. MARSHALL:   and you must interpret for the tapes
as best you can, but this is, this is the tunnel, right.

     MR. FOSTER:   Mr. Marshall's pointing now to that
central tunnel that leads to pens three and four.
     MR. MARSHALL:   Right, now then the gates, the gates
there are double gates, right,

     MR. FOSTER:     Yes.
     MR. MARSHALL:   and they open back in that fashion,
so they're actually in fact up against the wall an' they
will not open outwards. You're with me?

     MR. FOSTER:     Yes.
     MR. MARSHALL:   Right. Now then if a situation
arises where this is full and there's emergency inside, it
doesn't take too much imagination to visualise what would
                                                    50

                                               R. MARSHALL




be the result of people wanting to exit through that
tunnel and coming up against completely closed substantial
gates which would not open outwards. Not only are they in
contravention of the Safety in Sports Ground, but they
would be an absolutely death trap in respect of people
wanting to, to make an exit from pens 3 and 4.
     MR. FOSTER:   Mr. Marshall has just pointed to those
on the map to where those gates are that close off that
tunnel.
     (Pause)
     MR. FOSTER:   You may be aware that I've spoken to or
have interviewed in fact Police Constable Smith and Police
Constables Illingworth recently ...

     MR. MARSHALL:   Yeh.
     MR. FOSTER:   and obviously other officers have been
spoken to. Certainly and I think it's, it's been brought
up before that there there has been different systems in
the past for putting crowds into those particular
terraces. Certainly both those officers have suggested
they they di... they have seen occasions where those gates
that you've just referred to have been closed. Now, for
example, PC Smith said he believed it was at a time when
they used to bring the supporters in and fill in the pens
one at a time. Would you have been aware of that type of
situation before?

     MR. MARSHALL:   No.
     MR. FOSTER:   No. PC Illingworth, on the other hand,
has said that he thought and he's worked the concourse
area before which we would understand, if you accept the
concourse area being the area between the turnstiles and
the back of the West Stand, that he has seen the gates
closed and he'd assumed before it was because that the
pens were full and to stop people going down.

     MR. MARSHALL:   Mm.

     MR. FOSTER:   Have you ever come across that as a
suggestion, accepting that it's totally contrary to your
view and to what you ve said?

     MR. MARSHALL:   No.
     MR. FOSTER:   No. Can you think of any occasion
where in your knowledge that those gates have ever been in
a closed format?

     MR. MARSHALL:   No.
                                                         51

                                                    R. MARSHALL




     MR. FOSTER:   No. Would you think it's possible that
the stewards that are employed in various locations could
ever have taken it upon their responsibility to have
closed those gates without consulting the police?

     MR. MARSHALL:     Er, I doubt it very much.

     MR. FOSTER:     You doubt it.

     MR. MARSHALL:     Mm. (Pause)
     MR. FOSTER:    Moving    on to, to1989 (000089)          now, if
we can come on to that side, you actually changed
operational roles with Mr. Greenwood.

     MR. MARSHALL:     That's right, yes.

     MR. FOSTER:     Can you tell me why that change took
place?

     MR. MARSHALL:   The only reason I think was one of
the variety in so far as I'd done the inside of the ground
in 1988 (000088) and I discussed with Brian Mole what I'll
do once we knew we were going to get the semi-final, said
well I'll, I'd, I'd looked after the Nottingham Forest
fans as well outside plus on, on the '88 (000088) sir, so
I said I would do the Liverpool fans in 1989 (000089).

     MR. FOSTER:   Was it ever considered that when Mr.
Mole left and Mr. Duckenfield was coming in as a new
commander, did youever consider it may have been better
to revert back to to your experienced role if you like,
without changing. Did that ever come up?

     MR. MARSHALL:     No no no.

     MR. FOSTER:   You accepted in those two roles      that
when you, went outside in 1989 (000089) that there      were a
number of police officers actually designated with      the
responsibility for Mr. Greenwood, the ones outside      the
turnstiles ...

     MR. MARSHALL:     Yeh.

     MR. FOSTER:     that ...

     MR. MARSHALL:     Serials 16, 17, 18 and 19.

     MR. FOSTER:   Yeh. That those officers are actually
outside and and you have said I think to the inquiry you
always knew that you would be around that Leppings Lane
area on that time.

     MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.
                                                 R, MARSHALL




     MR. FOSTER:   Does that mean that you accept the
responsibility for the actions those police officers take
outside those turnstiles?

    MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:   You do, thank you. And is that an
understanding that you and Mr. Greenwood had the year
before an' and was it a sort of talked about
understanding?
     MR. MARSHALL:   No it wasn't, I I can't remember any,
any conversation with Roger Greenwood for the game before
or indeed f.. for this year.

     MR. FOSTER:     So ...
     MR. MARSHALL:   I I, I automatically assumed that I
would be in charge of these officers outside the
turnstiles but you must remember that three of, I think
three serials on duties inside once the ...

     MR. FOSTER:     Phase two.
     MR. MARSHALL:     kick-off takes place - Phase two.

     MR. FOSTER:     Yes.
     MR. MARSHALL:     Yeh.
     MR. FOSTER:   That leads me on to that side of it.
Would those officers understand that they were under your
command outside albeit if they read the order it appears
they're always under Mr. Greenwood and he briefed them.

     MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:    Would they understand from a briefing
that you   were incontrol outside?
     MR. MARSHALL:     I'm not quite sure   what they would
understand.

     MR. FOSTER:     No.
     MR. MARSHALL:   I mean I cannot, that's something
you'd have to ask them.
     MR.   FOSTER: Okay fine. But whatyou're saying is
that if anything needed to be done you would take on the
responsibility of saying to them ...

     MR. MARSHALL:     Yeh.
                                                          53

                                                    R. MARSHALL




        MR. FOSTER:     you need to do this, you need to do
that.
     MR. MARSHALL:   Yeh, yes. I mean, I've never seen,
I've never sought to evade responsibility ...

        MR. FOSTER:     No.
     MR. MARSHALL:   for the fact that that whatever was
done wasn't done. I was in charge outside and you know
there is no way that I would expect Roger Greenwood to be,
to pick up a responsibility at this stage in respect of
anything which happened outside.

        MR. FOSTER:     No No, it's really is just ...

        MR. MARSHALL:     Yeh.
     MR. FOSTER:        clarifying the the organisation and
what it worked.
        MR. MARSHALL:     Yeh.

     MR. FOSTER:   You, you've attended a number of
meetings and briefings before the actual event ...

        MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:   on the 15th of April, and you actually
completed a set of briefing notes which, which again we
have here.

        MR. MARSHALL:     That's right, yes.

        MR. FOSTER:     There is both a written one ...

        MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.

        MR. FOSTER:     set of briefing notes,

        MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.

     MR. FOSTER:   and a typed set. Can you tell me this
whi .. which ones did you actually use as your briefing
document to the people that you briefed?

        MR. MARSHALL:     The handwritten set.

        MR. FOSTER:     The handwritten set.

        MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.

     MR. FOSTER:   Okay fine. I mean they, within your
briefing to the officers under your command, was it a
                                                R. MARSHALL




factor that safety of supporters outside the ground
featured in your briefing in any way?

     MR. MARSHALL:   I have to say no no it did not, but
the factor of safety was one of the things which Mr.
Duckenfield included in his briefing, not only to the
Inspectors and to the Chief Inspectors, but also to the
entire deployment of officers who reported for briefing on
the morning of the game, but it was not specifically part
of my brief.
     MR. FOSTER:     You refer quite a bit to public order
situations ...
     MR. MARSHALL:     That's right.

     MR. FOSTER:     in fact ...

     MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:   and would you tell me perhaps the
reason why the emphasis is, is on that ...

     MR. MARSHALL:     Well.
     MR. FOSTER:     as an outside commander.

     MR. MARSHALL:   It it may be that I've a fairly
jaundiced view of football supporters, but there were
incidents which had taken place at the 1988 (000088) Sem..
Semi-Final which I found disturbing and distasteful, for
instance, there was a fight and a stabbing which took
place in in Hillsborough Park,

     MR. FOSTER:     Mm.
     MR. MARSHALL:   and which was only detected by some
very good work by a Special Constable who has an off-
licence which was raided, there was some shoplifting which
took place down in the precinct and generally the
reputation of, of Liverpool fans left a lot to be desired
in my view.
     MR. FOSTER:   So you had taken some time to find out
what had happened in the past at ...

     MR. MARSHALL:     Well
     MR. FOSTER:    previous events to, I mean you, you've
mentioned there to me about the stabbing ...

     MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.
                                                R., MARSHALL




     MR. FOSTER:   so you've taken some time to sort of
assimilate what happened before and to to brief
accordingly. At ... has there ever been a problem to your
knowledge of safety of any individuals outside those
turnstiles before 1989 (000089). Was there anything that
you know of that should have perhaps attracted your
attention to the fact that people were, could have been in
danger outside?
     MR. MARSHALL:   No there wasn't, no.
     MR. FOSTER:   Thank you. You've just said actually
you were present at Mr. Duckenfield's briefing and he
specifically talked about the elements of safety,

     MR. MARSHALL:   Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:   and could you tell me the sort of areas
that he, that he touched on with safety in specific terms.
Can you recall them?
     MR. MARSHALL:   Not in so many words,   I I couldn't.
I think you, you know you will see that if   you look at
the, the Div..., the Operational Order for   the game, that
that safety is actually referred to too in   there. I mean
if I can just, just find that ...
     MR. FOSTER:   Mr. Marshall is now referring to the
Match Order for 1989 (oooo89) which is Document - this is
for our purposes - Document 194.
     MR. MARSHALL:   Yes. You you see at item two 2.1,
that's Intention, it is the intention of the police to
allow this match to take place and ens... ensure public
order and safety both inside the football ground to
segregate and control opposing fans and prevent
unnecessary obstruction of the highway and damage to
property. This will be attained and displayed with a
highest standard of smartness and professionalism, and
that, and that that is my recollection of the the
information which was given by Mr. Duckenfield to the, the
officers.
     MR. FOSTER:  And I think Mr. Murray did a briefing
as well. Were you present at that one?

     MR. MARSHALL:   Yes I was.

     MR. FOSTER:   Yeh. Do you recall him in any way
specifically mentioning safety of any kind?
     MR. MARSHALL:   He he probably did, my lasting
impression is that the briefings were done to a prepared
script. They were, they were very very professional, they
                                                        56

                                                  R.. MARSHALL




were with the microphone was setup and everyone could, was
asked if they could hear, people were sat down in their
serials and it was everything that I expected it to be; it
was, it was done in a professional way.
     MR. FOSTER:   Thank you. Coming on to your own
responsibility again, you had I think you've said in
excess of two hundred and twenty-seven officers under your
command.
     MR. MARSHALL:    Two hundred and twe4nty-seven?

     MR. FOSTER:   Two hundred and twenty-seven
Constables, thirty Sergeants ...

     MR. MARSHALL:    Five.
     MR. FOSTER:  Eleven Inspectors and two, two Chief
Inspectors. Would that be right?
     MR. MARSHALL:   Yes the the total for my sector was
two hundred and seventy, and if you include the the
officers on the turnstiles you can add to that one Chief
Inspector, two Inspectors, four Sergeants and forty PCs, a
total of forty seven, and that comes to a total of three
hundred and seventeen, plus plus some mounted officers.

     MR. FOSTER:     Plus the mounted officers.

     MR. MARSHALL:    Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:    Now the ... it may sound a lot of
police officers ...

     MR. MARSHALL:     Yeh.

     MR. FOSTER:     to to people.

     MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:   Can you explain to me the, or give me
any estimation, I don't know the area and I know the other
people don't, geographically what sort of area are those
officers spread over. I mean can you give distances or


     MR. MARSHALL:     Yes, if you ...
     MR. FOSTER:     So the furthest point in from, from
your control.
     MR. MARSHALL:   D.. Difficult to appreciate unless
you actually know you actually know the area but if you
can envisage virtually the, the entire entire area to the
                                                  R.. MARSHALL




south and to the west and to the north west of the
football ground, extending outwards I guess for about a
mile and a half to a mile and three quarters, you that
that is the sector which was to be policed by, by those
officers.
     MR. FOSTER:   So that ...
     MR. MARSHALL:   So you ... the the the concentration
is, is spread over probably that entire area.
     MR. FOSTER:   The point being that they are not all
in and around Leppings Lane.




                   /MR. MARSHALL:   That's true
                                                       58


                                                R. MARSHALL


   MR. MARSHALL:     That's true.

   MR. FOSTER:     at that point?

   MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.

   MR. FOSTER:   Out of that number how many would you put
or how many from, from the serials and that are
specifically around the Leppings Lane area for you ...

   MR. MARSHALL:     Er ...

   MR. FOSTER:     would you estimate?

   MR. MARSHALL:   Again that, that number, that number
tended to vary, depending on whatever time you, you choose
to, to pick out, on, for instance, the the, you'll perhaps
be familiar with the residential area which is on the west
side of the ground known as the, the triangle, referred to
as the triangle, no you can't see it on your map but its
bounded by Leppings Lane and by Penistone Road and its an,
an with with the ground as the, as one side of the
triangle.

     MR. FOSTER:   Is, is that where a lot of them, a lot
of the supporters park and ...

     MR. MARSHALL:     No.

     MR. FOSTER:come through?

     MR. MARSHALL:   No no no, is is not, no.    That area    is
a, a residential area ...

     MR. FOSTER:     Mm.

     MR. MARSHALL:   and its, its long been police practice
to place barriers at the ends of the streets and prevent
all access to that area, except for residents an' that's
been forced upon police by the bad behaviour of fans in the
past who've parked motor vehicles down there and abused
their welcomes, climbed into the ground, urinated in
people's gardens and generally caused mayhem in, in that
particular area. Now the the area was policed on that day
by three serials of officers and there were, there were
Sergeants, a Sergeant and eight Constables in each serial,
and they were, they were on duty in the triangle manning
the barriers, but some would be remote from from Leppings
Lane in other words they'd be down on Penistone Road which
is the main thoroughfare into town. The the, the er area
on the left hand side of Leppings Lane was similarly
treated with, with serials of officers to, to look after
the local residents.

     MR. FOSTER:   So that, that is something that has
built up obviously over the years.
                                                         59


                                                R . MARSHALL



    MR. MARSHALL:      Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:   It's been of a protective nature because
you're saying the nature of the crowds that have come over
the years ...
     MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:     and something that is, is it virtually a
static post then?
     MR. MARSHALL:   Yes, yes the barriers are crowd
controlled by us and two officers are are allocated to each
barrier.
     MR. FOSTER:   Right then.     Would, would that apply to
both ends of the road?
     MR. MARSHALL:     Yes the the entire triangle ...

     MR. FOSTER:     Mm.
     MR. MARSHALL:   Bickerton Road, Fielding Road, Leek
Road, Vere Road, all these roads, all these streets are,
are blocked off by barriers. It becomes a a "No Go" area
for all ...

     MR. FOSTER:     Mm.
     MR. MARSHALL:    except residents.

     MR. FOSTER:     Right.
     MR. MARSHALL:  The residents perfectly well
understand that and indeed are most grateful for it.

     MR. FOSTER:   So, so that is in the region of I think
you said three serials of ...

     MR. MARSHALL:    Yes.

     MR. FOSTER:     of an ...

     MR. MARSHALL:    One and eight.
     MR. FOSTER:   of a one and eight so it's ... twenty-
seven officers ...

     MR. MARSHALL:    Yes, yes.
     MR. FOSTER:     for that.    The...they are fairly close
to Leppings Lane.

     MR. MARSHALL:    Yes.
                                              R. MARSHALL


     MR. FOSTER:   liny other officers specifically posted
to that area for for other matters you'd like to refer to?
     MR. MARSHALL:   Yes, the there, there were officers in
the vicinity of the, of the shopping precinct on Catchbar
Lane, and there were officers down by the, the roundabout,
the actual roundabout, at the end of Leppings Lane it's a
junction of Halifax Road and or rather Penistone Road North
and Penistone Road and Herries Road, again with specific
duties and that defined in the Operational Order.

     MR. FOSTER:   Mm. I know it's difficult but you you
cannot, you're not able to say really exactly how many
officers would have been in and around that area at set
times?
     MR. MARSHALL:   It, it is difficult to say that, it's
a question of addition, I suppose - twenty-six (clicks
fingers) about forty, sixty, I suppose round about a
hundred officers in in total if you include the the serial,
the four serials of ...

     MR. FOSTER:     Mm.
     MR. MARSHALL:     officers who were actually on
turnstile duty.
     MR. FOSTER:     So pos... possibly round a hundred that
were ...

     MR. MARSHALL:     About a hundred.

     MR. FOSTER:     f... fairly handy ...

     MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.
     MR. FOSTER:     to you for to help if you like in any
situation.
     MR. MARSHALL:    Well handy is, handy is a, a difficult
interpretation, the each each and every Constable had a
duty to do , and bear in mind that each a n ... not each and
every Constable had a radio so in terms of you know your
your statement that they were handy ...

     MR. FOSTER:     Mm.
     MR. MARSHALL:   they might not be as handy as perhaps
you you would think.
     MR. FOSTER:   So when you've got the difficulty that
they they may well already have assigned duties that it
would be difficult for them to leave except in a dire
emergency.

     MR. MARSHALL:     Right yes.
                                                  R. MARSHALL



     MR. FOSTER:   and secondly, because of the lack of
communications for every officer ...

     MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.

     MR. FOSTER:     that number is is reduced.

     MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.

     MR. FOSTER:   Fine. Available to you on a reserve
basis. What is your understanding with the number of
serials and the amount of officers that were available to
you to, to call on if you needed them?
     MR. MARSHALL:   Yeh. The reserve serials amounted to
what I think two Inspectors, two Sergeants and, and ten PCs
and, and they they would be from the 'F' Division Crime and
Vandal Squad and now known as the Divisional Support Group
and the 'E' Divisional Crime and Vandal Squad which would
be Serials 20 and 21 ...

     MR. FOSTER:     A total of ...

     MR. MARSHALL:     A total of about twenty-four.

     MR. FOSTER:     Twenty-four officers.
     MR. MARSHALL:     Twenty-four officers.

     MR. FOSTER:   And your understanding would be they
would be placed where?

     MR. MARSHALL:     They were in the gymnasium.

     MR. FOSTER:     In the gymnasium.

     MR. MARSHALL:     Yeh.

     MR. FOSTER:   As a reserve serials do we understand
that they were reserve serial for anyone's request as
opposed to just your specific reserve serials?

     MR. MARSHALL:   They weren't mine, they were reserve
serials for the ground, and and, and the entire operation.

     M R . FOSTER: Thank you. The d o ... would you accept
that the responsibility in terms of the crowd coming down
Leppings Lane and the build up of the crowd, the control of
that crowd was your responsibility for that particular
match?

     MR. MARSHALL:     Yes.

    MR. FOSTER:      Thank you.   (Pause)
                                                         62

A
                                                 R. MARSHALL


         MR. FOSTER:   I think at this stage, Mr. Marshall, if
    we can finish this particular interview as the tape is
    about to run out and if we can agree that the time is 1201.
    Mr. Tope, if you would now switch off the audio .v>
B        THE CORONER:   That is the end of the audio tape and
    this is where we stop as well. We will have lunch. It is
    now ten to. Can we start a little earlier, gentlemen? We
    will start at ten to and then we will listen to the next
    one. We will have a relatively short pause then. Then
    there is another one with a slightly longer pause and then
    there is another one but the last one is shorter. I think
    we will be finished between quarter and half past four. It
    will take us until then to get through the tapes.
C
                        LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT




D




E




F




G




H
                                                    63




             (In the absence of the jury)

     MR. KING:   Sir, may I say at once that I am
conscious you wish to keep to a timetable, but the matter
was of sufficient importance that I wanted you to be put
on notice immediately.
     Sir, I was minded to rise immediately when the short
adjournment was made after we heard the first two
statements.   Sir, it concerns the admissibility of the
two statements which have already been read to the jury,
and.in particular the so-called voluntary statement of
Superintendent Roger Marshall.   Sir, can I put you on
notice that first my submission is that it was totally
inadmissible.   Secondly, if it were admissible it would
be imadmissible under Rule 37 as documentary evidence and
that that Rule has not been complied with in the sense
that the maker of the statement is here, that there was
not notice given as to the fact he was going to have this
statement read out and certainly no opportunity was given
for a copy of that statement to be circulated, seen and
objection made.
     Sir, as you know an actual copy of it was only
produced half way through the reading out of it;
certainly I had no notice of what its contents were going
to be.   Sir, if necessary, I would want to say that the
very content of the statement renders it inadmissible,
but my primary contention is the way it has been produced
renders it inadmissible.   It is a remarkable document.
It is not, for the most part, evidence of what he
observed or saw.   It is a plea in the nature almost of a
speech putting his case.   It contains speculation,
opinion, all about matters which have no relevance to
this Inquiry, as you have ruled, sir.   That is to say, ,
events at Wembley, events in Cagliari in the World Cup,
events elsewhere at pop concerts.
     Sir, the document itself is so prejudicial, in my
submission, and the content of it, that I have to put you
on notice that my submission will be that the jury should
be discharged and these Inquests stopped now.   That is
the first part of it, sir.
     Sir, the second part of it will be - and I say "will
be", sir, because I am really putting you on notice
rather, because I know you are conscious of the time,
sir, and you may want to get on with what we are doing
already - that if it is admissible and you overrule my
submission, sir, then the second document is in effect a
reply to his cross-examination and the evidence he gave
at the Taylor Inquiry.   The whole content of it and the
atmosphere of it is in that frame.
                                                     64




     If you rule, sir, that it was and is admissible,
then in my submission there should be no answer to my
submission that the whole of Superintendent Marshall's
evidence as given in chief and in cross-examination at
the Taylor Inquiry should also be laid before this jury
and read out in its entirety.
     Sir, I may have to develop this more fully tomorrow
morning, but I refer immediately to the opening of this
so-called voluntary statement where Superintendent
Marshall says, "I refer to my statement of evidence
supplied to the investigating force and to the transcript
of my evidence at the Taylor Inquiry."   He then proceeds
to give an opinion of what he thinks he said at the
Taylor Inquiry, the nature of the evidence there given
and then to give a defence of his actions.
      Sir, my fundamental objection to it is that it was,
and is, inadmissible as documentary evidence and under
the Rules in my submission I fail to see how it could
have been put in in the way it was.    Its contents are
grossly prejudicial.    Indeed, I suspect it doesn't just
affect the interests of those I represent because, of
course, he is speculating and gave his opinion on all
sorts of matters which affect other interests here as
well.
     Sir, I have done it very briefly and probably not in
as much detail as I might have done, but I wanted to put
you on notice immediately as to the seriousness with
which that evidence has been viewed by those I represent.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I did consider very
carefully these documents and I had three options.   One,
should I have excluded them, as I did in fact the first
part of the second document?   Or, indeed, should I have
excluded them both?   Frankly, one of the factors which
weighed in my mind very, very strongly was that if I
excluded these documents from the evidence I would have
had you on your feet, with great respect, quite rightly
saying that we have only heard a fraction of what is in
the PACE statement.   The way the PACE statement was
taken was that the documents which I have had read were
incorporated within them.
     Now I have taken the view, and this is the reason
why I allowed them to go forward in the way in which I
have, that they form part and parcel of the PACE
interview.    I say nothing about the content at this
stage because that I don't think it is appropriate for me
to say anything on, but it was a matter of judgment by
me.   First of all I don't accept your submission that
these documents were introduced under Rule 37*   These
were introduced as part and parcel of the PACE statement.
                                                     65




      Secondly, insofar as they form part and parcel of
the PACE statement and insofar as I said I wasn t
intending to "red-pencil" sections except if I could do
it with reasonable precision, I could not see how I could
avoid reading it all.    I must admit I was a little bit
troubled by it as well, I am not denying that.    However,
it went in as part of the PACE statement and formed part
of. it.   Whether I like what it says, whether I don't
like what it says, I have no jurisdiction over.

     Therefore (a) I don't accept your submission about
Rule 37} (b) I don't consider it is necessary for me to
discharge the jury and we will proceed with the Inquests.

     If you disagree with me on that strongly, and I
don't expect you to rise and give me your response at
this stage, but if you disagree with me sufficiently
strongly to feel you wish to take this matter for review,
then no doubt you will tell me and the Divisional Court
will deal with it as appropriate.    Certainly for the
time being I have no intention of discharging the jury.

     What was your second point?
     MR. KING:   The second part of my submission is that
once the statement had gone in in the way it had gone in,
and I repeat, sir, that no notice had been given as to
its contents and I couldn't make this submission before,
that the whole of what this witness said to the Taylor
Inquiry should also be read to the jury, not only in the
interests of fair play but because he incorporates it by
reference in this, what I have described as a self-
serving speech to the jury, a speech to you, sir, in the
statement I have referred to.
     THE CORONER:   It is much more difficult for me to
deny this part of your submission because if I argue that
this statement is incorporated into the PACE statement,
by definition in this particular instance Mr. Marshall
has also incorporated the transcript into his submission.
The logic of that I think is irrefutable.   I did think
about this and you may remember I actually discussed it
yesterday with you.   The reason why I had felt it was
unnecessary to read the Taylor transcripts to the jury is
because, with all due respect to everybody, you all had
it.   If Mr. Marshall, as he will no doubt do, comes into
the witness box, it may well be that you will be able to
cross-examine him in relation to that*
      If somebody else wants to make a point on this I am
not saying that I fundamentally object to that particular
move.
                                                    66




     MR. HALE:   Neither do I, sir.    If Mr. King wishes
to have the transcript of the Taylor Inquiry in,
Mr. Marshall has no objection whatever.    On the other
point I can only say when one is charged with a criminal
offence and when one responds to that charge by saying
this, that and the other, it is not open for somebody to
say, "Well, we will accept the bits we like, but we will
not accept the bits we don't like."     It was open to us
to have gone on for days saying all these things
verbally.   It would have been recorded, videoed, taken
down and that would have been absolutely unobjectionable.
It was merely a matter of convenience that we agreed we
would summarise things he would otherwise have said and
they were put into writing and put in.
     I respectfully agree entirely with you, sir.   That
is part of PACE.   It cannot be separated from it and it
is only because of commonsense, which I thoroughly agree
with, that we excluded the earlier bit too.
     MR. CATCHPOLE:    Sir, could I rise?   With respect,
I support some of what my learned friend, Mr. King says.
I don t go so far as him in relation to discharging the
jury, but without doubt, in my respectful submission, the
second statement amounts to nothing more than a speech to
the jury on the facts.    It is, without any disrespect
intended, a Marshall Report instead of a Taylor Report.
It expresses his opinions about how this tragedy was
caused.   On the basis of everything that has been
submitted to you before, that is inadmissible and its
content, I would say, should not have gone before the
jury and whilst I would not invite you to discharge the
jury, sir, I would lay down a marker at this stage to say
that I would invite you to make a very strong direction
that the whole of this second statement should be
disregarded by the jury.
     It is a matter that Mr. King has been prevented from
adducing evidence that is similar to it.   I am sure that
if any of us attempted to address the jury on the facts
we would be prevented, quite properly, by you.   The fact
that a speech can be made in this way is, in my
submission, wholly improper and I would lay down that
marker.   Obviously there will be submissions at a later
stage but it is appropriate to make a point now.
                                                     67




      THE CORONER: The problem arises, as you can see,
if you had got up and attempted to make a speech to me
on fact I would have stopped you, you are quite right,
and indeed if a witness had attempted to perhaps make a
speech I would also probably have stopped them, so you
are probably right on that point too.
      Mr. Hale is also right that the PACE statement
of course is primarily taken for criminal proceedings,
not for coronal proceedings, we just tag on so to speak
on the back of it, but it is exceedingly difficult. I
can and I say I have exercised my rights to edit it as
well, but I did think about this quite hard because I
could see that my excluding it there would be strong
objection because it would be argued the jury had not
been told the whole story, and by including it there
would be strong objection, and I decided that I would
include it. Whether I was right or wrong will be a matter
for somewhere else.
      I am very well aware that the jury need to be directed
on an awful lot of stuff in this. I don't think that I
am going to direct them this afternoon on anything to do
with the PACE statement but you may well be right that
when I come to do my summing up and my directions that I
will direct them in hopefully correct terms as to what
value they place on various matters.
      I mean strictly speaking the second half of that
statement was all to do with complaints. I know that.
I felt that if I cut that out the interested parties
would have felt that they had not been given an opportunity
to hear what he had to say and I therefore decided that
it was only right that I should include it. As I say I
may be wrong on that and somebody else may have to adjudicate
on that if it is felt that is right, that is what I thought,
but I am not disputing that it may be necessary, and I am
not saying that I will not, direct the jury as to either
the value they place on it, whether they should include
it or whether they should disregard it or whether there
is a mix in this, but I am very conscious of that and I will
do my best, I don't deny it.

      MR. ISAACS: Although sir the present discussion
has little to do with me and my client, certainly not at
the present time, I have been listening with interest to
what has been said and it may be some misunderstanding on
my part, but the question that has raised itself in my
mind is this: and it is we have all to a degree accepted
that the PACE statements have gone before this jury, but
I ask you sir, and I say it with the greatest of respect,
I wonder what the evidential basis for the admission of the
PACE statements before this jury is? On what basis are
                                                         68




these PACE statement’s being put before this   jury, because
after all what the PACE statement is is not    what is being
said by a witness as to what he saw and did    at the time
to the jury, but it is effectively a Police    Officer asking
questions and then the jury is hearing what    somebody is
saying about those events after the event.     It is in fact
a form of hearsay.
      THE CORONER: Well I don't know. I would think about
that but I would be surprised, I am surprised by the
submission but I would have to consider that.
      MR. ISAACS: It is not so much a submission, sir,
it is effectively a question because one wonders what the
evidential basis for admitting a PACE statement is in such
proceedings because all it is is an account of what is
being said by a person who turns out to be a witness at a
later stage to a Police Officer. Now what is the evidential
basis of that? I leave it at that, sir, and perhaps no
doubt those along this row may be able to help me out but
I don't know.
      THE CORONER: You may remember two days ago we
actually discussed this very question and the consensus,
I actually put to you a suggestion which had come - I will
remind you - from Hammond Suddards, instructing solicitors
to Mr. Payne, to suggest that where a witness is willing
to attend and substantially answer the questions, whether
it would in fact be possible and proper, or advantageous,
not to use the PACE statement. I said I had not made up
my mind and I wanted to get your views.
      You know what you said. You can look it up if you
can't remember, it is all in the transcripts. I listened
to what you said and I said we would include it. Now
you stand up and say why have I done it? The opportunities
were there.
       MR. ISAACS: Sir, I don't mean this with any dis­
 respect. In fact during that discussion I said nothing
 at all because as you know sir Mr. Duckenfield has made no
 PACE statement other than to say: "I am making no statement
 of course as he was entitled to do, but having regard to
 the discussion that is going on and the possible consequences
 of some of the submissions that have been made and the rulin«
 that you have made as a consequence that we may be in some
 higher court at some stage, I am only concerned now when one
 comes to think about it as to what the probitive value,
 what the evidential value of the PACE statements are, whethe:
 or not somebody is prepared to come and answer questions,
 because effectively these are not criminal proceedings.
 No one is here because he is charged with any criminal
 offence, certainly not at the present time, and one wonders
                                                          69

A

    then what is the evidential value of hearing what somebody
    said to a Police Officer at some much later stage.
          THE CORONER: Well I suppose that is a problem one
    has whenever one listens to a PACE statement in whatever
B   proceedings and indeed if you are right, if you are right,
    then one has to ask the question: what is the value of
    taking the statement at all in any proceedings because it
    either has value or it has none?
          MR. ISAACS: Sir, in criminal proceedings it has a
    very clear value and you will certainly be aware that
    there are certain principles of law that suggest (a) that
    if something is said to a Police Officer in interview
    after caution which is inculpatory then that clearly is
    evidence against interest and is therefore admissible.
    If it is exculpatory then there is a body of law which
    has only recently been resolved by the House of Lords to
    the effect that it is admissible but not necessarily of
    the truth of the facts therein stated but should go before
    the jury in the context of the criminal charges. If it
    is a mixed statement which is both inculpatory and exculpatory
D   then it is difficult and unfair to distinguish one part from
    the other, but sir these are not criminal proceedings where
    a man is on trial and it is against that background that I
    wonder what, and I ask the question again and I have no
    answer and it may be somebody will be able to answer the
    question for me, I wonder what is the probitive value of
    such a statement?
          MR. HALE: Well I respectfully agree with you again
    sir. If you look back at the transcript I think it was
    two days ago, you suggested that we might do away with
    some of the PACE statements and Mr. King was on his feet
    immediately and absolutely rejected the idea and said
    that he wanted the whole of it to be brought forward and
    that is my point.
          When one is accused of criminal proceedings of this
    severity, and remember we are talking about manslaughter,
    we are not talking about road traffic or anything like
    that, and when the people bringing those charges persist
    and will not give up, then one is entitled to defend one­
    self, one is entitled to say absolutely anything that is
    helpful to the investigating Officer and the whole of that
    evidence must then be taken as a whole and indeed if we
    had not reduced it to writing all that would have happened
    was that the interview would have gone on for several more
    days and it would all have come out orally. If anyone
    now says that we have to put the clock back, then I will
    insist, as far as I am able, the clock be put back to the
    interview and that the interview be resumed and that all we
    want to see in defence of ourselves in this matter will
    then be recorded and taken down on video and then it will
    be shown, so it is not a question of being selective about



H
what bits they would like to see and what bits they would
not like to see.
      Furthermore, when Mr. Marshall is cross-examined he
is entitled to give his answers and the fact that people
may not like those answers is no reason for excluding them.

      MR. KING: Sir, if I might help. Undoubtedly I
stood up and invited you to use the PACE statement. I
don't resile from that at all. To that extent, therefore,
it becomes admissible in the case of Mr. Marshall by
acquiescence and agreement. That must be the case.

      Sir, if I did so in ignorance that is my fault in
that I also conceded that I was not entitled to advance
notice of what he was about to say because you may remember
sir we had that discussion and my learned friend Mr. Manning
said ....




                     THE CORONER:   Yes,
                                                  71




    THE CORONER:    Yes, you are quite right.

     MR. KING:   And I conceded that. That is a
concession which on reflection I ought not to have made
because it does appear to me that the only basis upon
which it can be admissible before you, because in
effect we are either watching or receiving a document,
because for these purposes it seems to me a video
recording is the same as a written statement, it is
documentary evidence, and becomes admissible in this
Inquest only by virtue again of Rule 37.
     THE CORONER:   No, I am afraid I don't agree with .
you at all.
     MR. KING:   If I am wrong on that, sir, then apart
from acquiescence which I don t resile from and I
accept that, sir, - I am not trying to resile from
that, I would not want to because I remain of the view
that once they are made we ought to hear it - I fail to
see how it can be admissible, apart from agreement and
acquiescence because on the face of it, it is an out of
Court statement made by a witness, not from the witness
box, and normally out of court statements made by a
witness not to a jury are not admissible in the court
of law, unless they fall within an exception or a rule
of law.
     THE CORONER:   The document which was read, are
you saying ... the whole of it, you mean?

     MR. KING:   We are talking about the PACE
statement now, sir. You were inviting submissions as
to how it could be admissible. I was saying that
undoubtedly I acquiesced and agreed, and I could not
possibly gainsay that and don't seek to, but that seems
to be the juridical basis of it going before you,
because I don't know any rule of law which would allow
- because Mr. Marshall isn't on trial - the out of
court statement to be automatically admissible. I am
not now talking about what is put to him in cross-
examination as a previous inconsistent statement which
becomes admissible under those rules, if it is a
previous inconsistent statement, or a confession or an
admission which becomes admissible under those rules,
so to that extent I disagree with Mr. Hale, but what
concerns me is, and I am sorry to come back to my
original submission about this voluntary statement
which I do make strong objection to, is that had I
known in advance that it was incorporated into the PACE
statement, I would have been able to see that in
advance, read it in advance, and then make my decision
as to whether to agree or not agree, or to object to
the PACE statement going forward.
     I had no notice that this document was
incorporated. I still don't know where it was
incorporated because I have not had time to go through
it.
     THE   CORONER: It is on page 3, I think you will
find, or   page 2, of    the typed version.
     MR. KING:    I accept, sir, that it is incorporated
if you tell me so. Obviously I don’t object to that
but I would have submitted had I known about it that I
would be entitled to advance notice, if it is within
the PACE statement - of course, I have submitted to you
that it has come other than through the PACE statement,
because it was introduced before the PACE statement was
introduced but, sir, you have ruled on that and so be
it,   that is for another place perhaps ....
     THE CORONER: Let me read to you whereit is
incorporated. It is page 5, Mr. Foster:
     "You have also provided to me today a document of
     19 pages and a separate document headed checklist
     for all defendants ...."
- which incidentally we have not read, we have not
produced, and was another which I have excluded. I
forgot to mention it when I was talking about the first
part, because I don't think it has any bearing whatever
on the inquest -
     "which you have asked to be considered, (1) by me,
     but also by the Director of Public Prosecutions
     and any other persons and you have accordingly
     signed a caption at the end of that which says
     that you understand it may be used in evidence, do
     you agree?"
Answer: "Yes." "Thank you", and then it goes on and
it is based on that, that I have taken the view, and if
I can read the bit about the Taylor Report, it is put
in slightly different language:
     "You gave evidence initially at the Public
     Inquiry, of which there has been a transcript.     Do
     you agree with that?"
Answer: "Yes", and the sense, if you like, is very
similar.
     MR. KING:   And indeed he incorporates the Taylor
evidence again in the statement ....

     THE CORONER:    I agree.
     MR. KING:   But sir, I do raise the question if I
am wrong on that, apart from agreement or acquiescence,
which I accept I am bound by, how would it be
admissible, the PACE statement?
     THE CORONER:   The PACE statement in my view ....
Yes, Mr. Catchpole?
     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, it may well be, and I think
there was some confusion with respect to Mr. Hale,
between the conversation that you raised, sir, about
the PACE statements going in - and they can be of some
value to those of us who have not seen them - in order
to put questions to a witness when he is giving his
evidence, saying, "That is not what you said in your
PACE statement". That is what evidential value it has,
it is an entirely separate question, and I am as much
in the dark as many of my learned friends, I suspect,
as to whether the Jury is entitled to take what is said
in a PACE statement as being evidence of the truth, as
opposed to what is said under oath in this Court room,
and that is a matter that is again appropriate at a
later stage because you will have to direct the Jury to
it.
     THE CORONER:   If you remember, on the first day
when we sat in this Court Mr. Isaacs made a submission
to me on the Rio Tinto Zinc case, you will recollect,
and very well presented we all felt it was, if I may
say so. I then explained that it was my normal
practice to introduce in the cases which I dealt with
where there were PACE statements - which were basically
road traffic incidents - I had the Officers read them,
I had the signature checked as we did with Mr. Marshall
and as we usually do at the end, but it is neither here
nor there. I then when it is done turn to the witness,
put him in the box, put him on oath, ask his name, and
say, "Did you hear that? Is that a correct record of
what was said?" That is the first question I ask and
the witness will then either say yes or no to that.
That is not, in my view, an incriminating question
because occasionally statements are much more
incriminating - they make admissions to speeding and
all kinds of things in their PACE statements, and if
they then on oath say, "Yes, that is true", they may
well then be in serious trouble, and I don t consider
that part of the question incriminating.

     Now, the next question which one can ask is, "Is
it true? Do you accept that it is accurate and is it
true?” If I were to ask Mr. Marshall that question I
would give him the appropriate warning.  If Mr.
Marshall then replies, "Yes, I stand by it, it is true,
I accept it as correct", then in my view it becomes
evidence not only that it has been made but also of
what it contains, and the Jury are entitled to accept
it.

     If he exercises his privilege and says, "I will
not respond to that question because it is
incriminating", then it remains in the situation that
it is evidence of the fact that the statement has been
made and of the contents, but not as I understand it of
the truth of the contents as against Mr. Marshall. I
hope I have got the law right on that.

     What the Jury then make of it, of course, becomes .
a very difficult problem because I have to explain to
them the difference between the fact that the statement
was made, and that he admits that it was made and that
it is a true record, but that it is not evidence of the
truth there of as against him, and I can only do my
best, but that is a problem which occurs in any court
where the witness, for instance, does not go into the
box, if this was a criminal trial.

     So I can11 see ....

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, with respect you have
highlighted the point by saying by asking the witness
the question, "Is it true, do you stand by it?", that
incorporates it into his evidence under oath. It then
becomes evidence of the truth, but that with respect
does not give him the right to make self-serving
statements in a PACE statement or matters of opinion.
Sir, again we are going back to the distinction we had
before and with respect also I think backing up what my
learned friend Mr. King said, I don't know how or
whether Rule 37 applies - that is something perhaps you
would be more familiar with, I have not had a chance to
research it properly - but if Rule 37 does apply to
PACE statements we would have been in a position to
stand up before you, sir, and say this part of the
evidence we think is a speech to the Jury, it should
not go in, and we would not have had this whole debate
then ....

     THE CORONER:   I suppose to this extent it is my
fault, because I tried in the interests of economy if I
can put it like that, to have the Officers who took the
PACE statements here on 19th December - if you remember
Inspector Cope - who gave evidence that he was present,
that he had been there, had been recording, and then I
think Mr. Beechey gave evidence of that as well.
Normally speaking we would have had Inspector Cope here
or Mr. Foster, in court, and I would have sworn him and
said, "Did-you take a statement?", "Yes", "Will you
please now read it to me or play it to me?" and it is
the evidence strictly of the Officer, that is the point.
It is the evidence of the Officer.

    MR. CATCHPOLE:    That is right.
     THE CORONER:   That is the point. It is the evidence
of the Officer and in that sense, of course, it is upon
Oath. Now what we have done is that we have taken the
evidence of the Officer, if you like, three weeks ago and
we are now playing it. Otherwise we have got to have this
chap sitting here for X number of days doing nothing while
we are watching the video. You can criticise me for that.
You may say you should not have done it. You should not
have worried and you should have had him here. It might
have been easier to understand what was happening but I did
take that decision and certainly materially nothing turns
on it in my view - not Superintendent Marshall but whether
Chief Inspector Tope is sitting there or not it seems to me
bearing in mind that we introduced it on Oath - and we can
produce a transcript to you and read it to you if you like
or you can read it for yourself - we have not just plucked
the statement out of the air and said, "Let us read it".
That is why I do not accept Mr. King's submission because
it is not a document introduced under Rule 37. It is the
evidence of the Officer who I agree is not here but it is
nevertheless the evidence of that Officer.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I think Mr. Payne wishes to say
something.
     THE CORONER:   I think I am not going to listen to any
more on this statement today. I am going to discharge the
Jury - I am sorry, I am going to let the Jury go because we
are going to take quite a bit more time over this I think
and you may want to think about the matter.   Let us face
it, if you want to go for a traditional view on this point
then it might be better to either adjourn the Inquest until
the matter has been resolved or to proceed with other
matters whilst the matter is being determined or we carry
on but I cannot see any point in spending hours and hours
doing things which may turn out to be abortive. Can I just
call the Jury in to tell them what is happening and also
arrange the time? From my point of view I would be quite
happy to do what you said, Mr. King, but I do not think it
is right.
               (The Jury returned into Courts

     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, we have run into
a difficult legal problem which is going to take us quite a
while to resolve. Whether we resolve it or not is not a
matter for you but whichever way we resolve it, I am not
going to feel like watching any more video, put it like
that. So I am going to let you go home because we do not
want you sitting there. Friday is a 9.30 start if that is
convenient. We will start at 9.30 and we will do what we
did before the Christmas break and we will aim to finish at
two o'clock or something of that order. If we might have
another load of legal submissions you might be home
earlier. Thank you for being here.
                     fThe Jury left Courts

     MR. KING: Before we continue, given that we now have
some time, I wonder if we might have a short break because
I have just been given a request from those behind and I
would like to take instructions. It is difficult and
discourteous to you for me to keeping turning round.
     THE CORONER:   Shall we take half an hour and that
would give sufficient time for everybody to get
instructions, to think about it and even have a cup of tea?

     MR. PAYNE:    I wonder if I might mention that I was
going to invite you to look at page 177 in Jarvis and the
pages that follow.
     THE CORONER:    Was it page 141 yesterday?

     MR. PAYNE:     Page 148 at paragraph 1228.

     THE CORONER:     I know it is a different point and
water under the bridge in a sense.
                      (Short Adjournments

     THE CORONER:    Are you rising first, Mr. King?
     MR. KING:   Sir, I have one submission to make which
is not of substance but procedural which is that I am
instructed to ask that the Inquest now be adjourned until
Monday in the light of your observations as to whether or
not the Inquest should be adjourned indefinitely pending
any application which may be made for review. Those are
clear instructions which have been given to me, in other
words, that we should go no further. I say that because I
am instructed that on Sunday there is a conference arranged
between all those who I represent and their representatives
and so forth when proper instructions can be given. Of
course, at the moment proper instructions cannot easily be
given because it is pure chance who happens to be here
today to give those instructions. Sir, that is the first
submission.
     As to any further submissions as to the manner in
which, apart from agreement, the PACE statement has become
admissible, sir, at this stage I do not want to say any
more because I know my learned friends have various things
they want to say and I can come back on them if necessary.
My position has been, if I can just summarise it to you, I
first submitted to you that the so-called voluntary
statement which was read out this morning prior to the PACE
statement being read out or shown was of itself
inadmissible in that it had not been shown to me in
advance, that I had had no opportunity to object to it and
its contents, given as they were, amounted to a self-
serving statement on any view of hearsay, opinion and
speculation and was so prejudicial that the Jury should be
discharged. You ruled on that, sir....

     THE CORONER:   Actually - carry on, I must not
interrupt you.

     MR. KING:   You ruled on that and you ruled on it, as
I understood it, primarily by saying, "In fact, Mr. King,
that statement which was read out was incorporated by
reference into the PACE statement and you, Mr. King, agreed
to the PACE statement going forward". In a way I cannot
deny I did agree to the PACE statement going forward but in
the light of the experience which has just occurred I would
certainly submit that the PACE statement ought, in those
circumstances, to have been produced in advance for an
opportunity for it to be looked at before any agreement was
sought as to it going forward. I did not seek that and I
am bound to say that I would never say in another place
that I sought it and was denied it because at the time we
were dealing with the PACE statements I did not perhaps
realise the significance of what was taking place but, on
reflection, it does appear to me that if the PACE statement
is being introduced by agreement then that agreement, of
course, can hardly be a conscious agreement without knowing
its contents and to that extent I was prepared to agree
blind. I do resile from it in the context of Mr.
Marshall....

     THE CORONER:   I think, with great respect, Mr. King,
and I must be careful, the PACE statement is not being
introduced by agreement. The PACE statement is being
introduced technically by the Officer who took it and it is
being introduced on the basis that I call that witness and
that I ask him to give me his evidence. His evidence, if I
can put it in words, "I carried out an interview with Mr.
Marshall" - or whoever it might be - "the interview was
recorded in accordance with PACE, the appropriate warnings
were given". I would then turn to him and I would say, "I
want you to read this, which the Officer would do. The
PACE statement is not a matter I had no right to introduce.
I had every right to introduce it and it is the evidence of
the Officer.

     The point about your agreement, Mr. King, if I may put
it like that, is not that you conceded we could introduce
something which, on reflection, we really should not have
done. The point about your agreement was, in so far as
there was an agreement, that I had put to all of you really
whether we should adopt the suggestion from him which was
to dispense with the PACE statements and not whether we
should include them. I said that in the interests of time
                                                     78




and economy and whatever else I said, "Can we dispense with
them because we may get the evidence we need viva voce from
the witness?". The view, if I can put it like that, of
those of you who expressed a view - and you said you were
ambivalent and that you did not mind, Mr. Manning took the
view that if we were going to have it we should have it all
- and you took the view, "No, we ought to have it". That
was a perfectly proper thing. You have not done anything -
and I will use the word - wrong in that. You said that and
I think if I had been in your shoes I would have said the
same. It happens, of course.
     Perhaps we are unlucky to have started with this
particular PACE statement, but this PACE statement contains
or incorporates a document which you are not happy with and
the Jury may well   need directing on. I do not deny that
but the inclusion   of the PACE statement is based on the
principle that it is the evidence of the Officers who took
it and that is what it is. I think it may actually help
you a little bit because you may feel if you put it the way
you do it looks or sounds as if it is all your fault but it
is not all your fault. In so far as there is any fault it
is simply the view that I think, on reflection, we ought to
have the PACE statements but that is not a fault.

     MR. KING: Might I just develop that and I accept
that? The question which I know my learned friends say
they have an answer to is this; when in theory an Officer
goes in the witness box and says to you, sir, "Yes, I took
a statement in one form or another from a witness to be - a
man who is about to become a witness - and here it is",
whether at that stage it is proper to simply read itout
when in fact if one knows in advance what is in that
statement, until it becomes properly evidence its contents
are grossly prejudicial even though you might direct a Jury
to disregard it.    Sir, what concerns me is this, if we were
in a normal Court - and I know we are not - say a civil
Court or a criminal Court and not dealing with a defendant
but an ordinary witness, you would not be able to call
another witness to give in evidence, in advance of that
first witness, what he had said in a written statement or
audio because that would simply be an out of Court
statement which, even though it has been introduced
properly evidentially in the way I have described, has no
evidential value and its prejudicial value is such that it
is not admitted because you cannot normally admit self-
serving statements. What one can admit under various rules
of evidence are admissions of a party to proceedings.




                               /Sir, I understand though.
     Sir, I understand though and I know my learned
friend Mr. Payne is going to develop the point, that you
are not bound, as I understand it, by normal rules of
evidence and that you are entitled, in your discretion,
to introduce a statement made outside the witness box of
a witness or somebody who is in some way a participant in
the event.
     However, sir, the danger of following that as a
practice, if I can submit it, in the context of an
Inquest like this where you, sir, have been very careful
in the case of all witnesses not simply to allow their
statement to be handed up or read out or their opinions
to be given on matters of which you have ruled either not
experts or as inadmissible, is that by following that
practice in the context of those who feel themselves
under some sort of allegation, that what is introduced is
what I repeat is grossly prejudicial evidence which has
not been pruned out in any way through that method which,
in strict legal theory, should have no probative or
relevant evidential value at all.    However, the damage
is done because it is read out.   I pray in aid the very
statement to which you know I took objection because it
is simply a self-serving statement which wasn t even
given, with respect, to the officer.    It was
incorporated by reference and then it goes on to other
things.    It is very easy in a PACE statement, if this
procedure be followed, simply to say, Oh, by the way, I
wish to incorporate by reference a statement which I made
at home which I now produce."   That, of course, is a
witness being allowed to give in writing in advance a
self-serving statement which, as I understand it, is
contrary to normal practice, and certainly normal rules
of evidence, in another court.
     Sir, I understand though the procedure you followed.
What I feel slightly aggrieved about, and it is not a
reflection on you, sir, because in a sense you were
following your practice and you may well have thought I
understood your practice.   I didn t understand that a
PACE statement of this sort could also incorporate, by
one line or two lines, another statement not made in the
police station but in a very d i f f e r e n t atmosphere, to
answer a series of allegations in the way in which it was
done, and that is the root of my objection.           Sir, I have
said enough on that.
     My third point, if I remind you, sir, was that if it
goes in in the way it has happened, then everything which
has been incorporated by reference should go in and
clearly if this so-called voluntary statement has been
incorporated by reference sufficiently for you, sir, to
say it can be read out in its entirety, fair play demands
that the Taylor Inquiry transcript equally be read out
    ^    o


    f-       -                                                              80

*

                     because that was no more and no less incorporated by
                     reference.
                          THE CORONER:     I don't deny that for one moment.
                 B        MR. KING:   Can I remind you that my first
                     submission, on instructions, was, and no doubt you will
                     hear from everybody else on all my submissions, that we
                     should adjourn in any event until Monday for reflection
                     to be given to what has happened today.
                          THE CORONER:   You will be pleased to hear that I
                     had already decided that I was going to send the jury
                     home tomorrow and we would take tomorrow off whatever
                     happened.   In that sense I agree, but I am not saying we
                     are adjourning the Inquests because we may not have
                     finished with the legal submissions this afternoon.    We
                     might have to come back, it depends how long we take.
                     However, if we finish today, then it is a day off for
                     everybody tomorrow.
                          MR. KING:   Sir, perhaps I should have made clear,
                     in the middle of my submissions which was talking about
                     the PACE statements, that I can only submit to you, sir,
                     given that you do have a discretion what you prune in and
                     prune out - you have done it - that if a practice were
                     followed of allowing those who represent various
                     interests to see in advance the PACE statements,
                     submissions can be made to you as to whether or not
                     something should be pruned out for whatever reason,    The
                     difficulty of what happened today, assuming for the
                     moment it were incorporated as you describe, sir, which I
                     accept for the moment your ruling on that, of course no
                     opportunity was given to say, "I accept it was
                     incorporated but for various reasons in your discretion
                     you ought to exclude it and certainly not allow it to be
                     read out.”
                          THE CORONER:     That is certainly an arguable point,
                     I agree.
                          Yes, Mr. Hale?
                          MR. HALE:   I would merely like to say, sir, that I
                     was not ambivalent the other day.   I supported the view
                     that the PACE statement should not go in.   I thought
                     sufficient was now known and the issues had been
                     clarified so much that I could see no reason why you
                     shouldn't just ask the witness questions, as you have of
                     every other witness, taking out the bits you thought were
                     relevant, and that everything should flow from that.
                          If it were possible to expunge everything from the
                     jury's mind, and maybe by Monday that might be possible,




                 H
                                                    81




and to start again and do that, I would have no objection
whatever.   I would have no objection whatever to your
excluding any bits you thought were prejudicial.
     I would just say this though, that in the context in
which that statement was given, was not in the context of
these Inquests.   As you know, sir, it was when a man is
in danger of being on trial for manslaughter, in danger
of being severely disciplined by his Force, had several
specific allegations made against him by various people,
he had no alternative but to answer those and if that is
self-serving, yes, it is self-serving.   One would hardly
expect him to make a statement saying, "Yes, all these
people are quite right.   I fell down on the job.   I
didn't do it properly."    Of course he fought with all
the means at his disposal to deny the allegations, to put
the contrary point of view, and that was done only for
that purpose.
     It is no part of my doing that that statement should
now be incorporated into the Inquests.   I raised no
objection to it because I appreciate that in many cases,
road traffic cases, for instance, as a matter of course
you bring in the police statements and so on.   Certainly
I was not ambivalent.   I was actually in favour of doing
it the way that I think Mr. King now wishes to do it.
If there is any way that things can be expunged and we
can put the clock back and start again on that basis, I
would be the first to support it in the interests of
saving time.
     MRS. McBRIEN:   I just want to say a few words.    I
just want to say that I will be very happy if both the
PACE statement and the transcript from the Taylor Inquiry
were included in these Inquests and I apologise to
everybody in this room if I am upsetting them by saying
these words.
     THE CORONER:   Yes, Mr. Payne?
     MR. PAYNE:    Sir, I think there are three points.
You have already indicated your response to the
suggestion there should be an adjournment but I wonder if
I might be permitted to say that for our part we are
anxious that the Inquests should proceed with as little
delay as possible.    Of course we are not quarrelling
with your decision to adjourn for tomorrow but I think it
ought to be heard that although...
     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, may I just interrupt you
for one minute because I have just remembered something I
was going to say?   Could you just sit down because you
may want to deal with what I am going to say.
                                                    82




     You very rightly said, Mr. King, that I have given
you a ruling on the question of the discharge of the jury
because I have had half an hour to reflect.   I listened
to you and took a decision, but in fact contrary to my
normal practice I didn’t give anybody else an opportunity
to make any comments on that.
     Therefore, bearing in mind we have all had time to
reflect, I am willing to listen to more on that point,
both from you and also from others.




           MR. KING:
      MR. KING: I heard you saying: "Leave it till
tomorrow" but I would add immediately sir a second argument
then.
      The first was based on the fact that it was a Rule 37
document and had been wrongly introduced. My second
argument is now that I understand it was introduced by
reference to it being incorporated in the PACE statement,
that its contents were so prejudicial that any reasonable
- and I have to put it this way sir - a reasonable Tribunal
properly directing itself would have said to itself:   Well
its contents are so prejudicial, opinion, speculation,
hearsay riddled with it, not evidence of fact, I should
in my discretion exclude it at this stage and not simply
allow it to be read to the jury because the damage is
done, albeit it has been incorporated by reference" and I
can ally to that, of course, and I have to put it this
way gently, my "complaint" because it is a complaint ---
      THE CORONER:   You can put it as strongly as you like.

      MR. KING: But I had had no notice of the contents
of the PACE statement, therefore I could not have objected
to it going in in the exercise of your discretion, so I
have a two pronged argument: one, it should not have gone
in as a matter of law because it is a Rule 37. Number two,
if it is in because it is via the PACE statement route,
merely because it has been incorporated by reference is not
of itself sufficient for the Tribunal to allow it in, the
Tribunal has to apply a discretion and the contents of it
are so prejudicial that one can't see how it could properly
ever go before the jury in the way it did and therefore
it should have been excluded at the stage where the PACE
statement was being read out.
      MR. CATCHPOLE: Sir, I am sure I will be shouted
down. I think there is actually some juridical support
for what Mr. King is saying although I don't go as far
as him in suggesting the jury ought to be discharged.
      As I understand it the procedure you adopted,
assuming that we are in a different Court, if I can deal
with the strict rules of evidence, you called someone, a
Police Officer, to give evidence of the fact that a statemen
was made. That is perfectly proper. You were then intendin
to call a witness who would then say possibly that the
statement and its contents were true. At that point, the
document having been played, that evidence then becomes
the evidence of the person sitting in the witness box, in
this case Mr. Marshall.
       The unfortunate effect of that and what has given
 rise to this is that no party has had any opportunity to
 object to any evidence that was given or anything that
                                                     84




was said on the PACE statement.

      If however a different procedure had been adopted
and if Mr. Marshall had been put into the witness box
first and asked: "Is the PACE statement true?" and then
you go on to play it, it then becomes a document that is
evidence relating to his evidence and it would become a
Rule 37 document and we would have had the opportunity to
object it, and I think, With respect, the effect of the
procedure that was adopted led by accident, I am sure,
to a safeguard that is provided in the rules for parties
to object for precisely the reasons that myself and Mr. King
have been on our feet, led to that being circumvented and
in my position, I don't go as far as my learned friend,
I say it needs a very strong direction in relation to the
evidence which was actually given, but it may well be that
if these PACE statements are given out in advance we could
all avoid this. It may be there is no such statement as
this in any other PACE statement. I hope not. It is
something we will all avoid the difficulties that have
arisen today. I think it is the procedure that has been
adopted that may have led to the complications we have had
today.
      THE CORONER: Mr. Payne, I interrupted you because
I thought I ought to just say that.
      MR. PAYNE: Certainly. I was dealing with the
question of an adjournment. Sir, I do appreciate you have
already given a ruling but I wonder if I might just be
allowed to say that we oppose the application for an
adjournment on the basis that those who I represent have
important other public duties to see to and the effect of
these proceedings is considerably disruptive and it is a
gruelling experience for those most directly concerned.
None of this of course detracts from our wish to co-operate
fully with the conduct of the Inquest and to give every
assistance to you, as I hope we are doing and to attend
when called upon to do so and to give every other help but
we are anxious that the matter should proceed with all
reasonable despatch.

      Now the second matter is this with regard to the use
of these PACE statements. Certainly the way we understood
the position is this: you had indicated that it is your
ordinary practice to have the PACE statement read out and
at one stage or another during the Inquest all the parties
as we understand it, certainly including ourselves, have
agreed that that practice should not be disputed and our
own understanding of the procedure is that looking at
Jervis at page 177 at paragraph 15.22, the Editor states
relying on several authorities under note 70:

      "It has been held and many times stated that
      the Coroner's Court is not bound by the
                                                       85




      strict rules 6f evidence.”

At the bottom of the page under paragraph 15.24, since
the 1977 Rules the position is, going to the bottom of the
page:
      "There is accordingly even less reason now for
      the Coroner to feel bound by the restrictive
      rules of evidence. His purpose is to find out
      certain facts about the deceased in the public
      interest and nothing more."
The Editors go on to draw attention, however, to the rules
of evidence including the rule against hearsay and at
paragraph 15.29 having set that out they say, we submit
correctly and relying on authority:
      "It should be emphasised that the rule prohibits
      the adducing of hearsay evidence of a particular
      statement to prove the truth of facts contained
      in that statement. It does not prevent such
      evidence being adduced for any other purpose
      such as proving that the statement was made at
      all or proving what the contents were ...."

Now as we understand it your practice, which you followed
here, is consistent with the digest of the law as set out
by the Editors of Jervis there based on authority, that
the Officer who took the PACE statement proves that he took
it; the statement is then read out not as evidence of the
truth of its contents but as evidence of the fact that it
was made and that is the procedure which you have followed.

      Now we understand that what had been agreed when the
subject Was raised earlier during the Inquest, was you
intended when that procedure had been exhausted then to
ask the witness whether in fact he had (a) made the statement
and (b) that the contents were true, and assuming that he
replied in the affirmative the effect then would be that
his PACE statement would become the evidence which he has
then given to this Inquest.
      Certainly as we understood it that procedure was
proposed, discussed and adopted by all parties as a convenien
way of getting the evidence before the jury as an alternative
to the other procedure which would have been to call the
witnesses, each of them, and then using the PACE statement
as a proof of evidence, as you have done with other witnesses
for you then to take the witness through his evidence by
the process of question and answer. That is the alternative
procedure which was set aside in favour of the "PACE"
procedure and we understand that that is what is taking
place to which we have all agreed.
                                                      86




      Now it happens that the way in which, the first
time this has been put to the test that the evidence has
come out to include matters which have come as a surprise
to one of the parties, well it has come as a surprise to
all of us because none of us had seen the statement, but
to include matters to which objection is taken by one of
the parties.
      Of course it could have come out any way. None of
us knew what was in the PACE statements. We have all
consented to this procedure and it so happens that that
is what has come out.
      Now for all we know when the other statements are
given the evidence may be to the disadvantage of other
parties. We don't know until we hear it. This is some­
thing, a procedure as I understand it to which we have
all agreed as being the best that was available in the
circumstances of the proceedings in this Coroner's Inquest.

      Sir, that is all I can usefully say about it. That
is what seems to have happened. We certainly make no
criticism of it and we observe that that is the situation
which has been reached.
      Now dealing with the next point then which arises
from that and that is what is now made, as we understand
it, a request that the PACE statements should be circulated
in advance, the idea being that any contentious matters
or "prejudicial", lots of prejudicial evidence has been
given by a lot of witnesses without raising this sort of
issue. However, the idea is with the statements circulated
in advance then prejudicial or inadmissible matters could
be edited out.
      I am very reluctant really to agree to such a
procedure because certainly I can envisage  that if as we
understand it some of these interviews run to about eight
hours' worth of transcript, this is going to involve a
very substantial editing exercise of I think altogether
there are about six witnesses in this category and the
editing will be done from, counting up the row of represen­
tatives here, about nine different points of view and the
consequence will be really that there is a serious risk
of the procedure running into rather a mess, so I am
reluctant to agree with that although I see the point that
is being made.
      This is a subject which was discussed I think yesterday
or the day before when I said that from our point of view
if those statements were to be circulated then we would ask
also that the statements of other witnesses should be
circulated in -advance so that we too might have the
opportunity of if necessary editing or preparing ourselves
for cross-examination.
      I can't say anything more about that but that is
our position with regard to the request that the statements
should be circulated in advance and I think our submission
would be that the best course is to stick to your ruling
at the moment, which is that the statements are given
out as an aid to note taking at the time that the witness
goes into the witness box.
      Sir, unless there is any other particular question
you would like to ask me, those are the useful things I can
say.
      THE CORONER: I take it then that you don't support
the application to discharge the jury?
      MR. PAYNE:   Oh no, I meant to deal with that, I beg
your pardon.
      No, I don't support the application to discharge the
jury. If you should rule that any of the evidence which
has been given by the means which has been followed is
inadmissible then that is a matter upon which you can direct
the jury, but certainly we don't support the application at
this stage of the Inquest that the jury should be discharged.

      MR. ISAACS: Sir, may I make my submissions on the
points that have arisen. I can deal first of all with
the question of the adjournment.
      My submission very simply is that we should go on
tomorrow. In the relatively short time that would be
available the jury can be played the rest of the video.
That would just about take up the time that would be taken,
that would be available. I appreciate what my learned
friend Mr. King says but nothing with respect to him and
his clients that would have to be discussed over the
weekend would be affected by the playing of the video
tomorrow, and similarly the playing of the video tomorrow
would not affect the discussions. It would be a shame
for another day when something could be done, a day when
we could actually be putting something in place of the
time that has been used this afternoon, that that was also
wasted. Sir, that is what I say about that. In my
submission there is no good reason why we should not get
Mr. Marshall's video evidence out of the way tomorrow.
That would be the end of this week.
      The second point is this in relation to discharging
the jury: I adopt what has been said with respect by
my learned friends Mr. Catchpole and Mr. Payne that any
irregularity insofar as there has been that has taken place
so far as the evidence that has been put before this jury
is concerned, reference has been made to prejudicial evidence
I don't adopt that word because one wonders prejudicial
to whom? Inadmissible might be the better word to be used.
Any such inadmissible evidence can be regularised by an
appropriate direction, and if that was for example in
relation to the voluntary statement made by Mr. Marshall,
then you could properly direct the jury that the jury
should not take into account such opinions as he proffered
in determining their view of the facts, and it really would
be as simple as that.
      My learned friend Mr. Payne says save insofar as
they are based on his own experience. Well that indeed is
a matter entirely for you sir, but that is also a matter
for submission at the end of this case possibly, but certainly
it is not a matter that requires the discharge of this jury
particularly having regard to the public interest in relation
to expense that has already been expended in relation to the
matter.
      Could I move on to the other main matter and that is
this: the question of the introduction of the PACE statements
To an extent I blame myself for this discussion that is
taking place because apart from the matters that were raised
by my learned friend Mr. King as to Mr. Marshall's PACE
statement, particular problems relating to that statement,
it was myself who actually raised the whole question of the
probitive value of the PACE statements in generic terms.

      Sir, may I say this and I hope I say this with the
greatest of respect, that I was not saying for one moment
that you did not have the right to call such evidence as
you chose. You can choose to call a Police Officer to give
evidence as to what a witness has said on a previous occasion
You can choose to ask a man off the street to come and give
evidence as to what he was doing on the 15th April 1989.
The question that I was addressing to you, sir, is what is
the probitive value of such evidence once it is before the
jury?
      We have all had an opportunity over the last half-an-
hour to consider that question and I respectfully agree
with what both my learned friend Mr. Catchpole and Mr. Payne
have said about this matter, that (a) it is evidence of
what a man says to a Police Officer. In itself that has
little probitive value as to what actually happened on the
day until the witness actually says, if he does say it,
I agree that that is the truth. Once he says that then of
course it does become his account to a greater or lesser
degree of what has been said and so it is valuable for
that purpose.
      One of my concerns was well what should be the case,
what is its probitive value if in fact that witness chooses
not to answer that question as you said sir, he would be
entitled to do?
      I am assured by everybody, as it turns out, that
that hypothetical question will not actually turn out to
have any bearing in reality because those who have given
such statements will not decline to answer, but if one
did decline to answer then one would have a statement which
had little probitive value as to the facts as they occurred
on the day, but on trying to exercise my mind about this
point it does occur to me that it would have this value:
the value would be to either show a degree of consistency
or inconsistency in relation to such evidence that was
actually given from the witness box in relation to the
matters that actually did take place on the 15th of April
and it would be to that, and to that only, that the giving
of evidence by the Police Officer as to what was said in
the interview would be directed.
      May I finally say this on this point: that some
submissions, observations have been made as to remarks or
answers that would in different proceedings be regarded as
self-serving.
      Sir, my submission is that such an expression "self-
serving statements" has no part to play in these proceedings.
That a man should say something in a PACE interview which
turns out to be self-serving may be inadmissible, may be
inadmissible in a criminal Court, but in these proceedings
which are not adversarial but which are inquisitorial,
it has no part to play at all and the fact that a statement
is self-serving or not is neither here nor there because the
question is posed: self-serving to who? Because a man is
not on trial he is entitled to give his account of his
perception of the events of that day.Insofar as they cast
him in a good light so be it. Insofar as they cast him
in a bad light so be it, but because they cast him in a
good light does not mean that they are not admissible to
go before a jury. I say that representing a person who made
no PACE statement and therefore to whom it does not apply
but in an attempt to assist the Court with the rather
difficult jurisprudential basis of such statements, but the
fact that a statement is made which is self-serving is
neither here nor there because a man is not on trial and
all that is served is the truth as to what took place on
the 15th of April and I expect the months before it.




                          So sir those are my
                                                  90




     So, sir, those are my submissions or observations
to make. I hope now that all being well this can
proceed and Mr. Marshall's video can continue to be
played.
      There was one final matter, and that is in
.relation to the editing of PACE statements, I agree
with my learned friend Mr. Payne the task would be so
onerous and so difficult having regard to the different
interests, that it would one which would only add to
the time. Perhaps I could put it this way, sir, having
had some experience of attempting to edit interviews in
criminal causes, between myself acting either on behalf
of the Prosecution or the Defence, and another
barrister, and knowing how long that can take, to try
 and do it with so many representatives would be so time
 consuming as not to be worth the trouble.
     MR. MANNING:   The first rule of evidence drummed
into me was that statements don't get better made twice
or three times. I therefore hope that you will not
think it impolite or impertinent of me simply to say
that I adopt an awful lot of what has been said by my
very learned friends, before me. There is no point,
with respect, in me rehearsing those so I simply
confine myself to statements or answers to the
questions that are posed.
     I too share the view of the course of justice
being as quickly as possible moved forward. I have no
idea whether having listened to everybody you intend to
think about your answers overnight and deliver your
decision tomorrow morning. That is a matter for you.
It may be that you do but if that is in your mind I
don't expect it will take perhaps more than half an
hour or so, or even an hour with any more submissions
that may be made. Coincidentally what remains of the
video are two 45 minute tapes and about another 20
minutes. With the breaks that the Jury would^have that
would be a convenient place to break on what is
ordinarily a shorter day and Iwould submit that there
can be no prejudice to anyone to actually get to that
stage and without there then being any spoken evidence
being taken at all, just to stop, so I support the view
expressed by Mr. Isaacs.
     The second point as to the discharge of the Jury,
probably you will have already gathered if I am
suggesting that, that I do not support that at all.  I
believe that any matters that need to be covered can be
covered and will be covered by you in the direction
that you give to the Jury.
      As to the PACE statements, I said that I had no
objection to my client's statement going in, but I
wanted it to go in as a whole statement, and the only
hesitation I had as to the filming of it, was whether I
 inadvertently or even my client inadvertently or even
my client inadvertently, had done something on the
.filmed view that might give an adverse view of it. I
doubt it very much. Having seen today I find myself in
 a sense of deja vu, remembering the same room and the
 same chairs, so the probability is I don't take any
 argument with that, but as to the statement itself, it
 is a statement and it ought to be contained and read
 through in whatever form in one complete episode, and
 not with bits and pieces taken out.
     The last matter was whether the Taylor cross-
examination goes in. My view of that is that we had
agreed in principle, and indeed it has also been a fact
on a couple of occasions, that where there seems to be
a deviation in cross-examination, that that is with
your permission then put to the witness. Frankly I
don't see any reason to depart from that which has
already been established.
     MISS SINCLAIR:   Sir, could I just set out my
position on behalf of Eastwood's, broadly, in relation
to what has been discussed today? The first thing is
naturally we are troubled by the fact that Mr.
Marshall's voluntary statement went before the Jury
this morning. Sir, that is not a matter on which I
propose to address any argument to you. It is
something the implications of which have to be
considered with those instructing me and with leading
Counsel. Unfortunately I have not been able to do that
today, despite efforts.
     What I can say, although you have already given
your ruling, is simply on the matter of whether the
Court should adjourn until Monday. I would support the
suggestion that the Jury be allowed to view the
remaining video tapes of the PACE interview tomorrow.

     Finally, sir, if I could suggest whatever happens
in the matter of the Jury being discharged or not,
could I suggest that perhaps, along the lines of the
submission made by my friend Mr. Catchpole, that the
Jury be directed forcefully and perhaps immediately
that they should take no account of statements of
opinion expressed by Mr. Marshall in his statement.
The expression of opinion is a privilege which has not
been accorded to other witnesses in this Court, and in
my submission it should not be, in these unusual
circumstances, accorded to him.
     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Sir, if I can make my position
clear, I hope not to add to the length of this, perhaps
I can say in brief, sir, I support and adopt all that
has been said by my learned friend Mr. Payne.

      The only observation I have to make is with regard
.to any future editing of any PACE statements. Sir, I
don't take such a pessimistic view as my learned friend
Mr. Payne, and indeed my learned friend Mr. Isaacs.
Sir, perhaps it is right to remind them that any
question of editing PACE statements in the future is
primarily a question for you and not those representing
the parties. Sir, if in your discretion you feel it
right and proper in the future to carry out any editing
work of PACE statements, then you may feel it prudent
 to disclose those editions to all interested parties
beforehand, and then anyone can express a view on the
editions you saw fit to make. Perhaps by that means it
need not be such a lengthy process, because nine
 lawyers are not going to be editing those statements.
Sir, that is all I wish to say about it.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    Sir, can I rise again just to
reply on the points Mr. Payne raised, and I hope to do
it very briefly? He suggested that everyone had agreed
to the evidence being taken and the procedure that has
occurred today. That may be right but I would put in
the caveat that no one, certainly I didn't agree, to
having evidence put in to which a legitimate objection
could have been taken, and the difference, with respect
to my learned friend, between seeking other statements,
other witness statements, with these statements, is
that in order to make these PACE statements of any
value to this Jury, the question has to be asked of a
witness, "Is it true?" At that point a document
becomes evidence. In any other circumstances that
document would be a Rule 37 statement, in which case
objection can be taken, it is expressly contemplated in
the rules, and that can only be there - the parties
can, in other words, say they have a legitimate
objection to certain passage contained and would like
them either to be excised or the person to give oral
evidence.
     As regards editing future PACE statements,
obviously there are going to be difficulties if
everyone is going to sit down and try and blue pencil
odd lines here and there, because we are going to argue
about opinions, but there is a qualitative difference
between 19 pages of opinion, which can easily be
removed with respect, and matters that can be dealt
with by a broad general direction as to opinion
evidence in general, whether it has been given in the
witness box or has occurred in odd sentences in PACE
statements. There is a very big difference between
these statements, which by the route currently being
adopted, means that the document goes in as evidence
without any party having had a chance to object to it,
and it is as a result of today's experience that has
only come to light, there could have been some value.
Prejudice, and I agree with my learned friend, Mr.
King, has been done by it going in. We could have
avoided it, avoided the discussion today if we had seen
them.
     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I didn't want to have to rise
again and I only do in response to the suggestion that
was made that you should at once give direction to the
Jury to disregard any opinions of expression included
in the statement made by Mr. Marshall. Sir, I would
oppose that invitation to you and ask you not to give
such a direction because there are different qualities
of opinion expressed by Mr. Marshall.

     There are expressions of opinion contained within
his evidence, based upon his own experience. For
example, it was a matter of opinion, it was a matter of
his opinion, as to whether or not it would have been
practicable to try to do something to hold up the
advance of the crowd at some distance away from the
ground. Now, that is based upon his own experience of
having to Police crowds in other situations and he
formed his opinion that it would not be appropriate to
do it, and gave expression to that opinion, so that is
one sort of opinion which in my submission he is
perfectly entitled not only to form but also to give in
evidence, and the Jury can decide whether they think it
is right or not.
     There is another type of opinion, based for
example upon the collapsing pressure that is required
on a barrier. That is not something within his own -
at least as far as one knows, and it is not given in
evidence - expertise, so that is a different type of
thing. It may be that some direction should be given
about that sort of opinion, but what I am objecting to
is that an overall direction should be given at this
stage to disregard all expressions of opinion, because
there are different categories.

     MR. KING:   Sir, could I very briefly reply to my
learned friend Mr. Isaacs about the significance ....

     THE CORONER:   I was just going to say I wonder
whether we should adjourn until tomorrow? We are not
finishing today, I am certain of that, and I think we
have got to resume but I personally feel, particularly
as I think some people left when they heard I said it
was my intention not to resume, and it is unfair of me
now if I resile from that as well, so to speak, I think
that we ought to resume tomorrow, deal with the legal
points we need to make, and not have any more tapes.
We will not be able to finish the tapes, so I think we
come together again on Monday and do whatever is
.appropriate at that point.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am reminded - I am not now
going on to any legal point - that my learned friend
Mr. Russell, who represents Mr. Greenwood, is not here.
He will be here tomorrow and he may well, of course,
feel that he ought to have had, and have an opportunity
to put his input into what is obviously an important
matter.
     THE CORONER:   Yes, I agree.

     MR. KING:    I know from Mr. Manning - a message
was put acrossthe bench here - that a request be made
on his behalf to that effect.
     MR. MANNING:   Yes, that is why I was just
attempting to come to my feet, sir. Mr. Greenwood is
here and counsel Mr. Russell isn't but will be tomorrow
morning, so for that reason as well I think this would
be as good a time as any ....

     THE CORONER:   Perhaps what I should have said is
that I want to give the Jury a day off ....

     MR. KING:   Sir, if I can summarise the position,
we will not be proceedings with any evidence tomorrow?

     THE CORONER:   I think by the time we have
finished submissions there won't be enough time.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am asked to put ray head above
the parapet and ask for a 10 o'clock start in the
circumstances.
     MR. MANNING:   It is slightly more convenient.

     THE CORONER:   I prefer it, but I start at half-
past-9 because I know it usually suits everybody else
better. Mr. Hale, are you happy to wait until
tomorrow?
     MR. HALE:   Yes. I have very little to say. I am
happy to have you direct the Jury to disregard entirely
things like the barrier. I think it would be a very
simple matter, and there is no need to discharge them
at all, just to say to them, "Mr. Marshall is not
qualified. He was entitled to say something when he
was being charged possibly with a criminal offence, but
as   far as this Inquest is concerned, what he has to say
on   that is totally irrelevant, there will be other
evidence about it, disregard what he says completely."

      I am very happy for that and anything else, but
jwhat I am certainly not happy to do is if the
circumstances were to occur again and he were to be
interviewed again, he will throw everything into the
pot and he will not hold back at all if somebody comes
to interview him about possible criminal charges. It
is purely accidental that his strenuous and strong
defence has found its way into here when it is not
really appropriate, I accept.

     THE CORONER:   I know I have just stopped you, Mr.
King, but I want to say one or two things because it
gives you an opportunity to think about it. These are
not decisions or directions or anything like that.

     when you first raised the point about discharging
the Jury I think the wording you used was that you were
putting me on notice that this was something which you
wished me to be aware of.




         /What I am a little
                                                      96


What I am a little concerned about, obviously you are
perfectly correct to do' that and I am glad that you did, is
that I would like to think that after you have had the
opportunity to have your consultations, take instructions,
consider the matter in detail, if        you wish to maintaint
point of view    then, of course, you must do so. If I
continue to rule against you then so be it. What I do not
want to happen is that we should spend an enormous amount
of time ^taking evidence on the inference that we have
resolved this point and at the end of the day you go for
judicial review after we have wasted several more thousand
pounds if you were to win. If this point is sufficiently
vital to you,   and I am not asking      you to resile from iti
any way, thenI would prefer you, if I may put it like
that, to have it reviewed early rather than late.

     We could proceed while that was happening, so to
speak, assuming that I continue to rule against you on this
point and I am not asking you to give an undertaking that
you will not go for judicial review on this particular
point at some point in the future because that would be
unreasonable of me and I would not want to do it but you
will understand what I am trying to say. It is not just,
if you like, my time and my costs but it is also your time
and your costs and for that matter your clients' costs. We
should not waste them if we can avoid it. That is the
first thought I have and I am addressing you in particular,
Mr. King, but it applies to everybody. Perhaps it is more
acute for you and Mr. Catchpole, I suppose, to a certain
extent and perhaps even you, Miss Sinclair. What I am
trying to say is that Iam not excluding anybody.

     The second thing is that I am exceedingly sorry that,
if you like, this controversy has arisen over this
particular statement because oddly enough and perhaps I
ought to just say this, I did read it, or at least I looked
at it which is more truthful and I decided that a part of
it was inappropriate as you know.The other part, in the
end, I decided I had toinclude.    Oddly enough, I included
it because I was not so much thinking of you but I was
thinking of your clients, Mr. King, and this is the oddity
about the situation because I felt that if I excluded these
two statements, the recollection and the voluntary
statement, you might with justice take the view, what have
we missed? It is right at the beginning of the PACE
statement. It refers to it and it disappears and I felt
you and your clients might feel that something had been
suppressed which ought to have been disclosed. That was
one of my reasons. I do not know whether it was a good
reason or not but anyway it was.    I just mention that
because I want you to know that I did actually think about
that. I accept that there may be views and I may have been
wrong. I am not infallible. Nobody is. That is the
second point. It is not really one that one can come back
on but I just wanted you to know.

     The third thing is the question of the handing out of
PACE statements for editing by the     parties.I am against
it and I am not going to do it. Ithink that is my view
                                                    97


unless somebody else can persuade me tomorrow otherwise but
my present view is, no.‘ It is in Jervis and it is page 140
if you can find it. It is quite clear that there is no
procedure for early disclosure. It is not my practise. We
have not done it up to now and I am not going to do it in
respect of this. Again, as I say, it is not a ruling and
anybody can come back to me on this again tomorrow but that
is my feeling.

      Mr. Payne drew our attention to Jervis. page 177,
1522. He did not read the whole paragraph but I will read
this paragraph to you because I think it does set out what
we are supposed to do. It says:

   "In theory at least, the coroner's inquest, being an
   inquisitorial proceeding, designed for the coroner
   (and his jury) to start with no preconceptions and to
   elicit the true facts regarding the incident in
   question, had no need for such restrictions...."

He is talking about the rules of evidence:

   "The aim was to find out the objective truth in the
   public interest and not to the limited 'truth' as
   between and for the purposes of two or more parties.
   Thus it has been held, and many times stated, that
   the coroner's court is not bound by the strict laws
   of evidence."

So even if I was totally wrong, apart from the breach of
Rule 37 which is a specific rule and which, as I say, I
have taken the view does not apply to this particular
document, and I may be wrong on that as well, but if I am
not wrong on that I do have the right to include whatever
evidence, including hearsay or any other evidence, which I
consider to be germane.

     The difficulty, of course, is that I think Mr. Hale
has agreed that Mr. Marshall is not an expert on the
construction of barriers and, therefore, his opinion as to
whether it was the corrosion of the barrier which caused
the deaths is worth nothing. It might be right or it might
not but he certainly is not in a position to tell us and I
do not think I would have very great difficulty in telling
the Jury that that opinion of Mr. Marshall's - it may be
his true and genuine view - is not an opinion which they
can rely on. If we had some engineer who came along and
expressed an opinion as to the effects or otherwise of the
corrosion - and I am using that purely as an example, Miss
Sinclair, and nothing else - that would put it into a
totally different category.

     You are right that the question of opinion evidence is
exceedingly difficult but my feeling is that we have heard
a certain amount of opinion evidence and it is a question
of who gives the opinion and at what level, if I can use
that term, we are getting the opinion from. I was not very
happy, for instance, about getting the opinion of a
programme seller as to the management or otherwise of a
                                                       98


particular match. I would take a totally different view if
I had Mr. Mackrell - fdrgive me, I am picking on you this
time - and asked him as to his opinion and ditto in that I
may not put much weight on the opinion of Mr. Smaliman,
say, one of the PCs if he tells me how he thinks he ought
to run the show but that is not to say I would not listen
with great attention to Chief Inspector Creaser or Mr.
Marshall, or anybody else who has the experience and
knowledge and the know-how to be actually be able to say
something which is of value, where I take the view that
this man is an expert in the field.
     It is not right that all opinion has to be excluded.
At least I do not think it is right that all opinion has to
be excluded at any price and from every person. It is a
matter of judgment as to whether a particular person's
opinion, whether that person is in a position to express an
opinion which one could class as an expert's opinion. Let
us face it, every single pathologist who told us the cause
of death was doing nothing other than expressing an opinion
but we accept it because we know they are experts.
     I think that is probably all I want to say at this
time of the evening. We meet again at ten o'clock, is that
convenient? We will carry on as long as we need to.

     MR. HALE:   I leave you with just one small thought
which might be helpful. I was able to be helpful today on
the technicalities when this microphone was on Mr. Jones'
microphone was off. It is an ill wind that blows nobody
any good. I question how much the Jury have picked up
today at all from the evidence that has been given because
of the inadequate sound system. It may be that
particularly with the video they must have picked up very
little. I was there and I could not have followed it
without having the transcript in front of me. The Jury did
not have the transcript of what Mr. Jones was reading. His
microphone kept going down so that it was not functioning
at all. It may be if the clock is to be put back and one
says to the Jury, "Look, we are going to start again on a
different procedure and disregard anything that happened
yesterday" that might not be very difficult because they
might not have taken much on board.
     THE CORONER:   The difficulty is, of course, that we
will compound the problem by repeating it.

     MR. HALE:   Could I put in a plea please for something
to be done to improve the sound system? It has been very
bad.

     THE CORONER:   It has been done but I do not know if
it is going to be any better. Can we leave it like that
for tonight?
       /The Inquests were adjourned until 10 o'clock
                   the following mornincn
