                                                                                                        M I R . 15



   OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                               Date and time raised       * ~ 'v
                                                                                         0   S"-0 * o     .          Number
                                                                                                                              T r
  -Title                                      C -j^                                                                            ^? T O L ^D
     d u d e source and any document number i f relevant)      (^ZC
,v/,
v w *'
   Receiver's instructions — urgent action - Yes/No _____________
                                                                                                                                  Receiver




                                                                                                                                  Indexer
   Document registered/indexed as indicated

   No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                              Statement Reader
  Statement reader's instructions




   Indexed as indicated                       o ~t      r v tP t            ■
   No(s) of actions raised

   Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                                SIO




   Further action No(s)                                                                                                           Indexer


  When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)



     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

 VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



        INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


          JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON




                 Before

S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

         (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At

       The Medico-Legal Centre,
            Watery Street,
              Shef f ield.

                   On

       Friday, 27th April, 1990.




       TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




 From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
      Official Shorthand Writers,
  55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                Page

OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER                  1


      DR. J.R. SHORTLAND Called

          By The Coroner                          2


      G.E. EVANS Called

          By The Coroner                          4


      DR. J.R. SHORTLAND Recalled

          Further by The Coroner                  7


     M. LAYTON Called

          By The Coroner                          7


CLOSING REMARKS BY THE CORONER                   10
                        27th April.   1990


                                 INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON


                             MR. FRASER:   Sir, the next evidence you will hear relates
                        to John Anderson.  Mr. Anderson's son, Brian, who was with him
                    B   at the match is present in your Court this morning, with his
                        father-in-law, sir, and a social worker.  Mr. Anderson's
                        solicitors are a member of my group, sir, and I appear on the
                        usual basis as their agent through the Steering Committee this
                        morning.

                              THE CORONER:   Good afternoon, Mr. Anderson.   If I could
                        explain to you the form in which the Inquest will be conducted
                        this morning so you can follow it more readily.    I am going to
                        read in a moment the evidence which was given on the opening on
                        18th April, 1989.   There are a few errors in this opening, I
                        know.   I will read them as it stands.  Then we will correct the
                        mistakes.   Then I will tell you what the analytical chemist found
                        with regard to alcohol levels in your dad.   Then we will listen
                        to Dr. Shortland, who is the pathologist who did the PM in this
                        particular case.   When Dr. Shortland has finished the West
                    D   Midlands Police Officer who is doing the presenting of the
                        evidence will come and will tell us what she can, and then
                        Inspector Layton will deal with visual evidence.    When we have
                        done all that we will close the evidence at the present time.

                             So that is the format.   Inspector layton, when he is talking
                        may refer to plans and things.   He will be doing it over there,
                        but he will then come here and show on these big plans where the
                    E   various locations are that he might have mentioned and that are
                        relevant.  All right?

                             MR. ANDERSON:   Yes.

                             THE CORONER:   This is a resumed Inquest which was opened on
                        the 18th April, 1989. On that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin,
                        Acting Coroner's Officer said:

                                  "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                                  identified to PC 520 Hogg of the South Yorkshire Police
                                  as that of John Alfred Anderson by Brian Anderson, his
                                  son.  He was 62 years of age, having been born on 2nd
                                  June, 1926, at Liverpool.  He was a married man and he
                                  lived at                                   Liverpool 10.
                                  He was a security officer by occupation.   He died at
                                  Hillsborough football ground following an incident
                                  there on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.   PC 520 Hogg
                                  caused the body to be removed to the Medico-Legal
                                  Centre, and there he identified it to Detective
                                  Constable Simon Weigold, who subsequently identified
                                  the same body to Dr. Shortland.   It is the family wish
                                  that the body should be cremated".
                H
                             If I deal with one error which you won't actually recognise,

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                      1
                                            DR. J.R. SHORTLAND


but Simon Weigold did not identify the body to Dr. Shortland, and
Dr. Shortland will deal with that in a moment, and we have
actually got a correcting statement from Simon Weigold about
that matter.

     Now, I did circulate a form, and it was signed in fact by, I
take it, your mum, Eileen May Anderson.  Is that right? It is
your mum, is not it?

     M R . ANDERSON:   Yes.

     THE CORONER:   On 26th April, 1989, checking that we had all
the names and spellings and so on correct.  In fact, I think the
sound was correct but the spelling of the address was wrong, and
she corrected the spellings for us.  It is correct on that sheet.
Your dad was born at Liverpool, was not he? Dr. Forrest did the
blood alcohols, and in the case of your dad the level was
76mg/100ml. Dr. Shortland?

                 DR. JOHN RICHARD SHORTLAND Called

                          Bv THE CORONER:

Q. It is John Richard Shortland, is not it? - A. That is correct,
   sir, yes.

Q. Dr. Shortland, in all the cases in which you have been
   involved you have had to deal with these identifications.
   Could you deal with it again in respect of this gentleman? -
   A. Yes.  The body of Mr. Anderson was identified to me by
   Police Officers whose names I do not know, and also mortuary
   attendants.  Also there were marks on the body to indicate his
   name and the sequential body number as delineated, in this
   case No. 76.

Q. Now, Dr. Shortland, can you please help me with the post
   mortem findings, please? - A. Yes, indeed.  Perhaps if I just
   run through them and then give a conclusion at the end.

Q. Yes, indeed. - A. Mr. Anderson showed the congestion and the
   little tiny haemorrhages externally that one associates with
   traumatic asphyxia, and in fact internal examination confirmed
   that these little haemorrhages and the congestion were also
   there.

        As we pass through the report there was evidence of a
   moderate degree of coronary artery atheroma, that is hardening
   of the arteries to the heart, and that would really be
   commensurate with his age.  There was no evidence to suggest,
   however, that Mr. Anderson had suffered any heart attack or
   consequence of that narrowing of the arteries to the heart.

        There was an additional feature which complicated the
   issue a little bit in that there was a large quantity of fresh
   blood within Mr. Anderson's abdominal cavity, and this had
   resulted because the aorta, which is the main blood vessel
   supplying the body running straight down the middle of the


                                2
                                                                 DR. J.R. SHORTLAND


                           body, had in fact been torn across, and I felt that this was a
                           significant feature in the cause of his death.  He had
                           suffered traumatic asphyxia, there is no doubt, but I felt
                           that to have had degree of internal haemorrhage I had to
                           record the cause of death as (la) shock and haemorrhage due to
                           (lb) traumatic transection of the aorta and ascribe traumatic
                           asphyxia to No. 2, sir.

                    B   Q. You obviously were not there so you can't speak from your
                           personal knowledge. - A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q. At least not anywhere near Mr. Anderson.   I don't know whether
                           you were there or not.    But if you have a transection of the
                           aorta what mechanism can you give for that, what explanation?
                           - A . I have had discussions briefly this morning with the
                           presenting officer, and my feeling was that he must have been
                           in the vicinity of one of the barriers and squashed up against
                           it, and I think it might prove he was in that area.

                        Q. I think that is right.  What you are postulating is that there
                           would have been pressure from the front which would have
                           severed the aorta against the spinal process? - A. I think
                           that is the only postulate I can give, sir.
                    D   Q. Because there was no external wound or anything like that? -
                           A. That is correct.  There was a little bit of bruising on the
                           anterior abdominal wall.

                        Q. But what I am trying to say is there was not a stab or
                           anything like that? - A. Oh, no.  I have stated in my report
                           there was no other injury to the body.
                    E
                        Q. Do you think, would the atheroma which was present in the
                           abdominal aorta, which in a 62 year year old you would perhaps
                           expect, do you think that would have made the aorta more
                           liable to severance as opposed to, say, a 20 year old? - A.
                           Yes, that in fact crossed my mind, and I did ift fact do a
                           histological examination, sir, and for a 67 year old man there
                           is ... .

                        Q. 62 year old. - A. 62 year old man, I beg your pardon, the
                           degree of atheroma in the aorta is relatively mild.

                        Q. So the only explanation is severe pressure? - A. That is
                           correct, sir.  I found no inherent disease which would have
                           made the aorta weaker than normal.

                        Q. Yes.  We have probably upset poor Mr. Anderson's son, but I
                           want to go over the question of loss of consciousness in
                           relation to this particular case, because you may have
                           something else to say.  I don't know. - A. Yes.  I think that
                           the traumatic asphyxia must have occurred before the aorta
                           ruptured, and as part of the traumatic asphyxia clinical
                           picture there is a rapid loss of consciousness. From my
                           experience of other cases where the aorta has ruptured in this
                H          way - well, not in this way but in other ways - usually the
                           exsanguination is catastrophic and death occurs very rapidly,

J. L. Harpham Ltd
   I

                                                                      D R . J .R. SHORTLAND


                             yes.  But I think that he would have lost consciousness
                             because of the traumatic asphyxia prior to that occurring.          It
                             is difficult to say.

                        |Q. It is difficult to say.   I suppose if the aorta ruptured
                            first, if it were the other way round? - A. That is right,
                            yes.

                    B   Q. But on the other hand it is difficult to assume that he would
                           have such localised pressure which would still enable him to
                           breathe, given the circumstances? - A. Yes, and he had all the
                           other features of asphyxia, sir, and I think they must have
                           been concomitant.

                        Q. Despite what you said, you would still postulate in this case,
                           as you have done in theothers,   that loss of consciousness
                           would have been rapid once this situation was reached? - A.
                           Yes .

                        Q. We know from the evidence, if you have seen the summary, that
                           Mr. Anderson - people noticed that he was in trouble? - A.
                           Yes .

                                  THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser?
                    D
                                  MR. FRASER:   Mr. Anderson's family have no questions,
                             sir, thank you very much.  I think for the sake of Mrs.
                             Anderson, sir, a short period with with the doctor and Brian
                             afterwards might very well be appreciated.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:    Do you mind doing that?          Not at all,
                    E        sir, no.

                                    THE CORONER: Did you get that, Mr. Anderson? Dr.
                             Shortland will stay and when we have finished he will help
                             yo u .

                                   POLICE OFFICER GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called

                                                    Bv THE CORONER:

                                  THE WITNESS:   Geraldine Elizabeth Evans, Officer of the
                             West Midlands Police, sir.   Sir, after the introductory
                             paragraph, Mr. Anderson has expressed that his father is
                             referred to as "Jack".  So for the benefit of other people he
                             will be referred to as "Jack” .

                                  THE CORONER:    Is that you how you know your dad?

                                  MR. ANDERSON:    Yes .

                                  THE WITNESS:   At about 1015 hours on Saturday, 15th
                             April, 1989, Brian John Anderson, together with his father,
                             John Alfred Anderson, James Edward Gerrard and Conteth
                             Farrell, travelled from Liverpool in Mr. John Anderson's
                H            vehicle to Sheffield.  It was their intention to watch the
                             Semi Final football match at the Hillsborough Stadium.

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                          4
                                      G.E. EVANS


     The party arrived in Sheffield at about 1315 hours, and
after parking the vehicle a short distance away from the
ground made their way to a public house, where they each
had something to drink.  At about 1415 hours they left
the public house and made their way to the Leppings Lane
entrance of the stadium, arriving at about 1425 hours.
There they joined the mass of people at the turnstiles.

     Brian Anderson and his father moved out of the main crush
and stood to the right of the crowd.  They were joined by
James Gerrard, and within a short time Gate C was again opened
and all three entered the ground through the gate.  They made
their way along the tunnel and into enclosure 4. There was a
surge from behind and Brian Anderson and James Gerrard lost
sight of Jack.

     At about 1500 hours Karl Matthew Mulee, a Liverpool
supporter, found himself crushed up against a barrier in
enclosure 4. He saw to his right a man who he believes to be
Mr. John Alfred Anderson, also crushed against the barrier.
Mr. Anderson appeared distressed and was shouting for help.
After a short while he stopped shouting and Karl Mulee noticed
that his complexion was dark red. Mr. Anderson vomited and at
this point Mr. Mulee became unconscious for a short time.
When he regain consciousness he saw that Mr. Anderson had
slipped off the barrier onto the floor.  Mr. Mulee attempted
to pull him up but was unable to.  He then lost sight of Jack
and has no further recollection of what happened to him.

     Shortly after 1500 hours Gary Patrick Burns, a Liverpool
supporter, found himself also pushed up against a man who he
now knows to be John Alfred Anderson.  He states that Jack was
crushed against a barrier in enclosure 4, he appeared
distressed and was shouting for help.  Mr. Burns was able to
place his hands under Jack's arms in an attempt to stop him
falling, but eventually he slumped, and Mr. Burns thought that
at that stage he was dead.  Once the surge had ceased Mr.
Burns assisted other persons to carry Jack out of the
enclosure, through the tunnel to the concourse at the rear of
the West Stand.  Mr. Burns then returned to the terraces to
assist other persons.

     Shortly after 1505 hours, following the severe crushing
in the West Stand terracing, Shaun Malcolm Sayer was in
enclosure 4 when he saw a man who he believes to be John
Alfred Anderson lying on the terrace behind a barrier.   Mr.
Anderson was lying on his back and appeared to be unconscious.
Mr. Sayer, together with a friend, Derek Southern, attempted
to resuscitate Jack, and they were joined by David Roger
Campbell, another Liverpool supporter, who also attempted to
resuscitate him.  They continued this for several minutes but
formed the opinion that Jack was dead.

     As a result of the crushing on the Leppings Lane terrace,
PC Alan Davis made his way to enclosure 4 via the tunnel that
runs under the West Stand.  He saw that Jack was lying on the
floor and formed the opinion that he was dead.  Together with
                                                                    G.E. EVANS


                             Mr. Campbell and Mr. Sayer the officer picked him up and
                             carried him towards the perimeter fence.  They were unable to
                             get onto the pitch, so Jack was carried to the concourse at
                             the rear of the West Stand and then moved to just outside the
                             ground in Leppings Lane.  The officer was approached by a Dr.
                             John Ashton, who looked at Mr. Anderson and stated that he was
                             dead.  PC Davis then left Jack and assisted Dr. Ashton.

                    B             At about 1530 hours PC Hogg was outside Gate B of the
                             Hillsborough football ground where he saw approximately six
                             casualties laid on the ground.  Beside one of the casualties
                             was a man who he now knows to be Mr. Brian Anderson.  PC Hogg
                             established from Mr. Brian Anderson that one of the casualties
                             was that of his father.
                                  As a result of the crushing on the terrace Brian himself
                             sustained an injury to his right arm, and was eventually
                             persuaded by the officer to leave his father and attend
                             hospital for treatment.

                                  At 1630 hours Dr. David Monaghan attended at the Leppings
                             Lane entrance of the Hillsborough football ground where he
                             examined the body of Mr. Anderson and certified life extinct.
                    D             Shortly afterwards PC Hogg accompanied the body of Jack
                             to the gymnasium in the stadium where a temporary mortuary had
                             been set up.
                                  At about 2050 hours that same day Brian Anderson formally
                             identified the body of his father to PC Hogg in the temporary
                             mortuary at the gymnasium.
                    E             PC Hogg later escorted the body of Mr. Anderson to the
                             Medico-Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
                             Detective Inspector Henry Timms.

                                  At about 1400 hours on Sunday, 16th April,' 1989, Dr. John
                             Richard Shortland carried out an autopsy and submitted a
                             report giving the cause of death.

                                  Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the blood
                             sample from Mr. Anderson where the presence of ethanol was
                             detected.  Witnesses proving continuity of the blood sample
                             are Detective Constable Jones, Detective Sergeants_Turner and
                             Fletcher and Dr. Alexander Robert Forrest who carried out the
                             analysis.
                                  Found in Jack's personal effects was a full ticket for
                             the Semi Final match, which confirms his entry to the stadium
                             as described by his son, Brian.

                                  That concludes my summary, sir.

                        Q.       THE CORONER:   Just one small point.  In paragraph 15     it
                             is Detective Sergeant John Turner and Detective Constable
                H            James Fletcher, is not it? - A. Yes, sir, my mistake.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                        6
                                                                       D R . J.R. SHORTLAND


                                                                     M ■ LAYTON
                        Q. One is a Sergeant and the other is a Constable.   There were
                           quite a lot of people who were involved with Jack, were not
                           there? - A. Yes, sir.
                        Q. I think I am right in saying, was he first carried forward and
                           then backward, or did they take him straight out? - A. If you
                           refer to paragraph 7, they carried him towards the perimeter
                    B      fence.

                        Q    They tried to get him out frontways and they could not do it,
                             and they turned round and came out through the tunnel? - A.
                             That is right, to the concourse at the rear of the West Stand.

                                  THE CORONER:     I d o n ’t think I have any questions.     Mr.
                             Fraser?

                                  MR. FRASER:    Jack's family have no questions, sir.
                             Thank you, Officer.

                                         DR. JOHN RICHARD SHORTLAND Recalled

                                                 Further by THE CORONER:
                    D   Q. Dr. Shortland, I want to ask you one more question.  We have
                           heard quite a lot of evidence of people trying to help Mr.
                           Anderson.  Would I be right in thinking once that transection
                           had occurred it was hopeless? - A. Yes, indeed, sir.

                        Q. And it does not matter what would have been done, nothing
                           could have been done for him? - A. Indeed, yes, sir.
                    E                   PET. INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                                                     Bv THE CORONER:

                                  THE WITNESS:   Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
                             West Midlands Police.   Sir,   an examination has been made of
                             video film and photographic    evidence, and Jack has been
                             identified in enclosure N o . 4.   If I can point out in my
                             summary the phrase that is being used at the moment is
                             "apparently dead".   I think it is fair to say that certainly
                             he was unconscious, and I think "unconscious" would be a
                             better interpretation.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   Yes, I think that is s o . - A. Sir, Gary
                             Patrick Burns has viewed visual evidence, and he has
                             identified Jack on a BBC video which has been given the
                             reference number MAP 1, in two different places, sir.    First
                             of all timed at 1512:40:07 and 1518:34:24.    That, sir, seems
                             to confirm the point that has already been made about the fact
                             that there was an effort to   take him out on to the pitch
                             initially, which was unsuccessful, and then he was taken back
                             through the tunnel area.  He signed a plan of the terraces
                             indicating the approximate location at which he found Jack,
                H            and that has been references GB/1.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                           7
                                                                  M ■ LAYTON


                               David Roger Campbell has viewed a photograph of Jack, and
                          confirms that this is the person that he assisted.  He, sir,
                          signed a plan of the terraces, and the reference number for
                          that is DRC/1. On that plan he indicates the approximate
                          location at which he first came into contact with Jack.  On a
                          second plan, DRC/2, he indicates the approximate location at
                          which he left Jack.

                    B          PC Davis has viewed visual evidence, and he has
                          identified Jack on a video in enclosure No. 4, on the tape MAP
                          1, again timed at 1512:40:07, which in fact is the same time
                          reference as I have given you.  The officer has signed a plan
                          of the pens indicating the approximate location at which he
                          first came into contact with Jack, and that is referenced
                          AD/1.
                               Sir, Brian Anderson, who as you know is in Court, has
                          viewed the visual evidence and he has been able to confirm
                          for us that Jack is shown on those other identifications, but
                          specifically on the BBC tape MAP 1, 1512:40:07.

                                Sir, can I refer you to a plan which has been given the
                           reference number MWJL/95.

                    ®   Q. C.135. - A. That is a plan of the terraces, sir, and in fact
                           refers to the video identifications.  Do you wish to refer to
                           Gary Burn's plan, that is GB/1?

                        Q. Yes, I think I do. C.136. - A. And the plan by PC Davis, sir,
                           AD/1? There is a slight difference.

                        Q. Yes, let us have that one as well.   C.137.   Take one of those.
                    E      - A. Yes, sir.  There are two plans.     I am referring now to a
                           plan which I have completed, which is MWJL/153.    That refers
                           to DRC/2.

                        Q. That is the first location where he was put down?    A. That is
                           right, sir, yes.

                        Q. What is the other one? Tell me what the other one is,
                           MWJL/154? - A. MWJL/154, sir, refers to the plan RU/1, which
                           is PC Uttley’s plan.  The slight difference there is it shows
                           the area by the river where eventually Jack was taken to
                           afterwards.

                        Q. And that is the area where the officer saw Jack with his son?
                           - A. That is right, sir.  I believe so, sir.

                        Q. In that case let us have them both and take them in numerical
                           order, MWJL/153, which is C.138, and then MWJL/154 becomes
                           C.139. - A. If I can refer you first of all to MWJL/95, that
                           refers to the video identifications.  This is enclosure No. 4.

                        Q. Excuse me.  I know it is taking it out of order, but should we
                           take GB/1 first? - A. Certainly, sir.  Chronologically it is
                    H      more accurate.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                       8
                                                                  M. LAYTON


                        Q. Time sequence it is. - A. GB/1 then, which refers to Gary
                           Burns, the point at which in enclosure No. 4 he indicates Jack
                           is in this position here.

                        Q. In other words, adjacent to a barrier? - A. That is correct.

                        Q. And that is one where as far as one can tell that he might
                           still have been alive at that point? - A. Yes, sir.  If we go
                    B      to the video identification, again in enclosure No. 4, the
                           point indicated is here, very close to Gate No. 4.

                                In respect of PC Davis’s plan, AD/1, he has indicated a
                           position approximately here.

                                In respect of MWJL/153, and I am referring to this plan
                           now, we have got a location in the concourse area, which is
                           here, which is between Gate C and the tunnel.

                                In respect of MWJL/154, the next location we have got is
                           at this point here, that is outside the ground as it were
                           adjacent to Gate C.

                        Q. That is really the place where PC Hogg and the doctor and
                           young Mr. Anderson were? - A. That is right, sir.
                    D
                                THE CORONER:   Have I misremembered, or is this the case
                           where we mentioned Gate B?   Did we mention Gate Binthis?
                           Which paragraph is it?   Can you remember?

                                MR. FRASER:    It is paragraph 8 you want, sir.

                    E           THE CORONER:   Yes, thank you:

                        Q. We have not mentioned Gate B before.   Can you show us where
                           Gate B i s , so that you know. There is more than one gate, but
                           the only one that really matters as far as we are concerned is
                           Gate C. Just so that we know where Gate B i s .‘- A. These are
                           the turnstiles A-G, and Gate B is just here.

                        Q. And that is the gate that PC Hogg actually came in, and   I
                           think we said about half-past-3, 1530.

                                MR. FRASER:    Jack's family have no questions for the
                           officer, but I rise again on specific instructions.   As you
                           heard, the young man who is in Court this morning, Brian, was
                           at the game with his dad.   He wishes to thank on his behalf
                           and on behalf of his mum everybody who attempted to save his
                           father’s life.   Sadly, it was too late, but the people who
                           were making valiant efforts did not know that at the time.
                           He wants to express his personal thanks to everybody who
                           helped on the day.

                                THE CORONER:   Thank you very much, indeed.  It comes out
                           in the summaries what a lot of effort was made.  It is just a
                           shame that it was unsuccessful.  Anything else?  (No response)
                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                       9
                                                                   THE CORONER


                             Mr. Anderson, thank you very much, indeed, for coming
                        this morning.  I would like to say to you it must be very hard
                        for you because you were there and it brings it all back more
                        vividly than for others, but I am glad you are here.   I want
                        say to you, but particularly to your mum, if you will make
                        sure you convey this to her, how very sorry we are that you
                        have lost your dad and that she has lost her husband in these
                        very, very tragic circumstances.  Thank you very much.
                    B
                             Ladies and gentlemen, we are going to rise and we are
                        going to have lunch, and then we will resume in the afternoon.
                        If we have everybody here before 2 we will resume a few
                        minutes before 2. Otherwise we resume at 2.

                            (The Inquest into the death of JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON
                                   was adjourned to a date to be fixed)




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                   10
