                                  First of S L Popper
                                  Sworn /o7u f&PrfrtS**? /¥?%
                                  on Behalf of Respondent
                                           Case No. CO/1QQ9/92

IN TBB HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

QUEENS BENCH DIVISION

CROWS OFFICE LIST


IN THE MATTER of AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


B E T W E E N


                             REGINA


                              - and -



                    HER MAJESTY'S COHOMER FOR
                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                            Ex parte
                       STRINGER AND OTHERS




                             AFFIDAVIT



I STEFAN LEOPOLD POPPER, of _____________________
                        MAKE OATH and say as follows:



1.   I hold the following qualifications: LLB. B *Med.Sci» BM«.

     BS. MRGCP. For 6 years I was Her Majesty/s Coroner for

     South Yorkshire (West District).       Or, the

     1st November 1991 I retired.       At various dated between

     the 18th April 1989 and the 28th March 1991. I conducted

     Inquests into the deaths of S5 individuals as        resralt- of

     an incident at Hillsborough Stadium on Saturday the

     15th April 1989.    In total I sat for 96 days.
I make this Affidavit in response to those sworn by

Jeremy Hawthorn on the 5th May 1992 and the

11th September 1992 filed on behalf of the 6 Applicants.

I make this Affidavit so that the Court may have the

benefit of my reasoning in acting in the way that I did.

Accordingly, what follows is put forward by way of

explanation.    I am content to leave all matters of

argument to Counsel instructed upon my behalf.



My attention has been drawn to the 7 grounds raised by

the Applicants in their Form 86A dated the 5th May 1992

and I will attempt to deal with each of those matters.        I

will commence by providing a summary of the form and

nature of the Inquests.    There is now produced and shown

to me and marked "SLP.l" a paginated exhibit bundle to

which reference is made in the body of this Affidavit.

That exhibit is divided into marked sub-sections which

indicate the contents.     I have attempted not to duplicate

material exhibited by Mr Hawthorn.     Further, I have made

an every effort to keep the volume of the exhibit within

a manageable amount.     During the course of the Inquest

there was generated an enormous volume Qf material which

I considered.    It would be intolerable for me to burden

this Court with all of that information.
Immediately, following the Hillsborough tragedy it fell

to me to conduct the Inquests into the deaths of the 95

individuals who suffered injury on that Saturday

15th April 1989 which led to their deaths.    In compliance

with my usual and well-established practice I considered

that the questions to be answered for each of the 95

Inquests within my inquisitorial jurisdiction and within

the parameters of the Coroners' Act 1988 were: Who? When?

Where? and How? - in other words who the person was,

where he/she was when they died; when he/she died and

finally how he/she died.



I opened the Inquests on the 95 deaths starting on the

18th April 1989.   At the initial hearings the bodies were

identified and the Inquests then adjourned.   Bven at that

very early stage there were certain features of this

tragedy which were bound to impact upon the nature of the

Inquests; including



(1)   The appointment on the 17th April 1989 of the Right

      Honourable Lord Justice Taylor by the Secretary of

      State for the Home Department to carry out an

      Inquiry:                          r



      "To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday

      football ground on the 15th April 1989 and to make

      recommendations about the needs of crowd control and

      safety at sports events."
(2)   The very large number of deaths and the nature of

      the circumstances in which they occurred coupled

      with what would be the extreme distress involved for

      the relatives and friends of the deceased.



I was acutely aware of attempting to balance the

practical imperatives of my inquisitorial purposes and

the eminently understandable desire on the part of all of

the relatives and friends of the deceased to know every

single piece of information concerning the lives of the

deceased on that fateful Saturday afternoon.



Following the identification carried out in April 1989

there followed the Interim Report by Lord Justice Taylor

in August 1989 and the Final Report in January 1990.      The

Inquiry and the Coronal process was assisted by an
independent Police Force - the West Midlands Constabulary

- who investigated the incident and gathered evidence for

the Inquiry.


Having opened each of the 95 Inquests in April 1989 and

then adjourned each, it had been my original intention

once the public inquiry had been completed to resume the

Inquests reasonably promptly and indeed initially I had

fixed the date for resumption as the 15th January 1990.
However, sometime after the Interim Report by Lord

Justice Taylor in August 1989 I was informed that
documentation was being prepared for submission to the

Director of Public Prosecutions in order to enable him to

consider bringing criminal charges arising out the

incident.


As a consequence of this I had determined that the

resumed Inquests would have to await the Director's

decision.   However, some time in I think early

February 1990 I received a letter from Miss Steele, a

solicitor connected with the Hillsborough Steering

Committee, enclosing a letter she had written to the DPP

regarding the provision of at least some limited
information regarding the deceased.    I reconsidered the

matter in the light of this request and following

consultation with the office of the Director of Public
Prosecutions decided that the Inquests could be resumed

on a limited basis at this stage.     In particular we would

not deal with the issued of "How". Evidence would have
to be carefully adduced such that there could be no
possible prejudice to any criminal investigations should

the Director decide upon this course of action.



Accordingly, I arranged for a series of meetings to take

place to explore this option.   The first took place on

 the 26th February 1990 with Mr Fraser representing the
interests of the families*   It was agreed that the

Inquests could proceed and all relevant interests could

be both promoted and protected by a two stage process -

firstly, answering the questions who, where and when (the

interim part of the Inquest) followed by a how element of

the Inquest depending upon any decision by the Director

of Public Prosecutions.



I arranged a further meeting on the 6th March 1990 where

a broader range of representation was able to attend.

The proposed method of proceeding was agreed.   I

explained fully the way in which I wanted the evidence to

be presented so as to meet the legitimate requirements of

everyone involved.   There was no dissent from the

proposals at this meeting.



Therefore, as can be appreciated from the above, in order

to complete my statutory function I had determined that

the factual evidence concerning the questions of who,

when and where, could and should be met by Officers of

the West Midlands Constabulary summarising for each of

the 95 cases the effect of the evidence they had gathered

and collected.   I had carefully explained to all

concerned in particular Mr Fraser, why I had chosen this

path (not least to avoid the possible pitfalls of

prejudicing the criminal investigations) and he was in

agreement with ray proposals.   On the same questions, the

forensic pathology
 evidence would be dealt with by the pathologists who

 undertook the post mortem examinations.     The team of

 pathologists involved in the post mortem examinations

 included no less than 4 professors, one of whom was
 Professor Alan Usher - the Professor of Forensic Medicine

 at Sheffield.   He is a pathologist of international

 repute.   He and the team of pathologists had completed

 all the autopsies within 48 hours of the tragedy.



 Although the Final Report from the Inquiry was completed

 in January 1990, at that stage the possibility of serious

 criminal proceedings and disciplinary proceedings still

 remained open against certain Police Officers of the

 South Yorkshire Constabulary.



 As already described above and with agreement, I decided

 that the questions of who, when and where should be

 decided at a preliminary part of the Inquest for each of

 the 95 individuals with the issue of how being held over

 until the decision regarding criminal proceedings (if
                                        <i
 any) was determined.


. The Preliminary Inquests (otherwise known as the Interim

 or Mini Inquests)


 Each of the 95 Inquests was reconvened to deal with the

 preliminary aspects.   This part of the Inquest has been

 referred to as the interim or mini Inquests.     This part
of the Inquests started on the 18th April 1990 and

continued up to and including the 4th May 1990.      At that

time upward of 90 out of the 95 families were represented

by the Hillsborough Steering Committee.       The solicitor

either directly or as agent representing the vast

majority of the families was Mr Fraser and he was present

when I led the relevant evidence.


On the 18th April 1990 a jury was empanelled to deal with

the 95 Inquests.   This same jury heard all the evidence

at the preliminary hearings (or interim Inquests) and all

the evidence at the resumed Inquests staring on the

19th November 1990 and going through until the delivery

of the verdicts in each of these Inquests on the

28th March 1991.   The preliminary Inquests were heard
either at the Memorial Hall or the Medico-Legal Centre,

Sheffield.


The list of representations on the 18th April 1990 was as

follows:
                                          \



Mr Sean Smith, Counsel for the Medical and Dental Defence

Union of Scotland on behalf of Alexander-JRobert

Walker-Forest.



Mr Callaghan, Solicitor for Trent Regional Health

Authority and South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance

Service.
                                        -   9   -




     Mr Gregory, Solicitor for Sheffield City Council.



     Miss Thorpe, Solicitor for Messrs Eastwood and Partners.



     Miss Addleman, Counsel for the Police Federation of

     England and Wales.



     Mr Isaacs, Counsel for Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.



     Miss Norcliffe, Solicitor for the Chief Constable of

     South Yorkshire.



     Mr Catchpole, Counsel for Sheffield Wednesday Football

     Club.


11. I would emphasise the following points as to the
     procedure I adopted:



     (1)     As relevant to the six Inquests the subject matter

             of this application the pathological evidence was

             taken front Professor Alan Usher, Dr Slater (a

             Consultant Histopathologist) and Dr^John Clark, a

             Pathologist front Glasgow.             In total 9 pathologists

             were involved in carrying out the post mortems

             within 48 hours of the tragedy.                 The others involved

              in alphabetical order were Dr Lloyd Denmark,




"•     ' -vr • ............ “ .   7";                    -     .   -   --
                       -   10   -




Professor Laurence Henry, Professor J S P Jones,

Dr S Sivi'aloganatham, Dr J R Shortland,        and
Professor J Underwood.          My understanding of the

overwhelming pathological evidence was that the

victims died as a result of crush injuries received

which in the overwhelming number of cases led to

traumatic asphyxia and that the pathological

evidence available to me was that the injury that

caused the death was crushing.



The representatives of all the families of the

deceased who had requested them had been provided

with copies of the post mortem reports prior to the

18th April 1990.



I adopted the approach of asking West Midlands

Officers to summarise the evidence.          It included the

results of extensive and exhaustive study of TV
recordings, video and photographic evidence and was

intended inasmuch as was possible to give accurate
and factual evidence in respect of the questions of

who, when and where.       I have set out above the

reasons why I used this approach. _B|rther, as a

matter of common humanity it avoided or at least

reduced the need for relatives and friends of the

deceased to have to re-live acutely painful and

distressing events.        I must stress that this

procedure had been explained to the representatives
                                     «*
                            “   11   -




      of the families and there had been agreement from

      the representatives about this method of proceeding

      before 18th April 1990.
      The evidence that was given was given on oath by

      Officers (albeit hearsay evidence) - the written

      summaries themselves were not evidence.        These

      written summaries were circulated to the legal

      representatives before I called the evidence.          On

      the 18th April 1990 I explained to the jury how the

      presentation of the summaries was to take place,

      together with how they had been prepared.        I also

      explained the working of Rule 37 and how I intended

      to apply that Rule in the presentation of evidence.

      No representation was madeuby Hr Fraser about these

      matters.


(3)   At the reconvened hearing of a substantial number of

      the Inquests, I started by explaining the method I

      proposed to adopt to the members of the families

      present.   As far as I recall Mr Fraser was always

      present.   There was no objection from him as to the

      proposed procedure.       Further, insofar as I can

      recall, there was no substantial challenge by way of

      cross-examination to the summarised evidence

      provided by the Officers of West Midlands Force.            A

      number of families through Mr Fraser expressed their
      thanks for the work carried out by those Officers.


                                               * •
In the majority of the cases the uncontested evidence of

the pathologists was that the pathological cause of death

was traumatic asphyxia and that within a natter of

seconds the individuals would have been unconscious and

unaware of anything further and would have died within a

matter of minutes thereafter.



The "How" element of the Inquests



Following the conclusion of the Preliminary Inquests on

4th May 1990, I was informed in September 1990 that the

Director of Public Prosecutions had decided not to

prosecute anyone in respect of the disaster.    The

Inquests had been adjourned to a date to be fixed and

accordingly, I made arrangements for the "How* part of

the Inquests to be held.


On the 30th October 1990 at the Medico-Legal Centre in

Sheffield I convened a Business Meeting of the Legal

Representatives of the interested parties.     This was

specifically required by me in order to discuss procedure

and the smooth running of the main part_qf the Inquests

which were due to start on Monday 19th November 1990 and

to be heard throughout at the Town Hall in Sheffield

(where the Taylor Inquiry had sat).
 In the meeting I indicated that in general terras I

 proposed in this part of the Inquest to take the evidence

 together in respect of all 95.     I then proceeded to

 outline to the representatives the parameters of my

 inquiry on the "how question*.     In particular, I

 identified the cut-off point for evidence that I had

 selected, namely the arrival of the first ambulance upon

 the pitch.    I had concluded that circulating the

 statements of witnesses before I called them would not

 take place.    In a similar vein I stated my initial views

 about the admissibility of the Taylor Inquiry Report.



 This was a Business Meeting and not part of the hearing

 itself.   It was not the appropriate forum for me to hear

 legal argument, but quite properly the legal
 representatives present used the occasion to inform me of

 the matters they would be raising.



 Mr King for the bereaved indicated in general terms his

 position on the "cut-off" point.



 I decided that all matters of a legal argument should be

 heard on the morning of Monday 19th November 1990.



. Whilst on the 30th October 1990 I had not made a

 preliminary ruling that in consideration the question of

  "How" I would be concerned with events up to and
     including the time of 3.15pm on Saturday 15th April 1989

     but not thereafter, I had reached a provisional decision
     that I would proceed in that fashion.   It was clear to me

     that an important issue for the "How" question was the
    manner in which the crushing on the terraces had come
    about*   As a marker I picked the arrival of the first

    ambulance on the pitch which was timed at 3.15pm because
    on the overwhelming pathological evidence available to

    me, by that time permanent irrecoverable damage would

    have already occurred.   I felt it right to draw a line in

    that regard and I had in mind the approach adopted by the

    Coroner in the Zeebruggee Inquest.   However, my decision

    was based mainly upon the expert pathological medical
    evidence.



16. Representation for this main part of the Inquest included
   the following:



   Mr Timothy King (Counsel): for 43 of the families.

   Mrs McBrien: lay representative for the McBrien family.

   Miss Hampton (Counsel) and Mr Maxwell Q.C.: Sheffield
   City Council.

   Mr Hale (Solicitor): Superintendent Marshall.

   Mr Manning (Solicitor) : Superintendent Mftrray.

   Mr Payne (Counsel) and Mr Limb (Counsel): Chief Constable
   South Yorkshire.

   Mr Isaacs (Counsel): Chief Superintendent Dackenfield.
                                            -   15   -




       Miss Sinclair (Counsel): Eastwood and Partners.

       Mr Gatchpole (Counsel): Sheffield Wednesday Football

        Club.

        Mr Callaghan (Solicitor): Ambulance Service.

        Miss Addelmann (Counsel): Police Federation.

        Mr Russell (Counsel): Superintendent Greenwood.



    17. On Monday 19th November 1990 I heard argument from
C       Counsel instructed for the families of the deceased about

        the way in which the answering of the "How" question was

        to be approached.             On that day 43 of the families were

        apparently represented by Mr Timothy King of Counsel who

        had been Junior Counsel instructed to represent the

        families before the Taylor Inquiry.



        In summary, Mr King made the following points to me in

        order to persuade me to a different view to the

        provisional view I had reached:



        (1)     Up to this point there had been no investigation or

                systematic analysis of what was the organisation of

                the rescue, what it might have been and whether it

                would have made a difference.              In that regard he was

                concentrating on that period of time after the
                individuals had been brought off the terraces and
                before death was certified.




                    ? r T 7 7 r7~:?    ■             ...
                :
                                                                  r    •
                                                                                   1
                                         -   16   -




            (2)   By reference to the case of Richard Jones he

                  contended that there was material to support the

                  general proposition that not all the victims were

                  necessarily dead by 3.15pm on that Saturday

                  afternoon.


            (3)   There was material (in particular from

Y                 Dr John Ashton) that       the medical andrescue attempt

C                 were disorganised.



^       18. I think it right to record Mrs McBrien supported Mr King,

            Mr Bale was not entirely supportive of Mr King's

            submissions and Mr Callaghan was against his approach.

    ^       Mr Payne made a point in support of Mr King, but he and

            the other legal representatives present adopted

            essentially a neutral position.



        19. Having listened very carefully to these submissions I was

            not persuaded from my preliminary view.        I reminded

            Mr King that the Inquest was not a Judicial Inquiry.        In

            answer to the seven matters raised in tlie Form 86A and

            the six cases the subject of the application I deal more

            particularly with my reasoning within the^exhibit to this

            Affidavit and further as set out below.



        20. On that first day of the resumed Inquests into the 95

            deaths there was also a good deal of legal argument (in
                             -   17   -




    the absence of the jury) about the rules against

    self-incrimination as they applied to Police witnesses.

    Those representatives also strongly urged me to consider

    whether the representations of the families at the

    adjourned Inquests was to elicit evidence in order to

    persuade the Director of Public Prosecutions to

    reconsider his decision not to prosecute any of the

    Officers and for the jury to bring in a verdict of

    unlawful killing.


21. I was well aware of the emotions of the families, of the

    concerns of the Police Officers and of the particular

    interests of all other represented parties.    I could not

    but fail to be aware of the views of the interested

    parties.



22. Following the legal argument on the Monday morning the

    19th November 1990 the jury returned in the afternoon and

    the Inquests proceeded on the "How" question for a total

    of 80 days up to the delivery of the verdicts.     In broad

    terms, I called the evidence starting outside the ground

    and working inwards.   Thfts evidence was called about the

    arrival of the people to the outskirts .of,the town

    followed by evidence as to how they approached closer to

    the ground.   I then called evidence of the entrance of

    the crowd to the ground (from all perspectives).       I

    called evidence dealing with the opening of the gates,


                                               n       '
                                            -    18   -




                the concourse and the tunnel and the way in which people

                went on to the terraces.        I ensured that evidence was

                called which came from people within enclosures 3 and 4

                and further I called evidence from people who were

                outside those enclosures but had a different perspective

                from different parts of the stadium.           I then looked at

                the position by calling evidence from those who had been

Y~             on or near the perimeter fence.            I called evidence about

 ^             the broken barrier.     The Senior Police Officers at Gate C

        1      at the ground and those in the Control Room were called.

 ^             Evidence was also taken from those representing the

                Licensing Authority.     I attempted to call evidence such
                that all points of view were put before the jury, namely

    ^          from the spectators, the Police and others.



            23. The summing-up and submissions on the verdicts available

                I dealt with in the following way.
C
                By Friday the 15th March 1991 (the 71st day of the "How"

                part of the Inquests) the evidence was beginning to draw

                to a close.     On that afternoon some of the

                representatives began to hand in their written legal

                submissions.     In particular, Mr Maxwell Q.C. and

                Mr Payne.     On Monday the 18th March 1991 the evidence was

                concluded.     On Thursday 19th March 1991 (the 73rd day of

                the "How” part of the Inquests) the legal representatives

                commenced making their submissions.           They made their
submissions in the following orders Hr Maxwell Q.C.,

Mr Payne, Mr Issacs, Mr Manning, Mr King, Mr Catchpole,

Mrs McBrien, Mr Russell, Hiss Addleman and Mr Hale.



The submissions and further submissions were completed by

the afternoon of Wednesday 20th March 1991.    In summary,

all of the representatives made submissions as to whether

or not the verdict of unlawful killing should properly be

left open to the jury.   Not surprisingly they differed in

their conclusions.   Only one representative ( Mr Payne)

indicated what other verdicts should be considered and

left open to the jury, namely misadventure/accidental

death or an open verdict.   Both he and Mr Maxwell Q.C.

agreed that the order in which the jury should consider

their verdicts should bes unlawful killing; then

misadventure/accidental death; and finally an open

verdict.


No one made any submissions relating to any verdict of

lack of care or any verdict whereby the cause of death

was aggravated by lack of care - either on the part of

any Police Force or Police Officer or of any other body.

Mr King made submissions exclusively referable to the

verdict of unlawful killing.     It is also correct to say

that on most days of the main part of the Inquests the

legal representatives raised submissions concerning

points of law.   At no stage was I addressed upon verdicts

of the nature of lack of care.
On Thursday the 21st March 1991 (the 75th day) I started

my svtmming up and continued through Friday the

22nd March 1991, Monday the 25th March 1991 and completed

the stunming up with the jury retiring at 12.33pm on

Tuesday the 26th March 1991.



As far as my summing up was concerned, I emphasised that

each Inquest had to be considered separately.     With

respect to the verdicts open to the jury, I directed them
th*t
b et they were as follows: unlawful killing, accidental

death and an open verdict.     In explaining the verdict of

accidental death, I emphasised that it included events

where no one was to blame through to events where there

was negligence.   I made it clear that such a verdict did

not absolve everyone of blame.



I did indicate to the jury that under Rule 36(b) no rider

should be attached to any verdict.    I also drew their

attention to Rule 42.


On Thursday the 28th March 1991 at 12.08pa (the 80 day of
the main part of the Inquest) the jury £e£arned majority

verdicts of accidental death in all of the 95 Inquests.
                                  -   21   -




    24. The Seven Grounds of Criticism in Form 86A



        With respect to the separate arguments made in respect of

        each of the 6 applicants I have set out my decisions (and

        where necessary reasoning) by way of separate commentary

        in the exhibit to this Affidavit.



        I direct my evidence on this aspect specifically to the 6
C
c       Inquests the subject matter of the application.



        Criticism (1)



        I have set out above the reasons why I adopted the

        procedure I did for the preliminary Inguests held in

        April and May 1990.   In the meetings beforehand this

        procedure was explained, understood and agreed.          In each

        of the 6 Inquests the subject of this application, the

        families were each represented by Mr Fraser.         Be or his

        instructing solicitors had been provided with each of the

        written summaries beforehand.          At the outset of the

        Inquests I explained the procedure that I prdposed to

        adopt to the families.   No objection was taken by

        Mr Fraser and there was very little questioning of the

        Officers giving the evidence.          I believe that in each

        instance the evidence as given in Court by the Officers

        was a fair and accurate statement of the evidence then
        available.
Criticism (2)



This is in effect the same criticism as in (1) above.



Criticism (3)



My understanding of the responsible and relevant expert

medical evidence available to me from pathologists of

high renown which had not at any stage been challenged

during that part of the Inquests held in April and

May 1990 was overwhelmingly to the effect that each of

the 95 victims were dead or had suffered irreversible

injury by 3.15pm.   Where appropriate, the pathologists

were invited to consider lay evidence relevant to each

particular case.    My task was to call relevant evidence

to put before the jury.    In the light of the unchallenged

expert testimony of the pathologists, together with the

other evidence already before the jury, there was not in

the circumstances of this disaster any other relevant or
reasonable medical or rescue evidence that would have had

any impact upon the cause of death.



I set out in the exhibit my comments upon,,the evidence of
Dr Burns.
Criticism (4)



I did not call either Dr Ashton or Dr Phillips.      I

considered the statements from both of these doctors.        In

the light of the uncontested pathological evidence I did

not consider their evidence to be relevant to the issue

of *'How" in any of the 95 Inquests.     I had noted that

Dr Ashton and Dr Phillips had both given oral evidence to

the Taylor Inquiry.     I had read the Interim report in

particular paragraphs 296 to 298.      They provided as

follows:


     "No Fault by the Emergency Services

     296.   I say at the outset of this chapter that no

     valid criticism can be made of the response by the
     St Johns Ambulance Brigade by SYMAS or by the Fire

     Brigade on the 15th April.     Indeed, no represented

     party ventured any criticism of them.     The only

     attack on SYMAS came from 2 Liverpool doctors. One

     claimed that ambulances did not arrive swiftly or
                                           %
     with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack

     of triage.    Be was proved to be wrong in all 3

     respects.    Unfortunately he had se£ZL*fit to go on

     television on 15th April when he said more lives

     could have been saved if staff and equipment had

     arrived earlier.    Apart from being proved wrong in

     fact as to the time of arrival of ambulances, he
    conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say

    whether lives could have been saved.   His comments

    on television were irresponsible.   The other doctor

    complained of the absence of defibrillators.     I am

     satisfied on the overwhelming evidence that to

    attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with

    people milling about would have been highly

    dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the

     electric charge.



     297.   I find that all 3 of the emergency services

     named above responded promptly when alerted, that

     they brought appropriate equipment and that their

     personnel operated efficiently.


     298.   It would be unreasonable to expect, at any

     sports stadium, medical facilities capable of

     dealing with a major disaster such as occurred.      To

     have in advance at the ground, oxygen,
     resuscitators, stretchers, other equipment and

     medical staff sufficient to deal with over 100

     casualties is not practicable."



At paragraph 301 the Report said:
     "There was insufficiently close co-operation between
     the Police and the emergency services.   It is clear

     that SYMAS and the Fire Brigade should have been
       called earlier than they were.   However, in view of

       the nature and extent of the crushing, the time when

       Police rescue began and the pathetically short

       period for which those unable to breathe could

       survive, it is improbable that quicker recourse to

       the emergency services would have saved more lives."



I was aware that Dr Phillips and Dr Ashton were the

doctors concerned in the observations made in paragraph

296.



In the light of the findings of the Lord Justice Taylor

Inquiry, the contents of their statements and of the

pathological evidence I had heard, I did not consider

that their evidence would assist the jury.



After the morning of the 19th November 1990 Mr King made

no further application with respect to Dr Phillips or
Dr Ashton.    I received letters from Mrs McBrien and

Mr Jones asking me to call these doctors.
                                          *



For the above reasons I decided against this course.



Criticism (5)



Again, this criticism is really a repeat of the point

made in (3) above.
Criticism (6}



On the relevant evidence that I had led I directed the

jury upon the verdicts that were in my opinion open to

them.     I had invited and obtained legal submissions from

all interested parties.     I have indicated in paragraph 23

above what submissions were made to me and how I directed

the jury.



Criticism (7)



I am confident that the evidence given in Court was an

accurate and a fair summary on the evidence then

available.



With respect to the matters exhibited to

Jeremy Hawthorn's second Affidavit sworn on the

11th September 1992, I comment as follows:



(1)     At the time I gave an interview to the makers of the

        television programme, I had retired from the office

        of Her Majesty's Coroner.   However^the transcript

        accurately sets out certain of my answers (plainly

        with editing not all of the information I ^ave was

        broadcast).



(2)     However, I confirm that the views I expressed in
        those interviews represent my opinion.
                                                               v .41



                                               - 27 -




                 (3)   I have read and considered the 6 page report of the

                       well known pathologist, Dr Iain West, dated

                       20th August 1992.     He is an eminent man in his field

                       - but then so is Professor Usher and so are Doctors

                       Clark and Slater and the other pathologists.

                       Professor Usher had held the post of Home Office

                       Pathologist for South Yorkshire and East Midlands

                       for 25 years, he has conducted approximately 27,000

                       post mortems, 700 murder investigations and has

                       professionally examined 40 to 50 cases of traumatic

                       asphyxia.   In certain instances Dr West expresses a

                       different view or opinion to the pathologists who

    C                  gave evidence at the Inquest.        Be was not present at

                       Hillsborough, has seen none of the bodies, he

                       carried out none of the post mortems and has not

                       seen the post mortem photographs.           I see no reason

                       why Dr West's opinion is to be preferred to the

                       evidence given by the pathologists who carried out

                       the autopsies.




             SWORN by the said
             STEFAN LEOPOLD POPPER /?7
             in the City of Nottingham
            ‘in the County of Nottinghamshire

            Dated this   /&7tf day of      SePrtFt-tKtrrf   1993

            Before me,

            SolicitgHT/Commfssi


            kl/sp/278a
_   —   -




                                                                                     Vi.
                                                 First of S. L. Popper
                                                 Sworn /07h$cf*rerM?*rfZ'
                                                 on Behalf of Respondent
                                                     Case No. CQ/1009/92

    IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
    QUEENS BENCH DIVISION
    CROWN OFFICE LIST
    IN THE HATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

    BETWEEN:

                                   REGINA


V                HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE

                                   EX PART

                             STRINGER AND OTHERS




    This is the Exhibit marked "SLPl" referred to in the Affidavit of

    Stefan Leopold Popper attached hereto.




           Sworn this      / &7h        day of          awv/^1993
                                    /
    BEFORE ME.


    Solicitor/Commission £
                            PAUL CARLILE



(1)   I opened the Inquest on Paul Carlile on 19th April 1989 when

      evidence of identification was taken.     The autopsy was

      carried out by Professor Alan Usher.



(2)   On 3rd May 1990 the Inquest on Paul Carlile was reconvened.

      Mr. Fraser appeared for the deceased's family.     I explained

      the procedure I was proposing to adopt.    Ho objection was

      made by Mr. Fraser.



(3)   Professor Alan Usher gave evidence and in answer to me

stated:-


      "The typical signs of traumatic asphyxia were present both
      externally and internally".
      "... I gave his cause of death as traumatic asphyxia".

(4)   Mr. Fraser put one question to Professor Usher who answered

      as follows:-
      " ... The reason for Paul's death was that his chest was
      held so tightly that he could not breath in or out and, once
      that had happened, then he would have been unconscious in a
      matter of seconds, between 10 to 20 seconds. He would have
      died within a few minutes but at the time, of course,
      subsequent to his unconsciousness, he would not have been
      aware of any pain".
                                            "T ***'"
      There was no other challenge to the pathological evidence.

(5)   WPG Geraldine Evans provided the summary of the evidence

      collected relating to Paul Carlile.     She summarised the

      evidence of 15 witnesses. Mr. Fraser neither objected to

      this procedure, not did he wish to ask any question of WPC

      Evans.                                     *
           (6)   Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence

                 available.   Again, Mr. Fraser neither oSjected to this

                 procedure nor did he have any questions of the officer.



           (7)   At the conclusion of this part of the Inquest on 3rd May

                 1990 relating to Paul Carlile, Mr. Fraser read a note from

                 the family

                 "The note is from the family in general. Sir, and I read it
                 out as it stands. They want to thank Michael Layton ^and
                 Peter Hogan who, I understand, is an officer who assisted
                 Inspection Layton, Sir, for their help throughout the
                 Inquiry. They want to thank the two officers, Goulding and
                 Pont, for the assistance which they gave to Paul on the day,
                 together with the ambulance man whose naae has not been
                 traced. Sir, they want to thank Maureen Rowe and Peter Hyde
                 from Moseley Social Services and they have been, in the
                 family's words, Sir, a 'lifeline for us throughout the last
                 year'. Sir, they want to thank Michael Hollinghurst for
                 trying to save Paul. They say, 'words will never express
                 how we feel, but knowing that he was with Paul, we are all
                 grateful'. Finally, Sir they want to thank you for being,
                 again, their words 'so thorough and a gentleman' as you have
                 been throughout these Inquests and, in particular, the
                 Inquest into their loved one".

c
           (8)   The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest
     )           commenced on the 19th November 1990.   Much of that evidence

                 was common to all of the 95 Inquests. ..With particular
                 respect to Paul Carlile, on 9th January 1991 (26th day of
                 main part of the Inquests) I called Michael Hollinghurst and




-■   - j
       on 13th February 1991 (49th day of the main part of <:he

       Inquests) Ian Fearna.   Mr* Timothy King who appeared for the

       family during this part of the Inquest had the opportunity
       to question both of them and did so.



(9)   At no stage during this last part of the    Inquest was it

       suggested on behalf of the family thatProfessor     Ushcx's
      evidence was inaccurate or wrong.



(10) Bearing in mind the extent of the coronal jurisdiction, the
      circumstances of this disaster, the findings of the lord

      Justice Taylor Inquiry and the evidence heard relating to P.
      Carlile, it did not appear that there was any other

      responsible or any other relevant evidence relating to
      medical or rescue efforts which would have had a bearing on
      the cause of death.



(11) There was plentiful evidence before the jury for this
      Inquest and the 94 others concerning the acts of thosa

      responsible for crowd control and safety.



(12) Apart from correspondence the only formal request I received

      in relation to the evidence of Dr. Phillip* and Dr. Ashton
      was as follows.   Mr. King in his submissions on the morning
      of the 19th November 1990 mentioned these witnesses a:*

      indeed did he mention Mr. Eccleston.    However, after "hat

      submission he did not make any further application to
      persuade me to call any of the evidence froa these
     witnesses.   The parents of Richard Jones wrote a letter to

     me dated 12th February 1991 in which they asked me to call

     the evidence from Dr. Phillips and Dr. Ashton.   For the

     reasons set out in the main body of the Affidavit I did not

     do so.




1 .9apgt
                                 IAN GLOVER



    (1)   I opened the Inquest on Ian Glover on “IfftfTApril 1989, when

          evidence of identification was taken.      The autopsy was

          carried out by Professor Alan Usher.



    (2)   On 4th Hay 1990 the Inquest on Ian Glover was reconvened,

          jlr. Fraser appeared for the deceased's family.     I explained

(         the procedure I was proposing to adopt.     No objection was



•
          made by Hr. Fraser.


    (3) Professor Usher gave evidence and in answer to me said:-



          "His body presented both externally and^internally^the
          typical appearances of traumatic asphyxia ... I give the
          cause of death as traumatic asphyxia ... He would take
          between four and six minutes to die. It would only be the
          first ten to twenty seconds he would be aware of".

    (4)   Mr. Fraser had no questions for Professor Usher as to the

          cause of death.   His one question related to a neck device
c         utilised by the undertakers.


    {5)   WPC Geraldine Evans provided the summary of the evidence

          collected relating to Ian Glover.    She summarised the

           evidence of five witnesses.   Mr. Fraser neither objected to

           this procedure, nor did he have any questions for WPC Evans.



    (6)   Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence

           available.   Again Mr. Fraser neither objected to this
                                                 •              s'

           procedure nor did he have any questions of the officer.
          (7)   On 4th May 1990 Joseph Glover indicated to WPC Evans that

                whilst he was with the deceased in the temporary mortuary an

                unnamed doctor said that he detected a pulse.    Joseph Glover

                had not previously revealed this information.     I recalled

                Professor Usher.   In answer to me he indicated in effect

                that there could have been a mistake about the pulse, but

                that even if the finding were accurate the deceased would

                have been unconscious and severely brain damaged.    I took

                the step of recalling the pathologist to deal with this new

                point because I wished the family to hear any explanation in

                Court rather than to go away without the point having been
                considered.


          (8)   At the conclusion of this part of the Inguest on 4th May
                1990 Mr. Fraser stated:-


                "Sir, just before you conclude taking evidence, I riss again
                at the specific instruction of Ian's family. They ax* very
                conscious of the efforts that were made to save Ian oa the
    ^ '         day and they are very appreciative of everybody at tha
                ground who did everything they possibly cottld and
                thereafter.
    &
                Sir they are particularly impressed by the way people of
f               Sheffield, with whom -they had dealings on that day ani
                since, responded to this tragedy to their family and they
                very much appreciate that".            _

          (9)   The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest

                commenced on the 19th November 1990.   Much of that evidence
                was common to all 95 Inquests.   I had received a letter

                dated 15th October 1990 from John Glover (the deceased's
                father).   On 29th January 1991 (day 40 of the
    main part of the inquests) I called Joseph G l o v e r ^ t h e ^ &
    deceased's brother) so that he could add anything^that he

    wished to the statement he first      g a v e '.   " T a i l e d him because

    he wanted to give evidence.


,10) Bearing in mind the extent of the coronal jurisdiction, the

     circumstances of this disaster, the findings of the Lord

     Justice Taylor Inquiry and the evidence heard relating to I.

     Glover, it did not appear that there was any other
     responsible or any other relevant evidence relating to

     medical or rescue efforts which would have had a bearing on

     the cause of death.




 1.9bpgt
                                      RICHARD JONES



        (1)   I opened the Inquest on Richard Jones on 18th April 1989 and

              evidence of identification was taken.       The autopsy was

              carried out by Professor Alan Usher.


        (2)   On 3rd May 1990 the Inquest concerning Richard Jones was

              reconvened.   Mr. Fraser appeared for the family. I did not

              in this case specifically explain the procedure I was to

              adopt, since Mr. Jones (the father) had been present on the

              first day when I had gone through the explanation.       I
              reminded him of this.     Mr. Fraser made no objection to the

              procedure.



        (3)   In answer to me Professor Usher stateds-



               "There were obvious signs of traumatic asphyxia both
              externally and internally". "This young Ban died essentially
              because he could not move his chest in or out and that
(             meant, of course, he could not breathe and that meant oxygen
    \         was cut off to his vital organs and, once that chest was
^             fixed, he would have been unconscious in a matter of
9             seconds, probably between 10 and 20 seconds, and he would be
              completely unknowing of anything that happened subsequent to
              that, though he would take a matter of minutes, perhaps
              between 4 and 6 minutes, to die"*
              Whilst Mr. Fraser did ask some questions of Professor Usher
                                                       “ *r.   ■


              directed towards a blood alcohol measurement, the

              pathological evidence relating to the cause of death was not

              in any way challenged.



        (4)   Police Sergeant Killock provided the summary of the evidence

              collected and relating to Richard Jones. ^He summarised the
           evidence of 9 witnesses.   Mr. Fraser neither objected to

           this procedure, nor did he wish to ask any questions of

           Police Sergeant Killock.



    (5)    Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence

           available.   Mr. Fraser neither objected to this procedure

           and nor did he have any questions of this officer.



    (6 )   The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest

           commenced on the 19th November 1990.   Much of the evidence

           was common to all 95 Inquests.   With particular reference to

           Richard Jones on 28th November 1990 (day 8 of the main part

           of the Inquests) I called Stephanie Jones (his sister).      Mr.

           Timothy King who a p y — d who appeared for the family during

           this part of the Inquest took the opportunity to question
K          her.



    (7)    At no stage during this last part of the Inquest was it
           suggested on behalf of the family that Professor Usher's

           evidence was inaccurate or wrong.



    (8)    Bearing in mind the extent of the coronal jurisdiction, the

           circumstances of this disaster, the findings of the Lord

           Justice Taylor Inquiry and the evidence heard relating to

           R.Jones, it did not appear that there was any other

           responsible or any other relevant evidence relating to

           medical or rescue efforts which would have had a bearing on

           the cause of death.
It is correct that Mr. and Mrs. Jones wrote to me asking me

to call Dr. Phillips and Dr. Ashton   but not Mr. Eccleston -

see their letter dated 12th February 1991).     I did not do so

for the reasons set out in the body of the Affidavit.     In

short, they could not add anything of relevance to the

Inquiry before me.   No further application was made to me by

Mr. King in the sense I have indicated above.    In his

submission on the morning of Monday 19th November 1990 Mr.

King had made specific reference to the evidence of these

witnesses.    As far as I am aware it is incorrect that Mr.

and Mrs. Jones submitted a report to me from Dr. James

Burns.   Until my attention had been directed towards the
material exhibited to the Affidavit of Mr. James Hawthorn I

had not seen the report dated 11th March 1991 from Dr. James

Burns.   Accordingly, as far as I am concerned I received no

written request from Mr. and Mrs. Jones to call Dr. Burns.
                                    MICHAEL KELLY



        (1)    i opened the Inquest on Michael' Kelly on 18th April 1989 and

               evidence of identification was taken.   The autopsy was

               carried out by Dr. Clark.



        (2 )   On 1st May 1990 the Inquest concerning Michael Kelly was

               reconvened.   Mr. Fraser appeared for the deceased's family.

               I explained the procedure that I was proposing to adopt.     No

               objection was made by Mr. Fraser.


        (3)    Dr. John Clark gave evidence and in answer to me stated:-



               "Cause of death was crush asphyxia. This was based on
               findings of signs of asphyxia in his face. His face was
               rather congested and had a bluish discoloration. These
               changes, I have to say, were fairly mild in comparison to a
               lot of the other people and one of the other features of
               asphyxia is to find little haemorrhages on the skin. These
               were not in fact present".
                " ... In any event there was nothing to indicate he suffered
^              for any great length of time. He probably lost
' \            consciousness within a short period of time, 10 or 15
    J          seconds or so, and then knew nothing about it after that.
0              As I said, there were not any major injuries internally".
                                                      *
               Mr. Fraser had no questions for Dr. Clark.


        (4)    Dr. Clark was a Forensic Pathologist fere® the University of

               Glasgow who had been in Sheffield on the weekend of the

               tragedy.   Towards the end of my questioning he said in an
               entirely unsolicited comment after I had thanked him for his

               invaluable assistance

                                                        ■«*
                            —
                        —
                                                                 IS




"Can I say in turn as someone dealing with this sort of work
and investigation of death very regularly how impressed I
have been with the professionalism and sensitivity with
which the proceedings have been car3^ed_jaifr-here, in _
particular your handling and explanations to the relatives
of the bereaved people. I think it has given comfort to
everyone who has worked here and I felt it a very
appropriate atmosphere".                  „               . _
Inspector Sawers presented the summary of evidence collected

which related to Michael Kelly. He summarised the evidence

8f 9 witnesses.   Mr. Fraser did not object to this
procedure.   He had one question to ask Inspector Sawers

relating to the likelihood of whether Michael Kelly had a

ticket for the match.


Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence

available.   His answers relating to the observable condition

of Michael Kelly on the photographic evidence were the

result of questions from me.    The relevant exchanges were as

follows


"Sir, on a photograph reference PR2/21 which is timed at
15.08 that shows Michael in Enclosure No.3 and_whilst the
detail again is not great it appears to show him certainly
alive at that time but I cannot say at what stage of the
process medically he is at".
"Question:     He looked a bit distressed you think in that?
- Answers That is my impression".
 "Question:     You can't say whether he is conscious or
  unconscious, alive or dead at that particular point?" “
  Answer: It is difficult. I would say he is probably still
  alive, Sir, but certainly in distress".
There was no objection from Mr. Fraser to these questions.

Mr. Fraser had no questions of this officer.


At the conclusion of this part of the Inquest on 1st Hay
                                          ■i
 1990 Mr. Fraser said:-
"Again, Sir, before you conclude the evidence in this case,
Michael's mother, who as it were is the head of the family,
is unable to be with us today. She is in Liverpool tut
through her son and daughter they specifically want a e to
thank through you everybody who helped Michael on the day
obviously. Everybody's efforts are very much appreciated
and they want to offer their thanks to the officers cf the
West Midland Police as well".



The evidence relating to the main part of the Inquest

commenced on 19th November 1990*   Much of the evidence was
common to all 95 Inquests.   With particular reference to
Michael Kelly, on 14th March 1991 (day 70 of the main part
of the Inquests) I called Police Constable John Maughan.



Bearing in mind the extent of the coronal jurisdiction, the

circumstances of this disaster, the findings of the Lsrd

Justice Taylor Inquiry and the evidence heard relating to M.
Kelly, it did not appear that there was any other

responsible or any other relevant evidence relating ts

medical or rescue efforts which would have had a bearing on
the cause of death.
                     PETER TOOTLE



I opened the Inquest on Peter Tootle on 19th April 1989 when

evidence of identification was taken.   The autopsy was

carried out by Dr. Slater.


On 18th Hay 1990 the Inquest concerning Peter Tootle was

reconvened.   Hr. Fraser appeared for the deceased's family.

I explained the procedure I was proposing to adopt.     No

objection was made by Mr. Fraser.


Dr. Slater in anwers to question from me stated


"My examination of Peter showed that the general findings
were those of asphyxia. These were indicated by extensive
blueness on the face extending to the upper part of the
chest."
• ... I submitted my cause of death, Sir, as traumatic
asphyxia."
" ... Sir, unconsciousness occurs very rapidly, normally
within 3 to 5 seconds,and after that there is no awareness
of any pain or discomfort and death supervenes after another
3 to 5 minutes."
Mr. Fraser had no questions for Dr. Slater.


Police Sergeant Killock presented the stannary of the

evidence collected which related to Petei Tootle.     He

summarised the evidence of 8 witnesses.   Mr. Fraser neither

objected to this procedure nor did he have any questions to

ask Police Sergeant Killock.
                           PETER TOOTLE



(1)   I opened the Inquest on Peter Tootle on 19th April 1989 when

      evidence of identification was taken.   The autopsy was

      carried out by Dr. Slater.


(2)   On 18th May 1990 the Inquest concerning Peter Tootle was

      reconvened.   Mr. Fraser appeared for the deceased's family.

      I explained the procedure I was proposing to adopt.    No

      objection was made by Mr. Fraser.


(3)   Dr. Slater in anwers to question from me stated:-


      "My examination of Peter showed that the general findings
      were those of asphyxia. These were indicated by extensive
      blueness on the face extending to the upper part of the
      chest."
      ■ ... I submitted my cause of death, Sir, as traumatic
      asphyxia."
      " ... Sir, unconsciousness occurs very rapidly, normally
      within 3 to 5 seconds,and after that there is no awareness
      of any pain or discomfort and death supervenes after another
      3 to 5 minutes."
      Mr. Fraser had no questions for Dr. Slater.

(4)   Police Sergeant Killock presented the suwmary of the
      evidence collected which related to Petet Tootle.     He

      summarised the evidence of 8 witnesses.   Mr. Fraser neither

      objected to this procedure nor did he have any questions to

      ask Police Sergeant Killock.




                              15
(5)    Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence

       available.   In answer to a question'iroSTme Detective

       Inspector Layton stated:

       "That photograph is timed at 15.03 and my perception of the
       photograph, Sir, is that Peter is at that time still alive
       although it is not possible to say at what stage of the
       medical process he has reached."
       Mr. Fraser did not object to the above procedure, nor the

       specific question and had no questions for this officer.



(6 )   At the completion of this part of the Inquest on Peter

       Tootle on 18th May 1990 Mr. Fraser said:-



       "Sir, Mr and Mrs. Tootle simply want to express their
       gratitude to everybody who helped Peter on the day. They
       recognise that everybody did everything they could and they
       are only sorry their efforts were unfortunately
       unsuccessful. They recognise that everybody tried their
       very best."

(7)    The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest

       commenced on 19th November 1990.   Much of the evidence was
       common to all 95 Inquests.   There was sufficient evidence

       from this source to deal with the "how*' question in the case

       of Peter Tootle.   The jury had been present throughout the

       hearings in April and May of 1990 (including the 18th May

       1990) and from 19th November 1990 onwards.



(8)    Bearing in mind the extent of the coronal jurisdiction, the

       circumstances of this disaster, the findings of the Lord

       Justice Taylor Inquiry and the evidence heard relating to P.

       Tootle, it did not appear that there was tny other
   responsible or any other relevant evidence relating to

   medical or rescue efforts which would have had a bearing

   the cause of death.



.9epgt
                             KEVIN WILLIAMS



(1)   I opened the Inquest on Kevin Williams on 18th April 1989

      when evidence of identification was taken.     The autopsy was

      carried out by Dr. Slater.



(2)   The Inquest concerning Kevin Williams     reconvened on 2nd May

      1990.     The family of the deceased were represented by Mr.

      Fraser.     I explained the procedure I was proposing to adopt.

      No objection was made by Mr. Fraser.



(3)   Dr. Slater in answer to me stated the following:-


      "My examination of Kevin showed that the main finding was
      that of asphyxia. This opinion was formed through the
      extensive blueness on the face and other part of the chest.
      In addition there were small haemorrhages in both the face
      and internal organs including the brain, heart and lungs.
      This asphyxia had clearly resulted from compression of the
      neck and chest and this opinion was supported by the
      presence of 3 small scratches on the left side of the neck
      and also over the front of the voice box. This had also
      resulted in 4 fractures to the small bones in the actual
      voice box. In addition there was evidence of bruising to
      the lungs, again supporting compression of the chest."

      "... In terms of the mode of death the compression of the
      neck or chest has occurred here and unconsciousness occurs
      very rapidly, certainly within a few seconds ...^ Following
      unconsciousness there is no discomfort and no pain. Death
      then occurs after approximately 3 to 5 minutes, Sir."



(4)   I was very well aware of the evidence of Debra Martin and I

      put her evidence specifically to Dr. Slater for him to deal

      with.     His answer was as follows:-’


                                                 %
                "Well Sir, I was aware of this statement and therefore I
                have clearly given this matter considerable thought, Sir* I
                think there are several comments to make but on the
                moderately large number of autopsies^       rom this
                incident, Sir, this was certainly the most^severe case of
                traumatic asphyxia that I actually dealt with. This was
                both in terms of blueness of the face and also the area of
                pallor whiteness around the mouth. Sir, it was a very very
                severe form of asphyxia. I do not think that
                unconsciousness would have been quicker than 3 or 5 seconds.
                I have no reasons to alter what I have already said on that
                aspect."

            (5) The evidence of Dr. Slater in commenting upon Debra Martin's

                evidence was not challenged by Mr. Fraser.         I explained to
f
    ;           the family that I had specifically taken the course of

                 referring to this evidence so that nothing of relevance was

                 hidden or concealed.       After the summary of evidence set out

                 in (6) below, which covered the evidence of P. C. Bruder

                 about convulsions, Mr. Fraser put the following questions to

                 Dr. Slater (relating to convulsions)

                 "It is difficult to    find the phrase to sum the situation up.
                 Kevin at that stage    was beyond help. Be was as good as dead
                 Answers   Yes, that    is right, absolutely. Be would know:
                 nothing".
f               Questions "And would    feel nothing and know nothing? -
1       >       Answers "Absolutely.     Be would know nothing?"
    J


            (6) Police Sergeant Killock presented the summary of the

                 evidence collected relating to Kevin Williams.                   Be
                 summarised the evidence of 15 witnesses.* No objection was

                 taken to this procedure by Mr. Fraser and he did not ask any

                 questions of Police Sergeant Killock.



            (7) Detective Inspector Layton summarised the visual evidence.

                 No objection to this procedure was raised by Mr. Fraser and
                                                         ■«*
                 he asked no questions of this officer.                    *.
                            ;                                          ^ . . . " -rH-— r > ~ ' - i - - f t -7-^=-'.--'- - : r ; '




                       •        v       ■                     '■■■■■            -            "                         '
(8)       I explained to the family present why I felt it important

          that the evidence of P. C. Bruder and DeSra" Martin be

          commented upon by Dr. Slater.                       However, I continued to be
          concerned about the evidence of a convulsion and later of a

          word spoken and so I invited the Police to further

              investigate these aspects of the evidence and for Dr.

              Gumpert to attend the Inquest.                      I understand that Dr. Slater

              contact P.C. Bruder direct to ask him in detail about what

              he saw.


(9)           I must emphasise that at no stage did I speak directly to

              either P.C. Bruder of Debra Martin.                         Dr. Gumpert, a
              Consultant Neurologist and Clinical Neurophysiologist, made

              himself available for 4th May 1990.



(10) On 4th May 1990 Inspector Sawers reported the results of his

              further enquiries.       Mr. Fraser raised no questions on behalf

              of the family.

                                            %
(11) Dr. Slater in an effort to explain his evidence on 2nd May
              1990 and incorporate his evaluation of the further evidence

              of P. C. Bruder and Debra Martin said:-


              "Death is a sequence of events. It is not one set of events
              and the sequence I will put to you is_an individual becoming
              unconscious; whilst they are unconscious they quickly lose
              all sensation of pain and discomfort; then there is a
              period of various tissues in the body which are susceptible
              to a lack of oxygen, dying. The most important one of these
              is, of course, the braxn andlafter about 3 to 6 minutes the
              brain undergoes irreversible brain damage* There is then a
              point which we call brain death. This is a difficult
              concept, but by this I am implying that the brain is
                                                                                           .T 'tl't   .........-
                                            1. :!-   ■ - v-       -
 ”
 ......   ;                                                           1
                                   ■    <                     '

                                                v-;3>
                                                            r*
                                                                            Si




    irreversibly damaged. The brain is no longer able to
    control respiration and in fact that person* for effective
    purposes, is dead, irreversibly. Th£t_ig^ar-medico-legal
    definition, at least one medico-legal definition, of death."

    "... Having said that, Kevin had extremely severe asphyxia.
    I have no doubt in my own mind that he had suffered
    irrecoverable brain damage and death within the 3 to 6
    minutes that I said."


(12) Dr. Gumpert having listened to the evidence said:-
    "It seems clear to me, Sir, in this case that poor Kevin was
    probably dead before he was got out of the area in which he
    was standing."
     "I cannot explain the Liverpool Police Constable's term
     convulsion' because to me a convulsion is a major epileptic
     attack and he has quite clearly said he does not mean that,
     so I don't know what he does mean".


(13) I did what I felt was necessary to put before the jury at

     the conclusion of this part of the Inquest into the death of

     Kevin Williams all that was relevant onthe issues of            who,

     when and where.   I must emphasise that I was then and remain

     today (apart from the present allegations) wholly unaware of

     any allegations of improper pressure applied to witnesses

     I must say that in the light of all that I knew of those

     officers who investigated the tragedy,'I find such

     allegations highly improbable.



(14) The evidence relating to the final part of the Inquest

     commenced on the 19th November 1990.   Much of the evidence
     was common to all 95 Inquests. On 12th February 1991 (day 48

     of the main part of the Inquests) I specifically called

     Andrew Duncan in relation to the Inquest concerning Kevin

     Williams

                                              ■   tv:   "        ‘
(15) Bearing in mind the extent of the coronal jurisdiction, the

    circumstances of this disaster/ the findings of the Lord

    Justice Taylor Inquiry and the evidence heard relating to K.

    Williams, it did not appear that there was any other
     responsible or any other relevant evidence relating to

    medical or rescue efforts which would have had a bearing on

    the cause of death.



1.9fpgt
   EXHIBIT OF DR. STEFAN POPPER MARKED "SLP1"              TO WHICH
   REFERENCE IS MADE IN THE AFFIDAVIT OF DR. STEFAN POPPER

                               INDEX OF EXHIBIT



   SECTION    DETAIL                                       PAGE NO.

       1.
               a) MICHAEL DAVID KELLY                     2-4
               b) PETER FRANCIS TOOTLE                    5-7
               c) KEVIN WILLIAMS                          8-12
               d) PAUL CARLILE'                          13-16            *-
               e ) RICHARD JONES                         17-19
               f) IAN THOMAS GLOVER                      20-22



       2.      a)   TRANSCRIPT OF INQUEST
                    HELD BETWEEN 18TH APRIL AND
                    4TH MAY, 1990 - INDEX.

               b)   TRANSCRIPT OF INQUEST
                    PAGES 1-89
                    PRELIMINARY PROCEEDINGS
                    18TH APRIL, 1990.

               c)   TRANSCRIPT OF INQUEST
                    PAGE 1247-1259.
                    CONCLUDING PROCEEDINGS
                    4TH HAY, 1990

       3.           TRANSCRIPT OF INQUEST
                    SIX INDIVIDUAL CASES

               a)   MICHAEL DAVID KELLY                 950-963
               b)   PETER FRANCIS TOOTLE                984-996
               c)   KEVIN WILLIAMS                     1007-1042
               d)   PAUL CARLILE                       1 1 1 1 -1 1 2 2
               e)   RICHARD JONES                      1144-1154
               f)   IAN THOMAS GLOVER                  1209-1220



       4.           TRANSCRIPT OF 3 BUSINESS
                    MEETINGS

               a)   26.2.90 MEETING OF                      1-14
                    DR. POPPER; MERVYN JONES,
                    MR. METCALF AND MR. FRASER

               b)   6.3.90 INFORMAL MEETING OF H.M.         1-9
                    CORONER, LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES
                    AND THE BEREAVED.

               c)   30.10.90 - BUSINESS MEETING             1-35


                    TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS               1-97
                    19TH NOVEMBER, 1990
                    LEGAL SUBMISSIONS


'MTJ
                                            2.


      SECTION   DETAIL                           PAGE N0*

      6.        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
                 DAYS 73-80 INCLUSIVE
                 DAY 73 - 19TH MARCH, 1990       1-97
                 DAY 74 - 20TH MARCH, 1990       1-92
                 DAY 75 - 21ST MARCH, 1990       1-115
                 DAY 76 - 22ND MARCH, 1990       1-74
                 DAY 77 - 25TH MARCH, 1990       1-129
                 DAY 78 - 26TH MARCH, 1990       1-61
                 DAY 79 - 27TH MARCH, 1990       1-3
                 DAY 80 - 28TH MARCH, 1990       1-17


      7.        AUTOPSY REPORTS


                a)   MICHAEL DAVID KELLY         1-6
                b)   PETER FRANCIS TOOTLE        7-13
                c)   KEVIN WILLIAMS              14-20
                d)   PAUL CARLILE                21-24
                e)   RICHARD JONES               25-28
                f)   IAN THOMAS GLOVER           29-32


      8.        SIX WRITTEN CASE SUMMARIES
                AND CONTINUITY CHARTS


                a)   MICHAEL DAVID KELLY          1-18
                b)   PETER FRANCIS TOOTLE        19-36
                c)    KEVIN WILLIAMS             37-56
                d)    PAUL CARLILE               57-77
                e)    RICHARD JONES              78-94
                f)    IAN THOMAS GLOVER          95-110




MTJ
SECTION 2
                                   H M CORONER
                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE VEST

                           TRANSCRIPT OF INQUEST
                       HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

                         HELD AT SHEFFIELD BETWEEN
                          18 APRIL AND 4 MAY 1990


INDEX                                                  PAGES

PRELIMINARY PROCEEDINGS AND OPENING ADDRESS             1 - 36
BY CORONER.

EVIDENCE OF JOHN MERVYN JONES                          37 - 40
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE, WEST MIDLANDS POLICE.

EVIDENCE OF MICHAEL LAYTON                             40 - 49
DETECTIVE INSPECTOR, WEST MIDLANDS POLICE.

EVIDENCE OF DR ALEXANDER ROBERT WALKER FORREST         56 - 71
CONSULTANT CHEMICAL PATHOLOGIST.

EVIDENCE OF MR JAMES WARDROPE                          72 - 81
CONSULTANT, NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL.

EVIDENCE OF PROFESSOR ALAN USHER                       81-88
HOME OFFICE PATHOLOGIST.


INQUEST RE       COLIN WAFER                           90 - 100
                 STEPHEN FRANCIS O'NEILL               101 - 111
                 SIMON BELL                            112 - 120
                 ROY HARRY HAMILTON                    121 - 133
                 CHRISTOPHER EDWARDS                   134 - 142
                 JAMES GARY ASPINALL                   143 - 152
                                   2.


INDEX                                           PAGES


INQUEST RE   DERRICK GEORGE GODWIN              153 - 165
             COLIN ANDREW HUGH WILLIAM SEFTON   166 - 179
             DAVID HAWLEY                       180 - 194
             MARTIN KENNETH WILD                195 - 203
             GERARD BERNARD PATRICK BARON       204 - 219
             ADAM EDWARD SPEARRITT              220 - 231
             DAVID WILLIAM BIRTLE               232 - 241
             STEPHEN FRANCIS HARRISON           242 - 256
             GARY HARRISON                      257 - 270
             GARY COLLINS                       271 - 278
             PETER MCDONNELL                    279 - 297
             HENRY CHARLES ROGERS               298 - 311
             GARY PHILIP JONES                  312 - 333
             JOHN McBRIEN                       334 - 350
             STEPHEN PAUL COPOC                 351 - 364
             FRANCIS JOSEPH MCALLISTER          365 - 374
             STUART PAUL WILLIAM THOMPSON       375 - 387
             WILLIAM ROY PEMBERTON              388 - 400
             TRACEY ELIZABETH COX               401 - 410
             DAVID LEONARD THOMAS               411 - 420
             PETER ANDREW HARRISON              421 - 433
             PAUL CLARK                         434 - 442
             DAVID GEORGE RIMMER                443 - 454
             KEVIN TYRRELL                      455 - 463
             CARL BROWN                         464 - 475
             ARTHUR HORROCKS                    476 - 490
                                    3.



INDEX                                      PAGES
                                  •—

INQUEST RE   SARAH LOUISE HICKS            491 - 510
             VICTORIA JANE HICKS           511 - 531
             PAUL ANTHONY HEWITSON         532 - 543
             ANDREW MARK BROOKES           544 - 554
             INGER SHAH                    555 - 566
             GORDON RODNEY HORN            567 - 578
             CHRISTINE ANNE JONES          579 - 585
             DAVID JOHN BENSON             586 - 595
             JOSEPH CLARK                  596 - 607
             PETER REUBEN THOMPSON         608 - 621
             THOMAS STEVEN FOX             622 - 631
             COLIN MARK ASHCROFT           632 - 647
             IAN DAVID WHELAN              648 - 660
             DAVID STEVEN BROWN            661 - 669
             VINCENT MICHAEL FITZSIMMONS   670 - 678
             ANTHONY PETER KELLY           679 - 691
             JON PAUL GILHOOLEY            692 - 701
             HENRY THOMAS BURKE            702 - 712
             CHRISTOPHER BARRY DEVONSIDE   713 - 724
             JONATHON OWENS                725 - 736
             JAMES ROBERT HENNESSY         737 - 745
             DAVID WILLIAM MATHER          746 - 753
             JAMES PHILIP DELANEY          754 - 762
             JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON          763 - 774
             CHRISTOPHER JAMES TRAYNOR     775 - 789
             MARTIN KEVIN TRAYNOR          790 - 797
                                       4.


INDEX                                                      PAGES


INQUEST RE      PHILIP JOHN STEELE                         798 - 810
                MARIAN HAZEL McCABE                        811 - 822

                STEVEN JOSEPH ROBINSON                     823 - 834

                THOMAS HOWARD                              835 - 844
                THOMAS ANTHONY HOWARD                      845 - 854

                GRAHAM JOHN ROBERTS                        855 - 870
                 KESTER ROGER MARCUS BALL                  871 - 882

                 ERIC GEORGE HUGHES                        883 - 890

                 RAYMOND THOMAS CHAPMAN                    891 - 900

STATEMENT BY THE CORONER TO THE YORKSHIRE POST NEWSPAPER   901 - 903

INQUEST RE       LEE NICOL                                 904 - 919

                 PAUL BRIAN MURRAY                         920 - 929

                 BRIAN CHRISTOPHER MATTHEWS                930 - 940
                 GRAHAM JOHN WRI6HT                        941 - 949

                 MICHAEL DAVID KELLY                       950 - 963

                 CARL DARREN HEWITT                        964 - 974

                 NICHOLAS MICHAEL HEWITT                   975 - 983

                 PETER FRANCIS TOOTLE                      984 - 996

                 NICHOLAS PETER JOYNES                     997 - 1006

                 KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS                     1007 - 1042

                 PHILIP HAMMOND                            1043 - 1057

                 PATRICK JOHN THOMPSON                     1058 - 1068

                 ERIC HANKIN                               1069 - 1078

                 GARY CHRISTOPHER CHURCH                   1079 - 1089

                 JOSEPH DANIEL MCCARTHY                    1090 - 1097
                                          5.



    INDEX                                      PAGES


    INQUEST RE      PAULA ANN SMITH            1098    1110


                    PAUL WILLIAM CARLILE       1111    1122

                    CARL DAVID LEWIS           1123    1134
                     PETER ANDREW BURKETT      1135    1143
                    RICHARD JONES              1144    1154
                     BARRY GLOVER              1155    1167
                    ALAN JOHNSTON              1168    1177
                    CARL WILLIAM RIMMER        1178    1187
                     ALAN McGLONE              1188    1198
                     KEITH McGRATH             1199    1208
                     IAN THOMAS GLOVER         1209    1220

                     PAUL DAVID BRADY          1221    1232
                     BARRY SIDNEY BENNETT      1233    1246


    CLOSING ADDRESS BY THE CORONER             1247 - 1259


m
    HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                 (WEST DISTRICT)



         INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

      VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
                STADIUM DISASTER




             PRELIMINARY PROCEEDINGS




                     Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED'.Sci, BM. BS, MRCGP.


             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                       At

               The Memorial Hall,
                   City Hall,
                   Sheffield.

                       On

          Wednesday, 18th April, 1990.




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                (MORNING SESSION)



      From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
           Official Shorthand Writers,
       55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                       APPEARANCES

    Wednesday.    18th April.   1990

    M R . D . FRASER                      Hillsborough Solicitors'   Group
    MR.       WOODS                       Steering Committee

    MR. S. SMITH                         Medical and Dental Union of
                                         Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                                         Forrest)

    MR.     CALLAGHAN                    Trent Regional Health Authority and
                                         South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                                         Ambulance Service

    MR.     GREGORY                       Sheffield City Council

Q   MISS THORPE                          Eastwood & Partners

    MS. A. ADDLEMAN                      Police Federation of England and
                                         Wales

    MR.   P. ISACCS                      Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

    MISS B. NORCLIFFE                    Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
    MR. P. METCALF                       Constabulary

    MR. S. CATCHPOLE                     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
    MR.    JACKSON




+
                         IN D E X TO T H A i!SC R IP T




                                                         Page


OPENING BY THE COROWER                                      1   .
JOHN HERVYN JONES Sworn

   Examined by THE CORONER                                34.

MICHAEL LAYTON Called

   Examined by THE CORONER                                 37.
   Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS                            45.
   Re-Examined by THE CORONER                              45.




                                                                    3
                                         Til!-:   CORONER




                  PRELIMINARY PROCEEDINGS

               ;:EDNESDAY. 18th APRIL, 1990


     THE CORONER:    Uelcome everybody.    Someof you will
have seen rue, of course, once or twice before, but we are
now resuming these inquests proper.
     Uhat we are going to do in the first instance is we
are going to deal with the selection of the Jury. We will
deal with representation after I have done that.

     Now ladies and gentlemen of the Jury, can you see me?
Yes.    I want to, before we ask you to take the oath,
remind you that these inquests are going to deal with the
people who unfortunately lost their lives at the disaster
at the Hillsborough Stadium on the 15th April, 1939.       I
therefore want to check, before we swear you in, one or
two things. Are any of you related or close friends to
any of the bereaved or their immediate families?     (JNo)
Are any of you related or close friends to any police
officers who were involved at the Hillsborough Stadium on
that day? (.No)    Are any of you related or close friends
to any of the stewards who were working on the Leppings
Lane end of the Stadium?    (No)    Do any of you know any
other reason which I may not have put to you why you feel
you are disqualified and may be biased in dealing with the
evidence which you will be hearing in relation to these
deaths?    (Ko)   Finally, are there any particular
personal reasons which you think you ought to tell me
about which might make you feel you cannot give your
attention and time to these particular inquests? (No)

     Gentlemen, I know I have not taken representations
yet, but I hope I have covered the main grounds we need to
be concerned about.   Is there any particular matter you
want me to put to the Jury other than the peremptory
challenges which don't applv in the Coroner's Court,
before we swear them?   (No;
      Then in that case ladies and gentlemen, we are going
to ask you to take the oath.    Sergeant Griffiths will do
this.    You will be asked to put your hand on the New
Testament and he will read the oath to you and I will ask
you to repeat it.    Before you do it I have to read the
list of names of the people who died, at this inquest,
because it is in respect of those that you will be asked
to deal with.    I want you to listen to these names which
I am going to read out, not only to you, but, of course,
to everybody else, but in particular it is read for you
and also for the Presenting Officers.     Are the Presenting
Officers in Court?    Are you all here?    (Yes)   I have to

                         - 1 -

                                                               4
                                                            TI1K CORONER


                   say because of the way the place is set out I cannot see
                   you very well.     I think you can see me quite well, but
                   you will have to forgive me if I peer round a little bit
                   because you are all in darkness.
                         How listen to the names, would you?   The names I am
                   ■>oing to read in alphabetical order.   This is not the
               B   order in which we will be taking the evidence fe*it it is a
                   convenient way of doing it:

                         John Alfred Anderson
                         Colin Mark Ashcroft
                         James Cary Aspinall
                         tester Roger Marcus Ha 11
                         Gerard Bernard Patrick Baron
                         Simon Bell
                         Barry Sidney Bennett
                         David John Benson
                         David William Birtle
                         Paul David Brady
                         Andrew Mark Brookes
                         Carl Brown
               D         David Steven Brown
                         Henry Thomas Burke
                         Peter Andrew Burkett
                         Paul William Carlile
                         Raymond Thomas Chapman
                         Gary Christopher Church
                         Joseph Clark
                         Paul Clark
                         Gary Collins
                         Stephen Paul Copoc
                         Tracey Elizabeth Cox
                         James Philip Delaney
                         Christopher Barry Devonside
                         Christopher Edwards
                         Vincent Michael Fitzsimmons
                         Thomas Steven Fox
                         Jon Paul Gilhooley
                         Barry Glover
                         Ian Thomas Glover
                         Derrick George Godwin
                         Roy Harry Hamilton
                         Philip Hammond
                          Eric Hankin
                         Gary Harrison
                         Peter Andrew Harrison
                          Stephen Francis Harrison
                          David Hawley
                          James Robert Hennessy
                          Paul Anthony Hewitson
                          Carl Darren Hewitt
                          Nicholas Michael Hewitt
                          Sarah Louise Hicks
               H
                                            -   2   -



L H arp h am Ltd                                                                 5
                                                             Till'. COiWNKR



                         Victoria Jane Hicks
                         Gordon Rodney Horn
                         Arthur ilorrocks
                         Thomas Howard
                         Thornas Anthony Howard
                         Eric George Hughes
                         Christine Anne Jones
                         Gary Pnilip Jones
            B            Richard Jones                       «,
                         Alan Johnston
                         Nicholas Peter Joynes
                         Anthony Peter Kelly
                         Michael David Kelly
                         Carl David Lewis
                         David William Mather
                         Brian Christopher Matthews
                         Francis Joseph McAllister
                         John McBrien
                         Marian Hazel McCabe
                         Joseph Daniel McCarthy
                         Peter McDonnell
                         Alan McGlone
                          Keith McGrath
             D            Paul Brian Murray
                          Lee Nicol
                          Stephen Francis O'Neill
                          Jonathon Owens
                          William Roy Pemberton
                          Carl William Rimmer
                          David George Rimmer
                          Graham John Roberts
                          Steven Joseph Robinson
                          Henry Charles Rogers
                          Colin Andrew Hugh William Sefton
                          Inger Shah
                          Paula Ann Smith
                          Adam Edward Spearritt
                          Philip John Steele
                          David Leonard Thomas
                          Patrick John Thompson
                          Peter Reuben Thompson
                          Stuart Paul William Thompson
                          Peter Francis Tootle
                          Christopher James Traynor
                          Martin Kevin Traynor
                          Kevin Tyrrell
                          Colin Wafer
                           Ian David Whelan
                          tlartin Kenneth Wild
                           Kevin Daniel Williams
                          Graham John Wright
                          Is anybody aware of any name I have not read out?
                     don't think so.   (Ho response)
                 H                           - 3 -


H arp h am Ltd
                                                         THE CORONER


                     Sergeant Griffiths, would you be kind enough to swear
                the Jury now?
                    (The Jury was sworn by their swearing the oath
                    collectively as follows, taking the New Testament in
                    their right hands:
                     "I swear by Almighty God that I will diligently
            B        inquire on behalf of our Sovereign*-Lady "the Queen,
                     into the deaths of the ninety-five persons whose
                     names have been read out in my presence and hearing
                     by Her Majesty's Coroner, and give a true verdict
                     according to the evidence."
                     THE CORONER:   Sergeant Griffiths, would you please
                arrange for the release'of all the other people who have
                been held in reserve in case we needed other Jurors?
                      The next thing we need to do is to deal with the
                legal representation; some of you, of course, I already
                know or know about.For the sake of the record and      so we
                all know who is who, I would like you to tell me who you
                are and whom you represent.     If I start with Mr. Fraser,
            D   tiien we have someone    whom I recognise. Mr. Fraser, if
                you would please introduce yourself?

                     HR. FRASER:   Sir, my name is Fraser.  *.a® a
                solicitor and I represent the Hillsborough Solicitors'
                Group Steering Committee.
                     It may assist you and the Jury and the Officers if I
                explain a little of the background as to how and why that
                Committee was set up and so you may understand why I am
                here this morning.
                     Following this tragedy a large number of firms of
                solicitors were consulted by injured and bereaved in
                Liverpool and elsewhere, those people seeking advice on a
                variety of legal problems which arose as a result of this
                disaster, including, of course, sir, the inevitability of
                holding these inquests.    Liverpool Law Society called a
                meeting at its offices in Liverpool on the 27th April,
                1989, and invited those firms who had at that stage been
                consulted by the injured and bereaved, to send a
                representative for general discussion about the best way
                to deal with the various legal problems which arose, which
                then took place.   It was decided that a small committee
                consisting of six solicitors should be elected to collate
                and disseminate information to member firms who had joined
                the group, which that meeting decided to form.
                     That committee has undertaken a variety of tasks
                which I will not go into at this stage, sir, but one of
                those tasks obviously has been to try to co-ordinate
            H                            -   4 -



H arph am Ltd                                                                  7
                                                               TUI'   CORONER


                     representation of the bereaved families before you, sir,
                     on an en bloc basis; the alternative being for you to be
                     faced with upwards of fifty practices before you to
                     represent the individual interests of the bereaved
                     families.   I am pleased to be able to tell you, sir, that
                     our efforts have been largely successful in relation to
                     more than ninety of the bereaved families, those
                     solicitors representing the vast majority of those who
                 B   lost their lives have confirmed from their clients that
                     they are happy that my committee should represent them
                     en bloc before you.   There are one or two individuals who
                     either seek no representation at all, or who will appear
                     before you with their own solicitors, for reasons which
                     are entirely within their own control and so far as I can
                     I will assist those solicitors who appear and those
                     families who are not represented at all by handing to them
                     any information which may appear relevant.
                          I am therefore here, sir, as a representative of that
                     steering committee and it is my intention and wish to
                     remain in your court throughout the presentation of all
                     the ninety-five summaries which will follow, to assist the
                     families in any way in which I can and by putting to you
                 D   supplementary questions which are known to arise from some
                     of the summaries which have been presented and also, sir,
                     to assist you.   I will then obviously report the outcome
                     of each day's events to the solicitors individually who
                     represent families and hopefully by that method all the
                     families who will be represented through me will have a
                     full report of the day's hearing before you.

                             On that basis, sir, I seek representation before you
                     today

                          THE CORONER:   I am very happy indeed to grant that.
                     Now we can go either way, but do you want to move this way
                     or shall we start at the end?   Let's start with you.

                          HR. SMITH:   Sir, I am Sean Smith, Counsel.   I am
                     instructed by the Medical and Dental Defence Union of
                     Scotland to appear on behalf of Dr. Alexander Robert
                     Ualker Forrest.   He is to give evidence to this inquest
                     as to blood tests carried out either by him or under his
                     supervision on ninety-four of the victims.

                          Sir, I intend to stay here only for the duration of
                     his evidence.

                             THE CORONER:   Thank you.

                          ciR. CALLAGHAN:  Sir, my name is Callaghan.   I am a
                     partner with Dibb, Lupton, Broomhead.   I appear for Trent
                     Regional Health Authority and the South Yorkshire
                     Metropolitan Ambulance Service.   It will be my intention
             H                                  - 5 -


H arp h am Ltd                                                                      8
                                        THE CORONER


to attend today and to attend any of the inquests where
there may be anything relevant to my clients.

     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, were you able to
hear that?   Did you say no?    We are limited with
microphones.   If I may just repeat it for you.     It is
Ur. Callaghan who represents, the Trent Regional Health
Authority and the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service and it
is his intention to be here today and on those days where
anything which may be relevant to them might be raised.

     I am sorry we nave not got enough mikes, but if you
can shout or pull the mikes over towards you.

     liR. GREGORY:   My name is Gregory, sir.   I am a
solicitor.    My firm is Keeble Hawson.   I represent
Sheffield City Council.     Like Mr. Callaghan, I would
like to be here today and on other days, with your
approval, where it is considered relevant.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.
     MS. THORPE:   My name is Catherine Thorpe.    I am the
representative from Reynolds, Porter, Chamberlain,
solicitors for Eastwood and Partners.   I also intend to
be here today and any other day where evidence will be
given which is relevant to my clients.

     THE CORONER:    You are just here as an observer, I
believe?

     MS. THORPE:    That is right.
     iiS. ADDLEMAN:   Sir, ray name is Andrea Addleman of
Counsel.    I am instructed by Russell, Jones and Walker,
solicitors.    I am here to represent the Police Federation
of England and Wales.    It is my intention to stay
throughout this hearing.
     MR. ISAACS:   Paul Isaacs, sir, Counsel, representing
the interests of Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield.
Sir, with your leave, I propose to be here for those days
when it is deemed necessary and relevant.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, that will be perfectly all right.
Mr. Fraser, we have heard from you.

     MS. HORCLIFFE:    Sir, my name is Belinda Norcliffe
from Hammond Suddards.    I am a solicitor and representing
the Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police. Sir, I
intend being here for the duration of the interests,
although it may be that my colleague Mr. Peter Metcalfe
will attend to the representation upon some days.
                                                            THE CORONER



                        Till: CORONER: •   Yes.
                         MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, my name is Stuart Catchpole of
                    Counsel. I appear on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
                    football Club, along with my friend Mr. Jackson.   It is
                    my intention to remain for the duration of the inquest
                    with your leave and to be of such assistance as we can.

                B        THE CORONER:   Thank you.   Well, I have no problems
                    at all in agreeing and I am very happy for you to be
                    represented at these inquests.   I confirm that whilst, of
                    course, I am delighted if you are able to stay here, those
                    of you who feel that some of the evidence does not require
                    your attendance, that is a matter entirely for you.   It
                    would be helpful if you told us, as indeed you have done,
                    if you are not intending to be here, just so that we know
                    whether to expect you, that is all.
                         Now the next thing I want to do and it is a little
                    bit unusual. We are going to have the case summaries
                    presented by eight Officers of the West Midlands Police.
                    I want to arrange for them all to be sworn now in respect
                    of all the inquests, partly because a lot of the families
                D   are here so they can hear them, and partly because it is
                    convenient.   If the Officers would come down now please.

                         Ladies and gentlemen, I propose to swear the Officers
                    in the same way that I swore the Jury,   In other words,
                    collectively, but each one, of course, repeating the oath
                    in persona.   Are you content with that, or do you wish to
                    hear them sworn individually?   (Yes)
                         Right, if you would then, ladies and gentlemen either
                    put your nands on the Uible or New Testament in the
                    conventional way.
                         (The Presenting Officers were sworn swearing the oath
                         collectively as follows, taking the New Testament in
                         their right handst

                         "I swear by Almighty God that the evidence I shall
                         give shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
                         but the truth, in relation to each of the ninety-five
                         persons whose names have been read out by Her
                         Majesty's Coroner, in my presence and hearing,
                         touching whom I am called upon to give evidence."

                         THE CORONER:   Thank you.   You will introduce
                    yourselves as opportunity presents itself.

                         Finally, while we are still on formalities, as and
                    when the pathologists come I iptend to get them to swear
                    in respect of each of their inquests as well so we don't
                    have to ask them to repeat the words however many times it
                H                                 - 7 -


i. H arp h am Ltd                                                                10
                                                           THE CORONER


                   is that they happen to have dealt with cases.   I hope
                   that is all acceptable to you.   I think it is more
                   convenient and altogether more satisfactory.

                        Now that completes what I call the preliminary
                   formalities.    I want to take a few minutes to address you
                   and in particular, ladies and gentlemen, these remarks are
                   addressed to everybody but in particular to you because
               B   you as you will hear 1 n a moment, have a function to«play
                   in these proceedings and it is important that you should
                   (a) understand what we are doing, (b) what your function
                   is and various other things, so please listen.    You will
                   forgive f|ig  i don't look at you all the time because 1
                   am trying to take in everybody as well, so if I turn my
                   back on you from time to time that is not because I am
                   being rude or impolite to you, it is just the nature of
                   the auditorium.    I ought to say I am not used to being in
                   an auditorium like this and I am certain1y not used to
                   being under the spotlight, so I hope you will forgive me
                   if I falter on occasions.
                        The office of Coroner is a very ancient one.    It
                   goes back almost 300 years.   Its function hasn't always
               D   been identical to what we are doing now but it has always
                   been concerned, to a certain extent, with dealing with
                   people who have died.   I am not going to give you a
                   history lesson except you should know you are
                   participating in something which has long antecedents.
                   It is not something which has just been invented.

                        A Coroner's Court is a court of record and therefore
                   has a certain status in the hierarchy of the judicial
                   process in the United Kingdom.     It differs - and this is
                   a very important point - from,   I think, all other courts
                   in the United Kingdom in that it is inquisitorial rather
                   than adversarial.    What that means is if you think of a
                   normal court, some of you may have been in a court, I
                   don't know, but certainly everybody has seen them on
                   television, you have a judge and you have two parties and
                   they are striving, so to speak, to persuade the judge or
                   the jury, as the case may be, to reach a decision or
                   verdict in accordance with the evidence which they prouuce
                   before the Tribunal.
                        A Coroner's Court is not like that at all.    The
                   Coroner is charged with make inquiries.    That is why it
                   is inquisitional, an inquest.    It is he, together with
                   his Officers and the people who support him, who make the
                   inquiries and then that evidence, or such part of it as
                   the Coroner feels right, is presented.    Now you might say
                   to me, "What on earth are all these people doing here, if
                   it is not adversarial?"   The answer to that is that the
                   rules which I will mention in a moment, allow certain
                   classes of people to be represented, (a) to protect their
               H                            - 3 -


L H arp h am Ltd                                                                 11
                                                          THE CORONER


                 interests, (b) to make sure that points which they feel
                 need to be put are put and also to ask questions of
                 witnesses in order to establish the facts or the truth of
                 the evidence which is being placed before you in order to
                 enable you to reach a decision.
                      All inquests have limited objectives - not just this
                 one, every inquest - and I will deal with those in a
             6   moment or two, but you should remember that.   At! inquest
                 is not an open ended enquiry, there are bounds to it.

                      Why do we have an inquest at all? We have to
                 remember in this particular case there has already been a
                 Judicial Inquiry in this t own undertaken by Lord Justice
                 Taylor, which lasted about thirty-two days - quite a long
                 time - and quite a lot of words were said, So why have an
                 inquest?   The short answer is because the Coroner's Act
                 says that we must.   It is Section 8(1) of the Coroner's
                 Act 1988 which provides for that.    I am no t going to read
                 you the Section, I think you can accept tha t is true.
                      The next question is why are you here, because it
                 must be common knowledge that nearly all inquests are done
                 without the presence of a Jury.   The answer to that is
             D   that firstly the Coroner may, if he chooses, call a Jury
                 in any case if he thinks it is desirable.   However, more
                 importantly, under Section 8(3) sub-section (d) it says:

                      "Where the death occurred in circumstances, the
                      continuance or possible recurrence of which is
                      prejudicial to the health of safety of the public, or
                      any section of the public, he shall proceed to summon
                      a Jury."
                      Now this is another vaguely worded sub-clause, as you
                 will realise, but I think I would be hard pushed, bearing
                 in mind that a Judicial Inquiry has already taken place,
                 to say that these particular inquests don't fall within
                 that sub-paragraph, and that is the view I have taken and
                 that is the reason why I have decided to ask you to come.

                      Now, what are the objectives of the Coroner's
                 inquest?   Apart from what might be said in the main Act,
                 which is the Coroner'* Act 1988 - that sounds a very new
                 Act, doesn't it?    In fact it is a consolidating Act.
                 There have been load* of Coroner's Acts over the years but
                 one of the crucial ones was in 1887.    That really set the
                 modern system up.    It was the intention of Parliament, so
                 to speak, to make a hundredth birthday present to Coroners
                 by consolidating the .legislation in 1987, but I think a
                 General Election intervened and so the Bill was lost and
                 it was then re-introduced in 1988 and this is why we have
                 this new Act.    It is convenient because instead of
                 looking up half a dozen Acts we only need to look at one.
             H                            - 9 -


H srp h sm Ltd                                                                  12
                                         THE CORONER


     However, there are also Coroner's Rules. These were
formulated in 1D34, the Rules we are working to.  I want
to read you Rule 36.   Rule 36(l)(b) reads:

     "The proceedings and evidence at an inquest shall be
     directed solely to ascertaining the following
     matters, namely, (a) who the deceased was; (b) how,
     when and where the deceased came by his death; (c)
     the particulars for tha time being required byv the
     Registration Acts to be registered concerning the
     death.

     2. neither the Coroner, nor the Jury, shall express
     any opinion on any other matter."

     Now I did tell you at the beginning that inquests
were limited in nature and this Rule is the Rule which, if
you like, sets out the parameters more or less.    The
registration particulars - these on the whole are not
usually either controversial...   Well, they are certainly
not controversial, they are sometimes a little bit
difficult to ascertain. They are the sort of things like
what is a person's job, where was he born, what is his
date of birth, things of that nature.   Although we have
to deal with it 1 don't anticipate any particular
difficulty.   In fact I am not saying I anticipate any
difficulty with anything, but usually registration
particulars are very straightforward.

     There are then other things: who the deceased was.
That usually is not a problem, and it is not a problem, I
believe, in this case.   When he died.     Where he died and
how he died.   In   most inquests the who,     when and where
are very straightforward. The time that        isspent   isspent
on the question of discussing how.    In these particular
inquests - and by the way you will notice that I try to
refer to the inquests in plural because although we are
all sitting here, each one of the deceased is a separate
person and therefore we are actually doing ninety-five
separate inquests, as you will discover in a little while.
Some parts of it, of course, we are doing together, like
the opening address, for example.    It would be pointless
my repeating this   ninety-five times to you.

     As I say, in most inquests the time      isspent   onthe
word "how", say a road traffic accident or something of
that sort.   It) these particular inquests, the proceedings
which are taking place today and over the next few days
are even more limited than normal because I will not be
dealing with the question of how.    I will tell you why in
a moment. What we are going to concentrate on is who the
deceased was, when he died, as far as it can be
established, and where he died, as far as it can be
established, so we are dealing with those three things and

                         - 10 -
                                        THE CORONER


tne registration particulars.   At the end of each inquest
we will adjourn it and I will tell you what the plans are
with respect to that in a little while.
     Why is it I am not intending to deal with the
question of how?   The reason for it is that at the
present time there is an ongoing inquiry by the Director
of Public Prosecutions into questions as to whether or not
the incident at Hillsborough discloses any criminal
proceedings which warrant prosecution by the DPP.
     The DPP has not yet made any announcement as to what
his conclusions are and as far as I know, he is not in a
position to do so yet because all the material that he ^
needs has not yet been presented to him. That is nobody s
fault.   You might think if there has been a Public
Inquiry everything is done, but an awful lot of work has
been done since then and, indeed, is still going on.   So
the DPP is in the middle, if you like, of an inquiry.
When I heard tnis was going to happen my initial reaction
was that I would have to adjourn these inquests and there
are various reasons for it which I will not bother^you
with for the moment.   Indeed I did, I said I wasn t
starting because quite apart from any other
considerations, it is in the interests of justice that
nothing I should do at an inquest should impede or imperil
the DPP's inquiries. This is in the interests of justice
for everybody concerned.
     However, as a result of various matters which
happened in correspondence which took place I felt it
might be possible to resume these inquests on this limited
basis, which I have already described to you, and, indeed,
after consultation with the DPP the DPP agreed that that
was a satisfactory way of proceeding.    It has the^
advantage that it will answer quite a lot of questions
which are in people's minds, even though it will not
necessarily answer them all.   It does mean there are
certain limitations on the way the evidence has got to be
presented, because the overall consideration is that we
will not adduce or allow evidence to be adduced which is
critical of, or which could be treated as an attack on
anybody, or on any corporation, for that matter, because
we do not know where that might lead to.
     Now in some respect I am fortunate because the word
"how", you know., what on earth does it mean, and how far
should I go anyway in an inquest of this sort, luckily for
me at this stage I don't have to address you on that point
because we are not going to deal with it.    If and when
the time comes for us to deal with the question of how,
then will be the time for me to say what I intend to do.



                        - 11 -


                                                             14
                                                            THE CORONER


                          In order to avoid any misunderstanding I want to
                     repeat this because it is important for you to understand
                     it and, of course, for the legal representatives also to
                     appreciate, if you like, the ground rules on which we are
                     proceeding.   One, all inquests are limited in scope;
                     two, these particular hearings are even more limited than
                     normal because we are excluding a whole section of
                     evidence at this stage.   No criticism or attack on any
                 6   person or corporations will be permitted and if a question
                     is asked then I will not allow it.^ We will do nothing
                     which is detrimental to the DPP's inquiry.
                          Now as a small interlude, I want just to tell you
                     because having mentioned the DPP you might say, What will
                     happen when the DPP makes up his mind?    I will just very
                     briefly outline two possible scenarios which I can think
                     of.   One is that the DPP will decide not to prosecute
                     anybody.   They will decide there is not sufficient
                     evidence to warrant a criminal prosecution of the nature
                     which would affect an inquest.   If that happens then as
                     soon as it is conveniently possible we will resume.    I
                     think it is only fair to say I anticipate that assuming
                     the DPP takes that view, we will not be resuming the next
                 D   day, because a lot of further work will have to be done by
                     me to (a) re-absorb it all and (b) to decide which
                     witnesses to call and so on.   However, as soon as
                     reasonably possible we will resume and conclude the
                     inquests.
                          That is scenario 1.   If the DPP decides to prosecute
                     for an offence which falls within Section 16 of the
                     Coroner's Act, and for all practical purposes the only
                     real one which I think is relevant in that section is
                     manslaughter.   The other ones are murder, infanticide,
                     reckless driving and aiding and abetting a suicide, so I
                     don't think any of the others can be within contemplation.
                     However, assume for a minute that he were to decide he
                     wanted to prosecute somebody for manslaughter, or some
                     corporation or more than one — it has nothing to do with
                     me, that is a matter entirely for the DPP - then as soon
                     as a person is charged with such an offence, Section 16(1)
                     of the Coroner's Act provides that I am informed by the
                     Clerk of the Magistrates' Court and there are also
                     provisions for the DPP to let me know in certain
                     circumstances and the Section then goes on.

                          "The Coroner shall, in the absence of reason to the
                          contrary, adjourn the inquest until after the
                          conclusion of the relevant criminal proceedings..."

                     It goes on to say:
                          "...and if a Jury has been summoned may, if he thinks
                          fit, discharge them."
                 H                           - 12 -


J L H arp h am Ltd
                                                                                  15
                                        THE COKONER


Now what happens in practice is when a person - after all,
we have sufficient cases of people who do get charged,
under this Section - I, and I think nearly all Coroners,
adjourn as we have to.   Then because of various other
sub-sections in that section, we wait for the outcome, and
it is normal practice not to resume the inquest after the
conclusion of the criminal proceedings.   Now I am not
going to announce at this stage what I will do in these
particular inquests, apart from saying that it is normal
practice not to resume and to hear the rest of the
evidence. The reason for this is because of course the
evidence will have been fully explored in the Crown Court.
It does not actually say that in the Act but I am sure
that is what was behind the thinking when these provisions
were being drafted.
     As I say, it is the normal practice not to resume,
but I am not announcing at this stage what I intend to do.
We will let people know if and when the time arrives.
This does not mean to say there will be a prosecution.
It does not mean to say there will not.    I am just
explaining to you what may happen. There are two
possibilities.    One, that you might be back to hear a lot
more evidence. Two, just for a formal morning while we
adjourn under Section 16 and then for practical purposes
nothing more, or you might even be back at the end of the
criminal proceedings, but I will let you know when the^
time arises.   I don t want to anticipate either decisions
or actions by me.
     That was a little interlude, nothing to do with
today, just so you know how things worked.
     Now to return to today. Because of the limitations
which I have already described to you, I have decided I
will not be calling any South Yorkshire Police Officers.
In fact we will be calling very few witnesses to give viva
voce evidence.   In other words, orally, apart from these
Presenting Officers. What we have done is we have
prepared summaries of the evidence for each individual
deceased and the Officers will present those summaries.
The summaries have been prepared in such a way that they
comply with the rule, if you like, which I have laid down
as to the scope of these inquests, so you are going to
hear summaries from Police Officers.   They have already
taken the oath so they are going to tell the truth as they
know it.   However, you must remember, and it is a
terribly important point to grasp, that they were not
there and they are recounting to you what other people are
saying.   All right?   They have done it to the best of
their ability and I have gone through every single file.
They are about as big as this.   They look like that.
There are ninety-five of those.   Some summaries I felt
needed possible re-thinking in places. I have drawn it to

                         - 13 -


                                                              16
                                                           THE CORONEK


                 the Officers' attention. We have done our best in order
                 to get these summaries as accurate and as fair as we can.
                 That is not to say there may not be errors in them.    I
                 expect if there are, my colleagues down here will draw
                 those to tny attention, in particular you, Mr. Fraser, and
                 any other solicitors who represent the bereaved.
                      We have allowed the solicitors for the bereaved and
             B   Mr. Fraser to see the summaries. We have not circulated
                 them to other firms.   You may feel that is unfair, but I
                 did spend quite a bit of time thinking about this and on
                 reflection I don't think it is because the summaries, as I
                 have already explained, are drafted within the limits of
                 the proceedings and their only objective is to disclose
                 the who, when and where of the deceased.   It was they who
                 needed to see them. I think you will have plenty of
                 opportunity, because of the way they are read, if there is '
                 anything you need to pick up I am sure you will be able to
                 do it without any prejudice to your clients’ rights.
                      In addition to the summaries, we will hear post
                 mortem evidence.   Certainly in the beginning we are going
                 to have the pathologists here to give the evidence ^
             D   themselves.   There may be a few cases where we don t need
                 a pathologist and we will just deal with it on paper.
                 However, at the present time the arrangements are that if
                 need be the pathologists will be here for every single
                 inquest because we want the families to be able to hear
                 what the pathologist has to say for themselves, from him
                 or her as the case may be.

             E       .Then there are one or two other little bits of
                 evidence, mainly dealing with the registration
                 particulars.   I have had various forms signed and there
                 is the opening of the inquest which I did two or three
                 days after the event in order to enable people to have the
                 bodies of their loved ones back and in order to enable
                 them to arrange for the funerals, because as you can
                 appreciate, I am sure, one of the things that everybody
                 wants when a tragedy like this strikes them is they want
                 to be near their loved one and they want to be able to
                 arrange the funeral.   If we have got all the bodies in
                 Sheffield and all the families are in Liverpool or London
                 or wherever then that creates a great deal of problems.
                 I opened the inquests very, very quickly, in fact, after
                 the event in order to try to satisfy people*s legitimate
                 needs in that respect.
                      At the time I realised we were likely to make some
                 mistakes in the opening evidence because we were doing it
                 so fast we did not really have time to double check
                 everything, but I decided in the interests of speed it was
                 better to do that than to wait until I could cross every
                 "t" and dot every t l *1 •• t and I felt if we did need to make
             H                             - 14 -


H arp h am Ltd                                                                     17
                                                                    THE CORONER


                           any amendments or corrections to what was said to me at
                           the time we would have the opportunity to do so now.     In
                           fact you will hear that there were some of the openings
                           where errors were made either about a name or places or
                           birth or ages on occasions.    There were also one or two
                           cases where we have got - what we did was we prepared a
                           standard form and because we used a standard form and
                           because we did not double check everything in some cases
                       B   the standard form is incorrect, but I wilt draw those
                           points to your attention.    They will not strictly affect
                           you, but I want everybody to know if there is an error as
                           far as I am able I will draw it to your attention so you
                           know what is going on.    None of us, I am afraid, are
                           perfect, and that goes for me as well!


     •                 C
                                tJow there is one other matter I have to deal with on
                           this point and that is what I call the visual evidence.
                           You will hear in a few minutes from one of the Presenting
                           Officers, and, indeed, also Mr. Jones, whom I will
                           introduce to you in a moment, that there is a an enormous
                           amount of visual evidence and a great deal of time and
                           effort has been spent in trying to look at the videos and
                           photographs and try and find where people were on the day.
                   D
                                 I have given this matter a considerable amount of
                           thought as to how to deal with it and I have decided,
                           having looked at some of the photographs, that if I passed
                           photographs around it would not be particularly helpful
                           and it would be even less helpful to start to try to show
                           hours and hours of video recording, quite apart from the
                           problems it might impinge on the limitations. What we are
                       E   going to do is to use plans where we need to locate
                           people.    The Officers have prepared plans. They are
                           basically plans like those on the wall. That one, for
                           example, is a plan of a pen. They are not as large as
                           this.    They are much smaller, they fit into the folders.
                           On them there are different coloured spots, blue ones and
                           green ones.    You will hear about those in a few minutes.
                           From that it will be possible to trace what the evidence
                       F   is   as to where a person was at various stages, insofar as
                           ithas been possible to establish it.

                                 In fact, having said that we have got all these
                           little plans, in practice what we are going to     do during
                           these hearings is that as the Officer presents a case - I
                           will not be using every plan, there are hundreds of these
                           plans as well and there is no reason why I should use them
                       G   all, I will use those which I consider we need.     However,
                           instead of passing plans round we will try and point on
                           the bigger plans so that the Officer will say, That is
                           where the spot is", and you will be able to see it. We
                           are here today, as you know, and tomorrow we are here as
                           well.    The next day we are in the Medico-Legal Centre and
                           that is where we are going to continue. That is a very
                   H                                - 15 -


.   l H arp h am Ltd                                                                      18
                                               THE CORONER


much smaller, more intimate court, and it will be a lot
easier for everybody. Me will all be closer together and
we will all be able to see that much better.   I think
that is going to be the easiest way for all of us to know
what we are talking about in any particular case.

     We will probably bind a copy of the plan into the
transcripts, which I will mention in a moment. That does
not really affect you, but if we have referred to a plan
the record, if you like, will have a copy of it bound in,
at least the master copy will certainly have that.

     I have already said we will not be calling many
witnesses, definitely no South Yorkshire Police Officers
and we are not calling any stewards or, for that matter,
club officials either.
     Now I very briefly want to turn to the rules.    I am
not going to take you through all these rules and I am
going to be selective, but I ought just to say this: that
under Rule 20(l)(b) I am entitled to disallow any question
which is not relevant or which I consider to be improper.
That does not mean rude, but not proper for the purposes
of an inquest.    I do not think that is going to happen
but it rnay be that occasionally a question will be asked
which 1 consider to be outside the scope.    If that is so
then I will just have to say that I am not allowing that,
but we will see as we go along.

     There is an important rule, Rule 22, which I will
read because although it is not relevant at this stage, it
is a rule which has to be borne in mind at all inquests
and I think it is worth knowing it at this stage. Rule 22
says:

     "No witness at an inquest shall be obliged to answer
     any question tending to incriminate himself."

In other words, you cannot make somebody answer a question
which might make them liable to some criminal prosecution,
what ever that (night be.

     Sub-paragraph (2):

     "Wnere it appears to the Coroner that the witness has
     been asked such a question the Coroner shall inform
     the witness that he may refuse to answer."

Now you will appreciate because of the limits which we
have got on the inquest nobody is likely to be asked any
questions which fall within this rule at this stage.

     R u le   24   p ro v id e s   th a t:


                                      - 16 -
                                                             THE CORONER



                          "Anybody whose conduct is likely to^be called in
                          question is entitled to be present.
                     That is one of the reasons why we have got representatives
                     iere. but again because of the way the evidence is going
                     to be presented, if a person's conduct is likely to be
                     called in question it is not likely to happen at these
                     hearings, but it is still wise and proper, and I am
                B    ©reatlv obliged to*s»ll of you fo£;cQnii.n£,-because in
                     It the opening at least you ought to be here so that you
                     know what is happening and how we are dealing with it.

                          Rules 26 and 27 deal with the question of
                     adjournments in certain circumstances and I am not going
                     to deal with these now but they are the rules, if you
                     like, which support adjournments when the DPP gets
                     involved.
                          I have already drawn Rule 36 to your attention.   I
                     want to remind you of it.   It says specifically that
                     apart from those matters that are mentioned in that rule
                     we don't deal with other things.   In particular it is
                     clear from that rule we don't add riders to the verdicts.
                     At one time juries used to say, "So-and-so died as a
                D    result of this and what is more we make the following
                     twenty recommendations", or whatever it might be.    That
                     is no longer permitted. Some people do not like that, or
                     course, but that is how it is.
                          We now turn to Rule 37 and this is more a matter for
                     the lawyers than for you, but Rule 37 makes provision for
                     evidence to be produced by way of documents.    In other
                     words, it is permissible in certain circumstances not to
                     call the witness at all but just to read his evidence, or
                     such part of it as is appropriate and relevant.    That is,
                     if you like, the reason why it would be possible to take,
                     say, pathological evidence without the pathologist being
                     here because we could just use the PM report as
                     documentary evidence.     In many cases the evidence is not
                     actually controversial which is one of the criteria.     You
                     do not use this rule for evidence which is contentious,
                     shall we say.
                           The problem with the rule is that strictly speaking I
                      ought to tell you at this stage every single item of
                      documentary evidence we are going to call, together with
                      the names and the addresses of the deponents and together
                      with a summary of thecontent of the document. Well, X
                      have to tell you in these particular inquests that is an
                      impossible task and there is a further sub-clause which
                      says you are entitled to see the document.   Now we have
                      got a lot of problems with this where we want, for
                      example, to refer to parts of the evidence of people who
                      are within the folders, or, if you like, on which the

                                              - 17 -


l   H arp h am Ltd
                                                                                    20
                                                           THE CORONER


                    summary is based. What I propose to do is not to give you
                    this information at this stage, mainly because I am not in
                    a position to do so.   That is partly due to the fact that
                    it depends to a certain extent upon what questions arise
                    after the summaries are presented.     However, if it were
                    to be that we needed to amplify» or for some reason 1 felt
                    it would be helpful to read at) extract from a statement
                    which I have in respect of any particular deceased person,
                   'I would propose and I ho^e- you will« agree, to read the
                    relevant bit that is relevant to the proceedings within
                    the limits that I have set.    I will be prepared to give
                    you a copy, if you like, of that little bit, with
                    everything else blanked out in the statement because we
                    cannot disclose at this stage the statements because of
                    the DPP's involvement.
                         However, on the other hand it will all be transcribed
                    so you may find if we do read anything out of statements
                    you will actually have, if you request it that is, in
                    black and white what has been said.
                      I think if we do read extracts - I nave gone through
                 these files, as I have explained to you already and I have
              nI marked the bits that I consider would be either relevant
                 or readable, or perhaps the other way round, if necessity
                 demands.   I hope that will be acceptable to you.   I
                 think it is the best 1 can do at the present time in the
                 circumstances in which I and all of us find ourselves.

                         One other point, just in order to make it absolutely
                    crystal clear, if I were to read an extract out of the
                    folders, so there is no misunderstanding on this point,
                    what I read is an edition.    It is not the complete
                    statement and it may on occasions be bits pieced together
                    from the statement which I have picked out. For example,
                    let us imagine there is a particular statement which deals
                    with where a person has been found and for some reason I
                    want to read that. That may be in three sections on three
                    different pages.    I may join that all out as I read it.
                    I will deliberately leave out any criticism of any person
                    for the reasons which I have already explained to you.
                    Conversely, I have marked it in such a way as to leave out
                    any praise of any person, because otherwise, if I were to
                    read, if you like, all the goods bits about people, you
                    may get the wrong impression of the import of the
                    document.    In other words, if I do read something - and
                    it is unlikely I will do it often, the chances are I may
                    not do it at all - but if I do do it I want you to
                    understand that it is an edited portion of the transcript,
                    but that I am reading as fairly as I can the evidence
                    relating to what we are dealing with at the moment.
                         Have I made that clear?    I want to be sure you have
                    understood this point.
               Hi                            -18-


L H arp h am Ltd
                                                                                 21
                                                          THE CORONER


                       Summaries, of course, as I have already said, are
                  based upon these statements and to the best of our ability
                  they are correct, subject to the limitations which I have
                  already explained to you.
                       We have got a technical difficulty with regard to
                  exhibits because the rules provide that exhibits in
                  Coroner's Courts are supposed to be labelled C.l and
              B   "C.2" and so on, to wherever y?u go. We are going to try
                  and do that.   I am going to try and write down the
                  numbers as we go along, but from a practical point of view
                  I think it is infinitely preferable to refer to the
                  exhibit numbers which have been used by the West Midlands
                  Police because those are, if you like, common currency in
                  judicial inquiries and so on.    Therefore, if we do have
                  to refer back to any particular thing we will probably
                  refer to the West Midlands Police references rather than
                  to my own coronal numbers.    I am only doing it if I am
                  able to comply with the rule.
                       As you know, Coroners are to keep notes of evidence.
                  As you also know tape recording has been considered to be
                  a satisfactory method of doing it.    In these particular
              D   inquests I have asked for a firm to attend to take a
                  shorthand note and, indeed, I think they use recordings as
                  well as a back-up for themselves and they will produce a
                  transcript for ine of the evidence which will constitute
                  the notes of evidence for these inquests.    They will not
                  be produced immediately in the sense that they will be
                  available in the morning or the afternoon or the next day,
                  because I don't think we need that.    On the other hand,
                  they will be available relatively quickly, within the
                  abilities of getting things transcribed, and subject to
                  whatever the usual provisions are with regard to copies,
                  it will be a matter for you to decide whether you want
                  some or all or none of the transcripts, but we will have
                  them available once they have been transcribed.

                       Now then, ladies and gentlemen, what on earth are you
                  going to be doing?   Your duty is to listen to the
                  evidence in accordance with the oath and then to reach a
                  verdict.   It must be obvious to you already that you will
                  not be in a position to reach a verdict at this stage
                  because you will not have heard all the evidence and at
                  the end of each inquest I am going to adjourn it.    Your
                  task at the moment is to listen.   You may say, "How on
                  earth can I listen for fourteen days, remember it all, go
                  away maybe for three months, six months, come back and
                  reach a verdict?"   Well, the answer to that is it is
                  exceedingly difficult, but when the time comes, and I am
                  not saying... The time may never come because it depends
                  very much upon what happens under the provisions of
                  Section 16 of the Coroner's Act.    However, assuming for
                  the moment that the time were to come when we were all
              H                           - 19 -


L H arph am Ltd                                                                22
                                                             THE CORONER


                    together again, then it is my task to sum up for you and
                    the summing up includes summarising the evidence.   I hope
                    that at that point I will be in a position to remind you
                    of the salient parts of what we have heard and what you
                    need in order to enable you to reach a verdict.
                         I am afraid at this    stage you are here to complywith
                    the lav;, because I decided, and I did think about this
                B   quite hard, and I decided in the end that we had to hajtfe
                    this inquest with a Jury at this stage.      You are here to
                    comply with the law and for you to listen.      If, when the
                    evidence is presented, there is something which is not
                    clear to you, then I am going to try to remember to look
                    towards your foreman.     Now you probably have not yet
                    chosen a foreman, but at a convenient adjournment, say
                    over lunch, can you...      I could nominate somebody butI
                    would much prefer you to choose somebody amongst
                    yourselves who you would     like to act as your foreman. lie
                    or sue is the spokesperson who communicates, if you like,
                    with me.      Communication with me has got to be here in
                    open court.    All right?    We don't talk, if you like,
                    outside. This is not because I am snobbish and don't want
                    anything to do with you.      It is just for the sake of
                D   proprieties and so that everything that is done is done
                    correctly.

                         Now, Members of the Jury, it is not your fault that
                    you have been catapulted, in a sense, I suppose it is a
                    niche of history because it was, whatever the outcome,
                    what ever the verdict, a terrible, terrible tragedy, that
                    ninety-five people lost their lives and you have been
                    picked - I don't know any of your names or anything about
                    you, expect I know that letters were sent out by the Jury
                    Officer to various people and you happen to be the-eleven
                    who have been picked to sit on these inquests and so in a
                    sense you are now part of history, relating to these
                    particular inquests. What you are going to be doing is -
                    it is an arduous task and it may be a distressing task for
                    some of you - all of you.   Uowever, I am sure you will be
                    able to do it.

                         You will know, as I am sure all of us do, that there
                    are many people in caring professions - social workers,
                    doctors, nurses - who are faced all the time with sadness,
                    sickness, disasters, maybe not on an individual basis but
                    if you are, say, a nurse on a ward you might have hundreds
                    of desperately ill people going through your hands, so to
                    speak.   Everybody in that situation has in the end got to
                    reach a situation where they balance detachment with
                    emotional involvement with the people or the cases they
                    are dealing with.   If you become too deeply, too
                    emotionally involved with a particular matter and if there
                    is a lot of it, then you may not be able to cope with it
                    because it is hitting you so hard.   On the other hand, if
                H                            - 20 -


l   H arph am Ltd                                                                   23
                                                            THE CORONER



                   you become too detached and you just sit back and say, It
                   has nothing to do with me", you may feel you.are being
                   cold.   Therefore, if you like, the nurse on the ward has
                   always got to balance this, how to be close to the patient
                   and yet a -little bit to one side, to preserve her own
                   professional abilities to cope.
                        Now I have got no idea what your occupations are or
               B   what your backgrounds are, but to a certain
                   have got to do the same.   You have got to listen to this
                   evidence.   You have got to listen to it detachedly. That
                   is not to say you must not realise that we are talking
                   about real people, real families, real tragedies, but
                   remember your job is here as a Jury*   0K-    . at.1
                   verv. very important because you will be hearing ninety-
                   five cases, one after the other.   Unless you get this
                   right at the beginning you may feel uncomfortable.
                        Now, we are all different and all of us have our own
                   personal families, our own personal tragedies, our own
                   personal responses. Some of you may find some cases more
                   moving than others. We are all like this because
                   noticed this when I was reading some of the cases.    Some
               D   of the things which affected me most were not necessarily
                   what other people might have said were horrific, there
                   were little tiny nuances.   All of you may respond to
                   different things.   That is natural, that is you.   You
                   are human.   Do not expect all of you to respond   _
                   identically to every single bit of evidence. All right.
                        Because of the   nature and the volume of the evidence
                   that is being given   to you some of you may feel a little
                   bit upset from time   to time. Again, be prepared for that.
                   It is no reflection   on you.   It is perfectly normal and
                   when it is over you   will settle down again to be your
                   normal selves.
                        In addition you have got yourselves, the eleven of
                   you, you will be together for quite some time. I don t
                   suppose you know each other but at the end of it some of
                   you may form friendships which will last, I don t know,
                   but you have certainly got each other and in a sense you
                   are a mutual support group and when you meet for coffee
                   and so on you can do that, you can help yourselves if you
                   find you need a little bit of encouragement.

                        I have to tell you that you are not to discuss the
                   evidence with anybody else.    People will want to talk to
                   you about the evidence.     They will come up to you and
                   express sympathy and they will want you to tell them and
                   they will want your views.    Perhaps even more, they will
                   want to tell you their views.    You are the Jury and you
                   are not to discuss it with anybody e lse. All right?
                   That is hard, but do it, because the one thing we don't
               H                             - 21 -


L H arp h am Ltd                                                                 24
                                        THE CORONER


want is any mistakes made in inquests of this nature.    All
right?
     Now this restriction has worried me quite a bit in
fact because it could happen that despite everything I
nave said one or other of you really gets hit hard and you
just feel you cannot cope wi.thout some support from a'
doctor or a social worker or something like that.    I
think I still have to say to you that you ar£ not to
discuss the evidence but if that situation were to arise I
can see no reason...   First of all, I cannot see any
reason why any of you should really suffer. Ttiat is not
what yg want, nor do we want any long term harm to any of
you.   I am not saying that that will happen.    I do not
think it will, but I am just assuming this.    However, if
any of you were to be in that situation, then 1 think it
would not be improper for you to seek help from
professional people, not witii jugard to the evidence that
you hear here, but with how you are responding.    In other
words, help for you rather than help for the evidence.
You can discuss your response with a professional person,
but you are not to discuss the evidence.

   • I would prefer, of course, if that were not to arise
because that is quite a difficult distinction which I am
making, but I am trying to think of you as people, because
I don t think anybody would want you to be hurt
unnecessarily.   Is that clear?
     I think that that is a correct direction on this
point.   It is a very difficult problem with regard to
these particular inquests and I have given it a bit of
thought as to how to help you on this point.
     Now we have virtually finished the opening. We have
got a very tight schedule. Today is unusual because I am
doing the opening address and we are doing various other
things which we will not normally be doing.    Normally we
are going to start at 9.30.   We want to do eight inquests
a day. We will have coffee and lunch breaks and we will
probably rise in between each inquest just for a moment or
two.   We are going to try and fix lunch for one o'clock.
It is a nine-thirty start, one o'clock until two for lunch
and then in the afternoon if we can finish at about four
thirty to five that is what I am aiming at, but I cannot
always guarantee it because I cannot guarantee precisely
how long each inquest will take.   Although we have a
tight schedule and although everything is planned on that
basis I don't want anybody, and in particular the
families, to feel we are rushing them.    If it takes
longer then it will just have to take longer.    On
balance, I think we will be all right but we want to do
the proper thing for each individual inquest.     Each one
of those is a person who was loved. We have got to
                                                          TIIK CORONER


                 remember that and we have got to give them and their
                 families and the legal representatives and everybody who
                 is here supporting them the proper respect which is due to
                 them and that is how we are going to do the inquests.

                       Now there are a few inquests where we have already
                 -iad definitive advice from ei.ther the family or their
                 legal representatives that the family does not wish to be
             B   present.    That is entirely proper.    It i-^-ifeeir-right *
                 their privilege and it is no criticism whatsoever.       We
                 lave given them times.    What I intend to do is to use, if
                 I can put it like this, those inquests as fillers, if I
                 may use that word.     If, for example, we find we have
                 finished earlier on a particular day thenwe may bring in
                 an inquest forward where we know people will not be here
                 and deal with it then because it gives us a little bit of
                 extra space which we may need later on. We don t think
                 anybody will be prejudiced by this because they have
                 already indicated that they are not coming.      Of course,
                 if they change their mind and decide they do want to come
                 and they let us know then obviously we would not do that.
                 I am just saying this, particularly to you, Mr. Fraser,
                 because you will want to know this.     You have had the
             D   schedule and you will know the ones who are proposing not
                 to come. As I say, it gives us a little bit of
                 flexibility with our timings.
                      Because of the schedule we must start on time and so
                 everybody has got to be here when they are supposed to be
                 and we will start.    I mean, the Jury, you must be here.
                 All right?   We cannot start without you.     Once you are
                 here and I am here we have got to get cracking at the time
                 laid down.   So please, if you are members of the family-
                 and your inquest is listed for a particular time or day
                 please be here at the right time. This is not because I
                 am being horrible and nasty to you and have no
                 flexibility, but because if we wait we are putting
                 everybody else out and we want to start.     However, having
                 said that, we may of course overshoot ourselves.     If that
                 happens, and inquests are delayed because we have taken
                 longer, that is tough.     I want us to do a proper job with
                 each inquest, but as far as possible we are going to work
                 to time.   All right?
                      Now I have already said we are here today. We are
                 here tomorrow.    On Friday we are at the Medico-Legal
                 Centre.   Members of tne Jury, if you don't know where
                 that is please speak to Sergeant Griffiths or Mrs. Taylor,
                 you have met her, and make sure you know where to come.
                 It is not difficult once you know how to get there.
                 Please, please be there on time.    Proceedings are
                 starting at ‘J.30 so you have got to be there earlier than
                 that. We will try and make you as comfortable as we can
                 within the limits of available accommodation.
             H                            - 23 -


H arp h am Ltd                                                                   26
                                                            THE CORONER


                         At the Medico-Legal Centre our normal work is
                    proceeding.   Unfortunately people are dying in Sheffield
                    all the time and many of the cases that are reported to me
                    in Sheffield are very, very tragic.   Each one is as much
                    a loss to that family as every one of these young people
                    whom we are dealing with today so when we are at the
                    Medico-Legal Centre let us remember that there are other
                    people there as well. We will tend to swamp them a little
                B   bit.   Please let us remember them and act,, as I am sure
                    all of you will, with courtesy and care to them because it
                    is very easy to forget that those people are mourning
                    people just as you are.   I am sure I do not have to say
                    this, but it is terribly easy to forget when there are a
                    lot of us, that there are others there as well.    So we
                    want to be sensitive, that is really what I am saying.

                         Now tnat brings me very, very conveniently to the
                    media who I cannot see, but I think you are somewhere up
                    there!   Now ladies and gentlemen, I know that you have a
                    right to be at the court and that you have a right to
                    report proceedings.   I also know that the media have not
                    had the best press, if I can put it like that, with regard
                    to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster, although in passing
                D   it is only fair to say that a lot of the photographs which
                    were taken and which caused such a lot of distress at the
                    time, have proved exceedingly useful subsequently to the
                    inquiries and in particular to me because it has enabled
                    us to deal with identifications.   So some good, if you
                    like, has come out of a lot of the photography.   However,
                    you don't want to have a bad press any more than any of us
                    do, so I would ask you, please, firstly to record
                £   proceedings accurately.   I don't really have to ask you
                    that because 1 am sure you are going to do it anyway.
                    However, it is not so much the reporting that is
                    inaccurate, what upsets people is - I am not a media man
                    so I don't know, but I think it is the sub-editors and the
                    editors who then pick out the bits they want to blow up
                    for the headlines.   Be, as I have said to the families
                    with regard to the Medico-Legal Centre, be sensitive.
                F   Think before you write. Think before you speak. Think
                    before you print. Ask yourselves the question, "Would I
                    want it presented like that about me and my family?"
                    Then take a reasonable, professional decision.

                         I know you have a duty to convey information to other
                    people and you have to do it in such a way that people
                    want to read iJt and you have, because it is a business, a
                G   responsibility to sell or market your product.    I accept
                    that, but do it within the ambit of what I have outlined.

                         Secondly, I don't want you, please, I am going to use
                    the word harass - I don't like the word "harass" - my
                    families, if I may refer to you like that, and in
                    particular not within my court or the precincts of my
            H                               - 24 -


H arph am Ltd                                                                    27
                                                             THE CORONER


                     court, by which I mean the corridors and the rooms either
                     here or at the Medico-Legal Centre.    I want you to deal,
                     if you do want to take statements or things like that,
                     away from the court.   That is a matter for you but please
                     remember what I have said about sensitivity.   Within tny
                     court and within the precincts of my court I want
                     relatives to be treated with the respect that they deserve
                     and I would take a pretty dim view if that was not done.
                 B
                          I also have to remind you both here and at the
                     Medico-Legal Centre that the - well, the court is public
                     but tne building is not.   I don't expect people to wander
                     all round the building, down corridors and into rooms
                     where they have no business to be.   There are offices
                     there, there are other activities. They are private and
                     they are not public ground to anybody in fact.    We use
                     the bits of the building which are reserved for us.
                          As the families know, but perhaps you don't, Members
                     of the Jury, the social services and others have done an
                     enormous amount of work in supporting peopleand there are
                     many social workers who have come with families or who
                     will be coming, not only social workers, a lot of the VJest
                 D   Midlands Police Officers have had to spend time with
                     families and have also, I think, make a lot of
                     relationship and it sounds as if some very good
                     relationships have been made with families and they too
                     have supported and helped the families.    I would like to
                     say how very much I appreciate the help that people have
                     given to you and also, of course, to recognise the help
                     you have given to yourselves by your own support
                     organisations which you have set up.    That may well in
                     the end be the best form of help that you can have.

                          The WllVS have very kindly agreed to deal with our
                     teas and coffees and so on.    I am afraid some of you will
                     have to pay as you will discover when you approach them,
                     and some of you might not, but you will sort that out for
                     yourselves I am sure you will.    I am grateful to them for
                     coming and doing this both here and at the Medico-Legal
                     Centre.
                          Now there are a few matters which have been raised by
                     members of the families which are clearly outside the
                     ambit of the inquests altogether, never mind about the
                     restrictions we have placed on them.   The difficulty is
                     that they are things which have really worried and upset a
                     lot of the families.   There is not really an adequate
                     forum where they can be dealt with, but I am going to deal
                     with one or two of these items very, very briefly, just so
                     that you can hear what I have to say.

                          Some people have asked the question why on earth was
                     the gymnasium used as a temporary mortuary?   I don't know
             H                               - 25 -


H arp h am Ltd
                                                                                   28
                                                            THE COUONEK




                    precisely who it was who said to use the gymnasium as a
                    temporary mortuary but I can tell you this that in
                    retrospect, given the tragedy of the naturewhich we had,
                    having that gymnasium there was exceedingly fortunate
                    because it was such a larger building and it was so close
                    to the event that it did enable people to be accommodated
                    very much more conveniently than otherwise might have been
                B   the case.    In retrospect Istill* feel that that was a
                    good choice at the time and I think if I had been there -
                    I was not at the game so I did not make that decision at
                    the time - but I am quite certain that if it had been
                    drawn to iny attention I would have said, "Yes, that is a
                    splendid place".    I personally do not have any criticism
                    with that.
                         It enabled us to - and I did have something to do
                    with this - to segregate the bulk of the bodies from the
                    area where statements were being taken and the area where
                    families and relatives and friends were viewing individual
                    bodies.   You were obviously all terribly distressed and
                    who wouldn't be, but it would have been, in my view,
                    infinitely worse if we had not had that possibility for
                D   segregation.
                         The Polaroid photographs which were taken were taken
                    at my suggestion.   I take responsibility for those.
                    Again, we did it because I felt that it was kinder to try
                    and find the person, if he was there, rather than make
                    people walk up and down rows and rows of ninety-five dead
                    people to look for their own individual deceased person.
                    Of course it wasn't nice, but it was the best I could
                    think of, if you like, at the time and I still think it
                    was the right decision, but it was my responsibility.    I
                    did that.
                         The next thing that has worried people is the moving
                    of the bodies from the hospitals back to the temporary
                    mortuary.   There were thirteen bodies which had actually
                    gone to the two hospitals.    Most of them were at the
                    Northern General, one was at the ilallamshire.   They were
                    then brought back to the temporary mortuary.    That was
                    done on my authorisation.    There was a reason for it and
                    the reason was that firstly if we were going to do the
                    identifications with the Polaroids we had to take a
                    photograph and secondly, we thought it was inhuman to let
                    people view a partial list, so to speak, because if you
                    did not find your loved one on those photographs it did
                    not necessarily mean they were not dead because they might
                    have been somewhere else.    We took the decision we wanted
                    everybody in one place.    Whether that was right or wrong,
                    people may have different views on that, but I authorised
                    it and I take responsibility, if you like, for that.

                H                           - 26 -


                                                                                  29
l   H arph am Ltd
                                                        THE CORONER


                     The bulk of the deceased people were unidentified,
                as far as I was concerned and as far as the people at the
                mortuary were concerned, the temporary mortuary, that is.
                There were one or two, as we will hear, that people had
                identified actually beforehand because they happened to be
                with relations or relations happened to find them early,
                but that was not always known at the temporary mortuary.
                When you have such a large number of people you have to
            B   have a system and we decided that the system, the way
                people would come along and view, identify, give a
                statement and deal with it in a formal way.   Some people
                have been upset by that and obviously I am sorry that that
                should be so, but one of the problems is communication.

                      There are one or two cases where people carried
                identification on them and the question has been asked,
                why, if they had had, say, a liarclaycard or something
                which had their name on, or tnaybe even an address book
                with their name, then why didn't we know it was them
                straight away?    The reason is that a lot of the
                clothing...    Well, one could guess but one could not be
                sure.

            D        We also knew a lot of clothing had been mixed up and
                it was not felt right to proceed on the assumption that^
                somebody was dead on evidence which wasn't pretty certain*
                So people, even if we had a pretty good idea that they
                might be X, we still wanted it to go through the standard
                procedure.
                     Some others have queried the question of the blood
                samples.   Why were samples taken for alcohol?   The
                answer is because I authorised it.   I decided I wanted
                that done.   Somebody has said, "Is it normal?"   Well, of
                course, Hillsborough disasters are not normal, so in that
                sense it is not, but there are very many inquest cases.
                We don't take alcohol samples from everybody.   It would
                be a lie to say that every single inquest I do we do do a
                alcohol level.   Of course we don't.   However, we do do
                it in a great number of cases and in this particular case
                I took that decision.   People are entitled to have their
                own views but I took the decision and that is why we did
                it.
                     Remember that at the time when I was taking decisions
                we knew nothing, apart from the fact there had been a
                terrible disaster at Hillsborough.   Oddly enough, I knew
                less than most because I did not watch any of the
                programmes.   I heard none of the comments.   I heard
                nothing because I was at the Medico-Legal Centre trying to
                deal with day to day things.   You probably knew a lot
                more about what was happening on the day than I did, but
                that is how it is.

            H                            - 27 -



H arph am Ltd                                                                30
                                                               THE COliONEt*



                            Mow the final thing is the viewing.  There have been
                       a lot of people who have been very unhappy about the
                       viewine arrangements at the Medico-Legal Centre.     hat
                       they did not like - at the Medico-Legal Centre we have a
                       viewine room which is approachable only through tne
                       mortuary.   It has a glass partition so you view tne body
                       through a glass screen, which means, of course, you xannot
                       touch it.   A lot of people have felt very, very unhappy
                  B    about that.
                             I was not Coroner when the Medico-Legal Centre was
                       designed but I know that at the time a lot of thought was
                       siven to the viewing arrangements and that was the system
                       which was selected and I, if you like, inherited it.
                       am quite satisfied in my own mind that bearing in m if|d
                       what was happening, It would nave been quite impossible in
                       all the circumstances to have allowed people into the
                       viewin'5 area through the mortuary on that day.   I
                       anybody had asked me and said, "Can we let somebody in to
                       the viewing area?" I would have said no.    In fact we
                       don't normally do it anyway for, if you like, Sheffield
                        people.
                            We have got to remember that the arrangements at the
                  D    iedico-Leeal Centre are arrangements at a mortuary. We
                       are not a‘Chapel of Rest and the object of the viewing is
                       identification.   There is a specific purpose behind it.
                       tow I realise this has caused upset and distress to people
                       and I am obviously very sorry that that is so, but we have
                       got to live within what we have got and the viewing
                       arrangements are designed as I have just'told you.

                             When this is all over I will think about it again.
                       I want to re-think, if you like, the design of that.     I
                       am not saying I will make any changes, and I am not
                       thinking of it now because I have got other things to
                       think about, but I do know a lot of you have been upset by
                       this.    I am sorry.   Nobody wanted to cause you
                       additional pain or distress, but that was the situation
                       and you have also got to remember there were an awful lot
                       of people there and an awful lot of people who wanted to
                       view - not surprising, because although ve use it for
                       identification, in fact people do come and view because
                       they want to see their loved one, quite understandably.

                             Now I want to very, very briefly just outline to you
                        what happens.   ..Inspector Layton, could you just come and
                        help me?   We all know it was football match, a semi-final
                        on the 15th of April, being played at Hillsborough Stadium
                        between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.
                             You will hear in the evidence references to various
                        gates and so on.   There are really four gates which are
                        relevant.   First of all there are the outer perimeter

                                                - 28 -



J l   H arp h am Ltd                                                                  31
                                                               THE CO t’ ONER



                  gates.   Can you just show where those are?           Those are
                  the gates at the Leppings Lane e n t r a n c e . _ They lead to a
                  sort of courtyard, or outside the turnstiles.           lhose are
                  the second gates, the turnstiles.        There were seven of
                  them, I think, A to G, which are relevant for this
                  purpose.   Next to the turnstiles there was a great big
                  gate called gate C.   There are other great big gates as
                  well, but they are not terribly relevant as f a r a s these
              B   inquests are concerned.    That gate C features in a l°t of
                  the summaries and it was a gate which was opened.           Tnen
                  there are some more gates which are what I call the
                  internal perimeter gates.    Can you just point to them.
                  They are the little gates on the terraces which lead out
                  on to the pitch.    The gates are numbered 1 to 7, but the
                  only relevant ones - well, there are four that feature,
                  the two most important ones are gate 3 and gate 4.           There
                  is a ^ate 2 which is on the right hand side of gate 3, of
                  course, and gate 5 which is a very narrow area and which
                  is on the left of gate 4, of course.

                        You will see that there appear to be lines down the
                  drawing which are actua lly fences and which divide the
                  terrace - incidentally, the terrace apparently is the
                  place where you stand,     The stands are the places where
              D                            stands in the West End were above
                  you sit.    In fact the
                  the terraces.    Be care ful because  people may refer to
                  stands. When they say    "stands" they   don't mean the
                  terraces, they mean the   areas above   them where people were
                  sitting.    All right?    It took me  a  little while to twig
                  that.    It is very easy to get confused.
                       There are these dividing fences.   There are actually
                  gates at the back which would be, I suppose, the fifth
                  gates.   There is one and then there are some at the back
                  there.   These fences divide the whole terrace into
                  enclosures and we will call the one opposite gate 3
                  enclosure 3.   It was not known as enclosure 3, but it is
                  easier to think of it like that and the other one, of
                  course, is enclosure 4.
                       Gate C - can we go back to gate C, that is the big
                  outer perimeter gate - was opened at three relevant points
                  of time.   It was opened at about 14.48 to let somebody
                  out and some people actually managed to get in - not all
                  that many but some got in.   It was opened again at 14.52.
                  That is four minutes later or so, and was kept open for
                  about five minutes to 14.57 and at that point a lot of
                  people came in.   That was the object.   It was opened
                  again at 14.59, just before kick-off.   Kick-off was at
                  14.59.30 - half a minute to three.
                       At almost five minutes past three there was an event
                  on tne field when somebody, Mr. Beardsley, hit the
                  crossbar.   That is an important event which people
              H                               - 29 -



t H arph am Ltd
                                                                                       32
                                                          THE CORONER


                remember.   At 15.05. 36 player's left the field and the
                game was stopped.

                     St. John's Ambulance was on the pitch at 1 5 . 1 5 - you
                don't have to remember these times but I am mentioning
                them because they are sort of markers.

                     The only other thing I need to say is the gymnasium,
            B   which I have already mentioned.   The gymnasium - can y m *
                point to where it is?   It is on the opposite side of the
                football field.    Point to the West Terraces again.
                Leppings Lane.   The gymnasium is diagonally across.
                That is, if you like, where the first aid/mortuary area
                was.

                     That is all I have to say.    Now, gentlemen, is
                there any representations or applications you want to make
                at this stage?

                     MR. FRAS E R:  Sir, there are two matters.    One is
                the presence of  a video camera at the back of this hall.
                Perhaps for the  benefit of the Jury you might explain why
                that is there.   Secondly, sir, I may have misunderstood
            D   you.   If I have  I apologise.   Is it your intention to
                have the contents of each post mortem report read to the
                Jury, or will you simply receive that report in evidence?

                     THE CORONER:    Let me deal with the TV cameras.    We
                are filming the proceedings.    This is mainly for the
                benefit - I don't think you are being filmed, it is us up
                here who are being filmed - this is mainly for the benefit
                of the press because we have provided a press room for
                them so they can sit and look at the proceedings at their
                leisure.   It is not so    important here because wehave got
                plenty of space, but as    we do not know how many people are
                going to turn up at the Medico-Legal Centre and as space
                is very much more limited there, we have had to make some
                provision so that there is an adequate amount of space for
                the press.   We are actually also recording it, Ibelieve,
                but that is for our, if    you like, internal use. As we
                have got the video cameras we are just runningit on to    a
                machine, but it is not of any significance.

                     Now the second point was the post mortem reports.
                As I say, certainly for the first two days we are
                definitely going to have a pathologist present and we may
                well have a pathologist here for all of them.   However,
                my normal practice is that if I use PM reports as
                docomentary evidence 1 do not...   Some Coroners read them
                verbatim, blow by blow.   I don't.   1 extract the cause
                of death and sufficient, if you like, of their findings to
                justify it.   I do that because I think it doesn't advance
                your knowledge for me to read you two pages of detailed

            H                             - 30 -


H arph am Ltd                                                                   33
                                                             THE CORONER


                    medical pathology and it is also very upsetting for
                    everybody.

                         Are you content with that if .we dealt with it in that
                    way, Mr. Fraser?

                         MR. FRASER:   Certainly in general terms, yes, but I
                    know that in many cases the families have no questions to
                B   raise on the contents of the post mortem reports, 'bttC in
                    some cases obviously they have questions and it is nice on
                    behalf of the families to know the pathologist will be
                    available in the event matters arise on a day by day basis
                    as we go.

                          THE CORONER:   This is what I felt.   I thought on
                    balance, although I knew there were many, many families -
                    incidentally, the families have seen the PM reports, at
                    least their representatives have had them - so they know a
                    lot of this already.    However, I felt on balance it was
                    better if we had the pathologist here for most of the
                    cases..

                         MR. FRASER:    I am obliged, sir.
            D
                         HR. CALLAGHAN:    Sir, I wonder if you might re­
                    consider your decison about the circulation of the case
                    summaries.   I, and a number of my colleagues, have
                    indicated that following today we would only intend to
                    come to the particular inquests which were relevant to our
                    respective clients.    If we have not seen the case
                    summaries in advance it will not be possible for us to be
                    selective in that way.
                         THE CORONER:   I understand.   I realise that that is
                    a problem.   I think, Mr. Jones, we have got a few copies
                    of the summaries.   The reason why I did not want to
                    circulate them was because strictly speaking they are not
                    evidence.   The evidence is what we hear in this court and
                    the presentation may well be different.   However, what I
                    think I would be prepared to do, if it will assist you, I
                    don't think we have got enough for everybody, but for you
                    to be shown or to be given a set for each day and for you
                    to look at them, pick the ones which you think you need to
                    be present at and then return them to us, and read them on
                    the basis that they are substantially correct but not
                    necessarily the verbatim evidence as they may possibly be
                    modified in one or two respects.   Would that help you?

                          MR. CALLAGHAN:  That would be very helpful, sir, if
                    thay could be made available the previous day in each
                    case.

                         THE CORONER:    We will try and sort this out for the
                    afternoon.
            H                                - 31 -


H arph am Ltd
                                                                                  34
                                                                 THE CORONER



                        Is there anybody else who is in the same difficulty
                   with regard l o these summaries, amongst you?

                        MR. ISAACS:   I think that all people would welcome
                   the opportunity to have that same facility.  Whether
                   everybody decides to use it or not, of course, is a matter
                   for them.
                        THE CORONER:   I do not think we are going    h a v e . ..
                   We have not got nine copies, so we will have to be a
                   little bit selective but I think you will be able to sort
                   that out amongst yourselves.

                         HR.   ISAACS:   We will either share,    sir, or be quick
                   readers!
                         THE CORONER:   That is right.    That is another way
                   of   doing it.   I want to be helpful to you and make life
                   as   easy as I can for you as well as for everybody else.

                        Now we were going to go straight into the evidence
                   but I think we ought to rise for at least five minutes so
                   that people can stretch their legs.   Would you take the
             J)|   Jury out please?

                                         (Short adjournment)

                        MR. FRASER:    Before you begin, sir, to take
                   evidence, it has been suggested to me in the short break
                   that the Jury might feel the benefit of a short visit to
                   the ground to get a better idea of the geography, of the
                   layout of the pens.    This obviously is a matter for you,
                   sir, but it is a suggestion which has come from behind me
                   and it is an attempt to give the Jury, as it were, a
                   hands-on impression of the geography of the area they are
                   dealing with.    The plans are accurate but give no real
                   idea of scale or size or view and it is a matter that
                   perhaps you might like to consider.
                        MR. CATCIIPOLE:  Sir, obviously we would be more than
                   delighted to put in train any plans you might have.^ I
                   should say I am not sure at the moment whether Leppmgs
                   Lane is still under the control of the West Midlands
                   Police.   In that case I am sure there would be absolutely
                   no problems.
                          THE CORONER:   Perhaps during the luncheon
                     adjournment you could get in touch with whoever the
                     appropriate person is.   Find out whether this would be
                   • possible. Would you wish to do that, Jury?     Let s just
                     check.  (Yes) This is only to make it easier for you to
                     follow, you understand.    If it is possible, perhaps you
                     could find out some times.

              H                                - 32 -


L H arph am Ltd
                                                                                     35
                                                                  i



                                                                THE CORONER


                         UR. CATCHPOLL:     Presumably either today or tomorrow?

                          THE CORONER:      I think ideally we ought to do it,
                    bearing i n  mind  we  have  got a pretty tight schedule, we
                    ought to  do  it  in  the afternoon   when we have finished with
                    the neari nos.     Maybe  we  could  do it tomorrow morning at
                    nine.    I  think  strictly   speaking  the Jury may have to go
                    on their own   on  this,    •
                                              without   me.  Find out whether it
                B   would be convenient at nine o'clock tomorp©wv-'ra©i?'i»ing'%
                    Would tha t be too early for you, ladies and gentlemen?
                    If we don 't start on time we have got all these families
                    queuing, if you like, and we don't want that to happen.
                         It we do do it then I think this is a visit for tne
                    Jury and not for the press and everybody else.   It is
                    just for the Jury to go and see what the ground looks
                    like, on tne ground.
                          HU. FRASER:   Sir, I am sorry to keep rising.   The
                    other matter which I know was canvassed yesterday was the
                    question of whether or not the model that was available to
                    Lord Justice Taylor should be available to your Jury today
                    and on successive days.    It is the view of those behind
                D   ine that the presence of that model would assist the Jyry
                    and would not - and I stress that this is a matter which
                    has been canvassed - would not cause certainly those who
                    are present and are likely to be present, any undue
                    distress.    They have already seen that model, sir, and
                    they think it might assist the Jury. Again it is a matter
                    for you, sir.
                         THE COROHER:     I shall decide that over the luncheon
                    adjournment.
                          There are three other things before we start taking
                    evidence.    Dr. Forrest, we will not get to your evidence
                    this morning.    I can tell you that already.   Two, where
                    is Inspector Tope?    Gentlemen, would you see Inspector
                    Tope?    Inspector Tope would you come down so they can
                    recognise you?    That is Inspector Tope, he is a Uest
                    Midlands Police Officer, to discuss the summaries and how
                    to organise that and we will see what we can do to help
                    you on that.
                         The third thing, is to tell you about this gentleman
                    is sitting next to me.   Host of. you, of course, know in
                    fact that this gentleman here is Mr. Mervyn Jones.    He is
                    the Assistant Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police
                    Force.   He will be giving evidence in a moment so he will
                    be telling you a little bit about his involvement.    He
                    wears several hats but for the purposes of our inquiry he
                    is heading up the coronal inquiry and I want to say now
                    now exceedingly grateful I am to him and to all his team
                    for the enormous amount and help and support they have put
                H                              - 33 -



l   H arph am Ltd                                                                      36
                                                      JOHN ilEitVYN JONES




            ihto tiie inquiry and which they have given to me.  I want
            everybody to know I am most grateful to you, Mr. Jones,
            ahd, of course, to your team members as well, but
            particularly to you.
                        Now we are going to start, in fact with Mr. Jones.
           B                         JOHN MERVYN JONES Sworn

                                    Examined by THE CORONER:

              Yes Officer? - A. Sir, I am John Mervyn Jones,
           Qf Assistant Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police.
              If it is helpful to you and to your Jury, sir, I would
              like to explain the role of the West Midlands Police in
           C this investigation, the nature of the investigation
              which had led to the material which is before you today
              and in future days to come.

                Ql.   Yes, please, if you would. - A. Also the progress of
                      the investigation overall.   Sir, on the 16th of April
                      last year I was invited to head up the investigation on
           D          behalf of Mr. Geoffrey Deare, the Chief Constable of
                      the West Midlands.   This took place on the Sunday
                      immediately after the tragedy the day before.   1
                      formally took charge of the investigation on the loth
                      of April in the afternoon and my first Officer arrived
                      in Sheffield the following day.
                       The responsibilities at that stage were two-fold.   One
                       was to service the needs of your goodself and, indeed,
                       I did meet you on the Tuesday and you first gave
                       instructions to me then and we followed those on from
                       that time, gathering evidence on your behalf.
                       My other master at that time as well was Lord Justice
                       Taylor who, as most people in this room know, followed
                       on the oral hearings which commenced on the 15th of Hay
                       and concluded in July, leading later to thepublication
                       of his report at the beginning of August.
                       An enormous amount of information was gathered in those
                       early days and has'continued since, although I would
                       like to point out that the bulk of the information was
                       gathered at the time of the public hearings.

                         THE CORONER:   Can I interrupt you for one second?
                       Jury, can you hear?   (Yes)
                      . I am sorry to interrupt you in mid-statement. - A. The
                        majority of the information was actually gathered in
                        the early days of the inquiry and, indeed, was supplied
                        to Counsel servicing Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.    I
            H                                - 34 -


                                                                                   37
H arph am Ltd
                                                    JOHN MEiWYN JONES


                     would like it to be known to_you, sir, that nothing new
                     or significant has been found in our inquiries since
                     the closing of those oral hearings in July of last
                     year.
                     Lord Justice Taylor published his report on the 4th of
                     August and immediately after the Chief Constable of
                     South Yorkshire wrote to the Director of Public
                 B   Prosecutions and invited the Director of Public
                     Prosecutions to decide whether a criminal investigation
                     should follow.   The DPP did respond and we formally
                     took responsibility for the investigation into any
                     alleged crime in September of last year.
                     All those inquiries have continued since with my
 •               C   Officers, with a very large team at the beginning.
                     Now a team something in the order of fifty-odd
                     Officers.   You may well wonder why it is taking so
                     long to conclude that investigation.    Well, the
                     material we gathered for Lord Justice Taylor was
                     enormous and to give you some feel of that, the
                     situation at this moment, today, on the computer is
                     that we have had contact with something in the order of
                 D   13,081 named persons. We have deployed over 8,500
                     Officer actions, as we call them.    Indeed, we have
                     completed nearly 8,000 questionnaires.    That has
                     actually led to nearly 4,000 people making statements,
                     many of whom have actually made more than one
                     statement.   In fact there is something of the order of
                     5,000 statements available.

                 E   In addition, we have something in the order of 5,000
                     documents in our possession.

                     Now all this wealth of information, sir, has been
                     analysed in detailed.   Much of it has been processed
                     on to a computer and over the months we have actually
                     been working through that material, analysing it, in
                     order to prepare the summaries which will be heard
                 F   today and later and also to assemble the evidence for
                     the Director of Public Prosecutions.

                     Because of the bulk it has taken so long. With regard
                     to the criminal inquiry, I can advise you, sir, we have
                     in fact submitted certain papers to the Director of
                     Public Prosecutions in the last week or so and we are
                     now awaiting his directions as far as further inquires
                 G   to be followed. We have not, sir, concluded the
                     investigation at this time. When precisely the
                     criminal investigation will be concluded will depend on
                     directions that the Director of Public Prosecutions
                     will give.   It will also depend on the length of time
                     the carrying out of those further investigations will
                     take.
                 H                        - 35 -


H arp h am Ltd                                                                 38
                                JOHN HEKVYN JONES


Precisely v.’hen the decision will be announced by the
DPP is as yet unclear, sir.
As far as the overall investigation is concerned, this
has been an absolutely enormous task, from what you
say?   Of course, it is not j u s t coronal activity you
have been involved in, but fiven if you look at just the
work tnat has been done for each individual case there
has been a considerable effort, is*that "right? - A.
That is right, sir.
Could I just raise one matter about the clothing of the
deceased?   I made a decision on the Wednesday, the
19th of April of last year, to actually retain the
clothing a little bit longer in order for that clothing
to be listed, photographed and help us subsequently in
the identifications.   I know, sir, that that caused
distress amongst some families and I deeply regret that
but by way of explanation I would like to say that if
we had not taken that decision and did what we did with
it, we would not be in a position today and in the
following days to actually identify them.   So I would
like to apologise through you, sir, to the families
where distress was caused, but say there was good
reason.
Yes, thank you, I am sure that is accepted now,
although at the time I know it did cause a great deal
of anxiety.
  THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, any questions?

  HR. FRASER:    No, sir.
  THE CORONER:   Shall I just work my way along.     Any
questions of Mr. Jones?   (No)
  Mr. Jones, I am most grateful to you, as I have
already said, for the effort which has been put into
this inquiry by the West Midlands Police, and, as far
as I am concerned, the coronal inquiry, but I do know,
of course, that you have worked very hard.

  THE WITNESS:   In leaving the box, sir, could I
mention that the Director of Public Prosecutions has
actually charged me to bear in mind the restrictions,
the parameters.of the inquests?

   THE CORONER:   Yes, I am glad you have said that
 because that reminds me, I have already indicated the
 DPP's view but it is right, Mr. Jones, that...   You
 have probably seen this letter but it is addressed to
 me.   The substance of what the DPP has said is this,
 that he is happy with the evidence relating to the
                               JOHN MF.rfVYN JONES


movements on the 15th of April,       of those who
died, with evidence of identification and medical
evidence of the cause of death to be given at the^
inquest, but he has said that any requests for evidence
exceeding this restriction should be refused:

That is right? - A. That is.correct.

I think I am right in saying that-he isr^ io©king to-you
in your capacity as the Officer dealing with the DPP
inquiry to try and safeguard his interests in that
respect? - A. That is correct, sir.
  THE CORONER:   I am, of course, very aware of that
requirement and as far as I am concerned the DPI has
nothing to fear.   Thank you, Mr. Jones.

  Inspector Layton.
                MICHAEL LAYTON Called

              Examined by THE CORONER:

Inspector Layton, you have already taken the oath, that
is right? - A. Yes, sir.
If you would just introduce yourself so we know who you
are?   Give us your full name and title. - A. Yes, sir.
Michael Layton, Detective Inspector with the West
Midlands Police.
Inspector Layton, you have prepared a statement for me
giving me an outline in particular of the work of the
video/photographic section which I will listen to in a
moment, but before we do that there are just two other
points on those plans*   Can you just walk back to the
plans?   I think if you look at the gymnasium.   I
think you were actually pointing to the corner.   The
gymnasium is actually that big building? ~ A. Yes, that
was an error on my part.
  THE CORONER:   timbers of the Jury, can you look?
The gymnasium, the temporary mortuary and so on which
features as you will hear in a little while, is that
building up there. OK?    It is not diagonally across
but it is certainly not next to the terraces:

The other point I forgot to ask you, is that there were
actually four collection sites for people who had died.
Two were the hospitals which are not on that plan.
One was the gymnasium and there was an even more
temporary collection point near Leppings Lane, I
believe? - A. It was in this area here, sir.


                      - 37 -



                                                           40
                                          MICHAEL   LAYTON




   THli COrtONEil: You will hear about that in the_
 course of the evidence.   People will say the bodies
 were placed, and then were moved. There were about
 eleven people who were collected there and tnen were
 moved to the gymnasium from there.

. Now if you take me through your statement please? - A.
  Following the Hillsborough disaster, a Video and
  Photograph Section was formed as part of the major
  inquiry team.   This was to look at all aspects of
  visual evidence available from various sources.    As
  such, since the 19th of April, 1989, I have been
  engaged with a team of Officers in the collation and
  examination of such material, initially for the
  Judicial Inquiry and latterly for the Coroner's
  inques ts.
 Specifically with regard to the deceased, we have
 attempted to identify each person's position at the
 ground, where possible, before and after their deaths.
 The search for such information has been exhaustive,
 but the degree of success in achieving an accurate
 picture for each individual does vary greatly.    In
 some cases the information obtained has been very
 limited and in some instances it.has not been possible
 to confirm with any degree of certainty some of the
 identifications made.

 The first step which.was taken with regard to obtaining
 visual evidence was to obtain copies of the facial
 Polaroid photographs of the deceased, which have in
 fact already been mentioned.   These were taken after
 the disaster at the behest of the Coroner.   In
 addition the clothing of a vast majority of the
 deceased was photographed prior to being returned to
 families.   Again, as has been mentioned.   At a later
 stage a number of families did in fact assist us by
 supplying recent photographs of their loved ones taken
 prior to the disaster.
  For reference purposes each of the deceased was
  allocated a number from 1 to 95 and the Polaroid
  photographs equate to that same numbering system. The
  clothing photographs are prefixed with the letters
  "NA", followed by the number.    The photographs which
  were supplied -to us by the families are prefixed by the
  letters "RPOD".    I mention those at this stage because
  that will help to make sense of the reference numbers
  as we go through each individual inquest.
  The material is obviously potentially very distressing
  in nature and every effort has been made to limit
  exposing witnesses to it.   However, it has to be said

                       - 38 -



                                                             41
                                                          MICHAEL LAYTON



                 these photographs have proved to be vital for
                 identification purposes.
                 The next step taken was to secure the video recordings
                 of the event which were obtained on a voluntary basis
                 from a number of agencies, such as the South Yorkshire
                 Police, Sheffield Wednesday. Football Club, and in
                 particular BBC television who had several cameras at
             B   the ground to film the match.
                 The video material was copied and referenced so that
                 each individual tape had a unique identifying number
                 with prefix letters indicating the source of the
                 material.
                 In all some 71 hours of video have been examined in an
                 effort to identify the deceased.
                 The liLiC television tapes have proved to be a
                 cornerstone in this respect.     They are of very good
                 picture quality.     They are in colour and they have
                 sound recording.

             D   With the exception of a short section of film on tape,
                 the BBC material is superimposed with a display in the
                 top right hand corner of the screen, which gives the
                 accurate time that the footage was recorded.   Reading
                 from left to right as you view the display, the figure
                 on the extreme left is the hour, the next figure the
                 minutes and the next figure the seconds.   In some
                 cases the final figure shown on the extreme right
                 refers to the film frame number.
                 For ease of viewing, where identifications have been
                 made from video tapes, we have produced a video print
                 using the technical services of the Home Office
                 establishment in Sandridge.   In addition, where
                 appropriate, the prints have been, as it yere*
                 enlarged, to assist   in theactual identification.

                 The next step taken   was toobtain still photographs
                 taken at the ground   on theday of the disaster.

                 A series of some 600 still colour photographs were in
                 fact taken by South Yorkshire Police for normal
                 intelligence gathering purposes on that particular
                 date. These photographs are of good quality and have
                 again proved to be invaluable.   Superimposed on each
                 print is the date and the time that each photograph was
                 taken. This appears in the bottom right hand corner of
                 the photograph and the first figure shown is the actual
                 date. The second figure the hour and the third the
                 minutes.

             H                         - 39 -



H arp h am Ltd                                                             42
                                                                    M ICHAEL LAYTON


                           It should be pointed out that the time shown on these
                           photographs was set by the individual camera operator
                           and in each case it has been established that the time
                           set was by reference to the cameraman's own watch, so
                           as such they were not synchronised and nor are they
                           verified.     For example, on a photograph which has been
                           given the reference number PR.11.A, which was taken by
                           f-jr. Philip Rich of South Yorkshire Police, it will be
                   B       seen that the dafca^b’
                                                a s^1time, in other words, the^tiiue
                           printed on the photograph, is shown as 15.01, whilst on
                           the actual photograph there is a clock in the ground
                           which shows the time as being 15.00.
                           In addition to these photographs being available, it


    •
                           became apparent that some 50 professional photographers
                           were present at the ground and these photographers
                   C       j*gpresented local and national newspapers and in many
                           cases were freelance agencies.
                           As a result of approaches to these various sources and,
                           indeed, a small number of supporters who had also taken
                           pictures, we took possession of a further 1,800
                           photographs for use in the inquiry.
                   D       Continuity in respect of this material is not complete
                           in all cases since the person handing over the material
                           is not necessarily the person originating that
                           material.   In each case the photographs again are
                           prefixed by letters which indicate the source and a
                           unique number for each individual print.

                       E   Where identifications have been made by way of a
                           photograph, these have been reproduced -on a colour
                           photocopier. The appropriate ones have been submitted
                           to the Coroner.
                           Having collected the material referred to, the task of
                           making identifications began.
                       F   In the initial stages whilst the public part of the
                           Judicial Inquiry was being held, efforts were made to
                           make identifications purely from the deceaseds
                           clothing and the facial photographs.    At the
                           conclusions of those proceedings in July, members of
                           the Video and Photographic Section began interviewing
                           witnesses in an effort to identify deceased and to
                           obtain continuity of their movements.    To this end
                       G   over 300 South Yorkshire Police Officers have been
                           shown visual evidence during the last twelve months.
                           Where identifications of the deceased has been
                           established, but it has not been possible to find that
                           particular person on video or photograph, then a plan
                           has been completed which shows the location at which
                            the Officer was involved with that particular person.
                       H                         - A0 -


.   L H arp h am U d                                                                   43
                                        HTCHAEL LAYTON


Examples of this are where an Officer knows for certain
that he has assisted with a particular deceased but is
not shown on video, or, indeed, where the identity of a
deceased has been ascertained by using clothing or
facial photographs.
It should be stressed that.by the very nature of the
disaster the degree of certainty in respect ot each
identification does vary to a great extent from being,
absolute where there can be no question, to where in
fact there has to be a degree of doubt.
It is perhaps worth mentioning at this point, and it
has been touched on already, that to indicate locations
we devised a series of coloured dots, which were
basically a colour code, along the following Jlnes*
used a red coloured dot where we felt we had found a
particular deceased alive; a blue dot where apparently
the deceased was dead; green where in one or two cases
we felt the deceased was located both alive and
subsequently dead in the same place; and in some
instances yellow where it was an identification which
was still, and, in some cases, is still subject to
confirmation.
In addition to the South Yorkshire Police Officers, a
further 10 Police Officers from other Forces who were
off-duty at the game, have also been seen, together
with 21 members of the South Yorkshire Fire Service and
19 members of the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service,
who attended the aftermath.
Following examination of written evidence, a total of
169 civilians who stated they had had some involvement
with deceased, have also been shown visual evidence.
Again, where appropriate, plans were completed to show
locations of the deceased and these also bear a unique
reference number.
In addition to those plans I have prepared plans which
bear the reference numbers "MWJL", followed by a
number.   These particular plans are designed to show
the location of deceased where they have been found on
video or photographs.   Having said that, as a general
rule I have not prepared one where there is already a
plan available from another source which clearly shows
the same location and as such does not take the matter
further.
 Perhaps I should stress at this point - it has been
 raised already - that plans now form an important part
 of the evidence to be presented.



                      - ‘41 -


                                                          44
                                                                  MICHAEL LAYTON


                          In the initial stages a conscious decision was made to
                          try to avoid the necessity for families of the deceased
                          to view visual evidence.   However, it soon became
                          apparent, following a meeting with members of the
                          Steering Group, that certain families did wish to be
                          appraised of such information as was available to us.
                          At the same time it was evident there were a number of
                          instances where we were unlikely to find any visual
                  B       evidence without the help from a family member.

                          Following consultations with the Social Services
                          Department, a small number of families were initially
                          shown visual evidence.   In the vast majority of cases
                          this proved very positive and as a result a decision


      •
                          was eventually made to give the families in relation to
                          all ninety-five deceased the opportunity to view video
                  C       and photographs.
                          As a result of these approaches which in the main were
                          done in conjunction with the relevant social workers,
                          families have now been seen in relation to eighty of
                          the deceased.   That contact has varied from seeing
                          parents and wives, to aunts, uncles and grandmothers
                  D       and the amount of material shown has always been
                          regulated by the families themselves.

                          It has to be said, and I do stress this, that but for
                          the highest degree of co-operation from the Social
                          Services and, indeed, from the enormous help given by
                          the families, there is no doubt that in many cases we
                          would not have been able to produce any visual
                      E   evidence.
                          In respect of the remaining fifteen deceased, the
                          families have decided not to view that evidence.

                          Taking that a step further now, in all, since we
                          started, over 600 people have in fact viewed video or
                          photographs.
                      F
                          I should point out that on a small number of occasions
                          it has subsequently transpired that both police and
                          civilian witnesses have made mistaken identifications.
                          Although I would again stress they were made at the
                          time with the genuine belief that they were correct.
                          For instance, if I can perhaps quote one occasion, a
                          witness who in.fact was involved with a number of
                  G       deceased, initially felt he had identified somebody who
                          he had removed from the terraces to the pitch.    We in
                          fact found out that that particular person was carried
                          from the terraces to the rear of the West Stand. So
                          whilst he was mistaken in his initial recollection, it
                          transpired that he had in fact been involved with that

                      H                        -   42 -


_ l   H arph am Ltd                                                                 45
                                                            MICHAEL LAYTON


                    person on the terraces themselves, but not on the
                    pitch.
                    Where a subsequent re-examination of material has
                    highlighted such mistakes, these errors have been
                    corrected.
                    As a result of the continuing process of examination of
                B   visual evidence, information is now available by way of
                    video, photographs or plans along the following lines.
                    Ei^hty-two of the deceased are believed, with some
                    degree of certainty, to have been in pen 3 of the West
                    Stand Terraces.   Three of the deceased may have been
                    in pen 3, but it has not been possible at this stage to
                    confirm those identifications.   Seven of the deceased
                    are believed with some degree of certainty to have been
                    in pen 4 of the West Stand terraces.   Two of the
                    deceased may have been in pen 4, but again it has not
                    been possible to confirm those identifications.
                    At this stage in one case it has not been possible to
                    establish in which particular enclosure_that person was
                    located.   However, he has been identified in the
                D   company of another person who subsequently died, prior
                    to the disaster, and that person was known to have been
                    in pen 3.
                    As I said at the beginning, the visual evidence by no
                    means presents a total picture, but I believe that
                    based on our day to day experience over the last twelve
                    months, that at the present time it is as accurate as
                    it is possible to be.
                    May I just ask you one or two supplementary questions?
                    First of all, I cannot remember whether I asked you at
                    the beginning, but just in case I didn't, you were one
                    of the Officers who took the oath earlier? - A. I was,
                    sir, yes.
                    I am not going to ask you that every time you appear
                    because you will be appearing frequently.   I just
                    wanted it confirmed once.
                    The second thing is, it is right that everybody who
                    viewed visual evidence, be they family, social workers,
                    Police Officers or otherwise, were co-operative in
                    assisting you?- - A. Very much, sir, yes.

                    With regard to the misidentifications, if we can just
                    dispose with that aspect of the matter.   Firstly, I
                    think in your presentations to me you have discounted
                    the misidentifications, that is right? - A. That is
                    right, sir.   The evidence that will be presented on

                H                         - 43 -



l   H srph sm Ltd                                                             46
                                         [|IC1IAEL LAYTON


each individual inquest will be that which we feel is
accurate.
At the present time? - A. To the best of our abilities,
yes.
Secondly, because some people might feel, how can it be


quite a        J;.,    little bit the problems of
identification with the visual evidence which people
had? - A. Although the video evidence we have is of
      1    -lifu in nlaces, it does not give a complete
picture in the sense there is a lengthy film which
s h o w s the entire terraces for any particular length of
t-i-ie     As such it is very often snatches of an area
 that*we are looking at and in some cases, for literally
seconds.
Uhere we are looking at photographs, very often those
nhotoeraphs only show a partial view of the person we
believe is one of the deceased. Sometimes they are in
black and white so they don’t assist in terms of colour
of clothing and very often they don t g i v e n an actual
orecise, clear picture.   Very often you only see
clothing and not facially, and sometimes vice_,vers|.
So therl is no complete set of video ot photographs
wSich Sill      us and <a) to <b) for each individual.

 In addition to that, of course, it was a very stressful
 occasion for all the people who were there? - A. That
 is richt, sir.   I can say on average tnat in each
 individual case for those people we saw, we saw them
 for a minimum of two hours.    In some cases up to a
 maximum of six.
 Uhinh leads me to the next question.   When we are
 talking about you seeing 600 people, this was a very
 lengthy - when I say "you" I mean you and your team - a
 very lengthy procedure? ~ A. Very lengthy, sir,
 Very many hours.   Indeed, at least 1200 from what you
 say and possibly more, was spent on just
 families or other people who viewed? - A. That is
 correct, sir.
 That is quite apart from the time which you and your
 team spend... - A. Researching and...
 The material.   In fact, if I can summarise it, you
 said 71 hours of video film? - A. That is correct, sir,



                        - 44

                                                             47
                                              MICHAEL LAYTON


And about, what, 2,400 photographs altogether? - A.
That is correct.
Would 1 be right in thinking that in many, many cases
video film was viewed over and over again to try and
form a picture of what you were seeing? - A. Very much,
sir, yes.
  THE CORONER:       Hr. Fraser?

  tiR. FRASER:      No, thank you, sir.
            Cross-Examined by HR.    I SA AC S :

Inspector, have efforts been made to trace the
movements of the deceased from the time before they
actually went on to the terraces? - A. There is a
limited amount of visual material available of the
outside of the ground at the Leppings Lane end and
where we have been able to locate people on that video
then that is included in the summaries.

So where the information is available to show that a
particular deceased arrived at the turnstile, for
example, at a certain time, moved in through the ground
and then to the position they were at on the terracing,
that would be in the summaries that are presented? - A.
Yes.   It may in fact be contained in statements as
opposed to visual evidence.   I can only refer to
visual evidence at this stage but where we have found
visual evidence that is included.

  Hil. ISAACS:      Thank you.
                 Re-Examined by THE CORONER:
As far as I can remember there is no visual evidence of
anybody within what I call the concourse area, that is,
between the turnstile and the entrance to the tunnel,
is that right? - A. I can think of just one instance,
sir. The camera which covers that particular area is
black and white and of very particular poor quality.
In one instance only that I can recall at the moment, a
Police Officer identified himself carrying one of the
deceased after the event, but it was of very poor
quality.

Which reminds me that we did not even mention the
tunnel when we were talking to the Jury. When you
finish your evidence I am just going to get you to show
that to them.
  THE CORONER:   Any other questions?   No.   Inspector
Layton, thank you very much indeed.   Perhaps you could

                         - 45 -



                                                               48
                                                                   MICHAEL LAYTON


                         just walk back to our plan. I forgot the tunnel, I am
                         sorry.   It is terribly important but I forgot.

                           To get from the turnstiles or gate C on to the
                         terraces - there are several ways on to the terraces
                         but the one that features for all practical purposes in
                         this inquiry is a central tunnel which is being pointed
                         out now.   Then on the other plan it is shown there,
                 B       exiting, so to speak.   You will ssfit it is, split into
                         two so'you can get into enclosure 3 or enclosure 4,
                         depending which side of the tunnel you are coming down.
                         The tunnel has got a bit of a slope, quite a bit of a
                         slop towards the end in fact.   One in six, I believe.



    •
                           Thank you, Inspector.

                 C         I have already fallen down on the job and overshot
                         lunch hour.   Before we adjourn there is just one other
                         thing I want to do.   When I opened the inquests last
                         April I said I was admitting as documentary evidence a
                         letter from the South Yorkshire Police confirming that
                         they had no objection to my releasing the bodies.
                         This was a technicality at the time which I felt I had
                 D       to do and in fact they wrote to me on the 18th of April
                         and I am reading it now so that it is formally on the
                         record and that applies to everybpdy*   It says:

                           "I refer to your recent conversation with
                           Superintendent Sleath concerning the release of the
                           deceased persons from the Hillsborough incident to
                           their respective next of kin following the
                 E         adjournment of the inquest.

                           After consultation with Professor Usher I have no
                           objection to this course of action.

                           Yours sincerely."
                         It is signed by the Deputy Chief Constable.
                     F
                           It is purely for the record, and for you, Members of
                         the Jury, to know that was done.
                           Now we are going    to adjourn.   Would it be asking too
                         much if we said we    would start at quarter past two?
                         That is shortening    your lunch hour by a little bit, by
                         ten minutes. . Can    you manage that?   (Yes)
                 G
                           After lunch we are going to listen to Dr. Forrest who
                         is going to deal with alcohol.    Mr. Wardrobe, who is
                         going to tell us a little bit about the set-up at the
                         hospital.   Professor Usher who is going to give us a
                         short lecture on pathology.    Then we are going to deal

                 H                               - 46 -



_ l H arp h am Ltd                                                                    49
                                                               MICHAEL LAYTON


                       with two cases.    All right?   Thank you.    Ladies and
                       gentlemen, remember, don't talk to anybody.
                                      (Luncheon adjournment)



               B




•              C




               D




               £




                   F




               G




               H                             -   47   -




L H arp h am Ltd
 HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
              (WEST D I S T R I C T )



      INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

   VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

             STADIUM DISASTER




          PRELIMINARY PROCEEDINGS




                  Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM. BS, MRCGP.


          (Her Maiestv's Coroner)




                    At

            The Memorial Hall,
                City Hall,
                Sheffield.

                     On

        Wednesday, 18th April, 1990.




          TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

             (AFTERNOON SESSION)



    From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
         Official Shorthand Writers,
     55, Queen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX
                                    APPEARANCES

    Wednesday. 18th April.   1990

    MR. D. FRASER                      Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
    MR.    WOODS                       Steering Committee

    MR. S. SMITH                       Medical and Dental Union of
                                       Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                                       Forrest)

    MR.   CALLAGHAN                   Trent Regional Health Authority and
                                      South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                                      Ambulance Service

    MR.   GREGORY                      Sheffield City Council

^   MISS THORPE                        Eastwood & Partners

    MS. A. ADDLEMAN                   Police Federation of England and
                                      Wales

    MR. P. ISACCS                     Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

    MISS B. NORCLIFFE                  Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
    MR. P. METCALF                     Constabulary

    MR. S. CATCHPOLE                   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
    MR.   JACKSON
                         IN D E X   TO T R A N S C R IP T




STATEMENT BY THE CORONER


     DR. A .R .M . FORREST Affirms

          By The Coroner
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Fraser



  DR. J. WARDROPE Sworu
          By The Coroner
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Fraser
          Further by The Coroner


     PROF. A. USHER Sworn

          By The Coroner
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Fraser


PROCEDURAL MATTERS
                                       PRELIMINARY PROCEEDINGS (Continued)

                                               (AFTERNOON SESSION) '

                             MR. FRASER:   Sir, I apologise for this, but over the
                        luncheon adjournment it has been specifically asked of me to ask
                        you if you would expound a little, if you are able so to do, upor
                        the reasons for your order -that ethanol analysis should be taken
                        from each of the deceased, bearing in mind that some pf.the
                B       deceased were very young.  I have no wish for you to deal
                        specifically with any deceased at this stage, but the decision tc
                        order an analysis to be undertaken has apparently caused some
                        concern.  Can I ask you to expound upon that, sir?

                             THE CORONER:    Not really, I think would be the answer to
                        your question.   I think I will just say these two things, that
    •           C       when on the evening of the 15th that I knew there were 94 people
                        who had died, because at that time there were only 94, it is t r m
                        that I do remember I saw somebody who was very young, but at thai
                        time I knew no ages when I first dealt with the matter, except
                        from looking at the people, that I realised the vast majority
                        were'in fact extremely young. So I did not really apply my mind
                        to the question and say, "How old is this p e r s o n ? Do I
                        specifically want blood alcohol or not?". Once I had made up my
                D       mind that we wanted alcohol levels done, I said we were doing
                        them for all, irrespective of any other considerations, and I die
                        not have lists prepared to see how old somebody was.       If I had
                        wanted to do that of course I could have done it, and may be you
                        might say I should have done it, but at that time my primary
                        concern was to arrange for the post mortems to be done as quickly
                        as possible.   In fact, 70 were done on the Sunday - we don’t
                        normally work on a Sunday, asyou will I am sure appreciate -
                    £   because I perceived it as themost important and vital matter was
                        to try and put myself into a position where the Inquests could b<
                        opened.

                             Secondly, I did not know at that time whether or not alcoho:
                        would be relevant or otherwise.  It might have been. The levels
                        might have been such that the cause of death might have been due
                        to that.  I had no idea. They might all have been negative.    I
                    F   did not know that either. So in that situation, and if I equate
                        this with a normal RTA, in other words, a situation where alcoho:
                        might have played a part, I would have asked for it in those
                        circumstances and 2 asked for it in these.

                             Thirdly, it is true that   some of the people turned out to b<
                        very young, but even the very young ones, as we all know from
                        experience, and I am not talking about these deceased, but all
                G       young people, youth these days is no guarantee that alcohol is
                        not ingested.  So it would have been a little bit foolish of me
                        to say, "I will only do alcohols of those over 18", because
                        anybody under 18 by definition does not drink.   I know very
                        well that is not so. So I think if I had once taken the
                        decision to do alcohol levels then I am afraid that decision
                        would apply to everybody in that situation.
                H
                             There is no harm in it, furthermore, because if I have done


.   H arph am Ltd                                       i                       -     54
                    blood alcohol for somebody who.was, say, 14, and it turns out
                 to be negative, that merely confirms what one ought to expect.
                 It does not make them any more alcoholic or less alcoholic b>
                 measuring the level, and I felt it was a justifiable
                 i n v e s tigation, given where it happened and all the circumstances
                 surrounding it that I knew at the time.

                      So more than that I do not think I can say.        There is
                 nothing I can say and I don't think I want to say any more
             B   either.  I hope that satisfies your clients   because I want them
                 to be as satisfied as I can make them.  We could have done dozens
                 of other things.  We could have checked for d r u g s . We could have
                 checked all kinds of things.  We did not do that because I could
                 not see any good reason for doing it and so I didn't, but the
                 alcohol level was something which sprung to mind as something
                 ^hich could possibly be relevant.  Whether it was or not is a
                 natter which we will be sorting out at the I n q u e s t s ..

                      MR. FRASER:    I am grateful for that, sir.

                       MR. CATCHPOLE:    Sir, may it be an appropriatemoment to
                 discuss the visit tomorrow? Unfortunately, we have not been able
                 to contact Mr. Mackrell, but we are assured that someone at the
                 :lub will be there to give access to the Leppings Lane terraces
             D   at 9 o'clock tomorrow, and   we will be trying to get hold of Mr.
                 'lackrell this evening just  tomake sure he is there as well
                 should you require his presence.

                 .      THE CORONER:    Thank you very much indeed. What I think,
                 Ladies and gentlemen of the Jury, we will do, is we want you to
                 neet here at quarter-to-9.       Iknow that is quarter-of-an-hour
                 sarlier than what I said.       We will make arrangements, hopefully,
                 .or transport to be available for you.        You, Sergeant
                 Sriffiths,, must go with the Jury, and your task is to look
                 after them and shepherd them because for technical reasons, and
                 [ d o n 't need to explain that to y o u , we have to keep you apart
                 from witnesses and everybody else. So we want you to go round
                 as a group with you responsible for seeing they .are kept
                 separate from club people and everybody else, including
                 relatives and me, for that matter.

                       We will ask Inspector Tope - where is he; this poor man is
                 /ery important to me - but Inspector Tope will also accompany you
                 Decause he he can find his way around the ground a little bit
                 setter than Sergeant Griffiths who does not actually know the
                 ground because he comes from West Midlands.   So does he but he
                 las been here for longer.   He will guide you through the gates,
                 Lf you like, and through the doors, but it is not his job to give
                 svidence or to explain things to you. The purpose of the visit
                 Is simply for you to get the feel for the size and the fact that
                 the tunnel slopes.   It is difficult for you to see on the model.
                 -Je have now brought the model in as you can see.  If you look at
                 this model and the ground tomorrow you will have it clearly in
                 /our mind.

             H        Is it intended or the wish of legal representatives to be
                 ^resent at this viewing?


H arp h am Ltd
                                                                                         55
                                                                DR.   A.R.M-   FORREST



                      MR FRASER:    Sir, for mv part I have had the advantage of a
                 visit previously.  I have no desire to go tomorrow morning, but
                 thank you for the invitation.
                      MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, obviously given that Mr. Mackrell or
                 any of the other officers won't be having contact with the
                 witnesses, I have no desire to go either.
                       THE CORONER:             I am glad about that, because I think that is
             B the   most satisfactory way of doing it/              Mr*. Jones-a«d I will
                 come along but we won’t walk around with you.              We will be well
                 apart so to speak, and we are just watching him watching you.
                 So q u a r t e r - t o - 9 here.  Please be on time for the reason I have
                 already told you. The visit will be short, because again we are
                 pushed for time, but it is really just to reinforce the evidence
                 you have heard about the layout of the place.              All right.   Is
                 that reasonably clear? I think you have already seen Inspector
                  ope. That is th® man to see if you need to sort that out.

                        Was there anything else I have promised to deal with?

                      MR. FRASER:   Not for the time being, sir          but I am sure I
                 will think of something.

             D        THE CORONER:      Right.    I think we will listen to Dr. Forrest
                 next.
                              DR. ALEXANDER ROBERT WALKER FORREST Affirms

                                              Bv THE CORONER:

                 Q    Dr. Forrest, could you please give me your full names, first
                      of all? - A. Alexander Robert Walker Forrest, sir.

                 0. And your position at the Royal Hallamshire? - A. I am
                    a Consultant Chemical Pathologist to Sheffield Health
                    Authority based at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

                 q   . Dr. Forrest, can you tell me a little bit about your
                      qualifications? - A. Yes, sir.  I am a Chartered Chemist and a
                      Registered Medical Practitioner, and my qualifications include
                      the Degrees of Bachelor of Science with Honours in
                      Pharmacology, Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery,
                      the Diploma in Obstetrics of the Royal College of
                      Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, Mastership in Clinical
                      Biochemistry, I am a Fellow the Royal Society of Chemistry and
                      a Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, and
                      a Member of the Royal College of Pathologists.

                 Q. Apart from doing the clinical pathology for the Royal
                    Hallamshire Hospital you do a great deal of forensic
                    pathology? - A. I am a Lecturer in Forensic Toxicology in the
                    Department of Forensic Pathology at Sheffield University,
                    sir.
                  0. Following the incident of 15th April, you received, I think,
                     94 separate and distinct specimens? - A. Yes, sir.  They were


H arp h am U d                                        3                                     56
                                                            DR.   A. R- . W-   FORREST



                     brought to me by Sergeant John Turner or a gentleman who
                     identified hiniself to me as Sergeant John Turner of the South
                     Yorkshire Police.

                   Q. And these were brought to you on the morning of the 18th
                      April.  Is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

                   0. And the samples, how were-they presented to you? - A. They
                      each came in a separate container in a plastic bag.     The
              B       container was one of this general variety-, a*td .they were _ ,■
                      identified with names and numbers.  There was also a container
                      of this variety which contained two tablets which had been
                      found in the body of one of the deceased.
                                                                            Yes
                   Q, And you then proceeded to analyse these samples? - A.
                      sir.

                   Q. Could you, before we deal with the results of your analysis,
                      briefly explain how one analyses, particularly of course for
                      blood alcohol? - A. Yes, sir.  The first thing to do, of
                      course, is to check that you have got the right sample taken
                      from the right person at the right time, and that is true in
                      clinical analyses as well as forensic analyses.  For that, of
                      course, we relied on the information we were given and the
              D       information that was written on the sample containers.

                           The principle of the analysis that we use is exactly the
                      same as that used by the Home Office Forensic Science service
                      when they are analysing blood samples for alcohol in road
                      traffic cases. How it works is that we use a standard
                      containing alcohol, and by ’’alcohol" in this context I mean
                      ethanol, which is the main alcohol present in alcoholic
                      beverages, at a concentration of 200 mg of alcohol per 100 ml
                      of fluid. That is used as a standard to calibrate the assay.

                           What we do is we take a small sample of the blood, 200
                      microlitres in volume. That is about the equivalent of a
                      large drop.  It is put together with what is called an
                      internal standard which is in fact another alcohol,
                      N-propenol, into a glass vial, which is then sealed, and the
                      whole lot is mixed gently. We then allow the vial to reach a
                      temperature of 65 degrees in a thermostatically controlled
                      block for 20 minutes, and during this time vapour from the
                      sample equilibrates inside the vial. So you have got air
                      which is, if you like, not saturated but which contains
                      alcohol vapour both derived from the sample and from the
                      N-propenol internal standard which has been added.

                             We then take a gas-tight syringe and aspirate 2 ml of air
                       from the vial and inject it into an instrument called a
                       gaschromatograph.   This is an instrument which essentially
                       consists of an oven with a long glass tube inside it. The
                       long glass tube is packed with material which to some extent
                       binds alcohol, but it binds different alcohols in different
                       ways.   Flowing through the tube is a stream of hydrogen.   The
               H       effect of this is that the two different alcohols and various
                       other volatile components, any other volatile components that


                                                    A
L H arp h am Ltd                                                                         57
                                          DR.   A.R.W.   FORREST



  ,may be present in the sample of air that is injected into the
   instrument are swept along the glass tube and are separated
   out at different rates so they arrive at the other end of the
   tube at different times.
       They are then burned in a flame and you can measure the
  electrical conductivity of that flame and produce an
  electrical signal.  That is then amplified and fed into a
  chart recorder which produces a series of peaks.   From the
  ratio of the height of the ethanol peak from 'that sample of
  air to the height of the peak produced by the N-propenol
  internal standard in comparison to the known standard that
  one has injected both before and after the run, one can
  calculate the amount of ethanol that there is in any
  particular sample. The assay is reliable and it is precise.

Q. I d o n ’t have to ask you the next question, but I will.   You
   are quite satisfied that your assays of these alcohols are as
   accurate as one would normally expect them to be? - A. In
   normal circumstances, yes.     In fact our assay is intrinsically
   slightly less precise than that used by the Home Office
   Forensic Science Laboratory.     We achieve a coefficient of
   variation in our assays of 2.8%.     That is, there is a
   variance, if you like, with individual samples when they are
   injected over and over again of something like 2.8%.      The
   target for the Home Office Laboratories is, I understand, 2%.
   They use automated equipment for their dilutions and
   injections.     We do it manually.  We are not as well funded as
   they are.
q. Yes.  But within that limitation of 2.8% the assay is
   accurate? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. The little yellow top bottles in which the assays arrive are
   plastic containers, are they? - A. Yes.

Q. That presents a theoretical problem, does it not? - A. These
   containers are perfectly adequate.   Perhaps I could just
   explain what they are. They contain two additional chemicals.
   They contain dried sodium fluoride, potassium fluoride and
   oxalate,  The idea of the oxalate is to keep the blood
   fluid. It Removes the calcium from solution and stops the
   clotting process taking place. The fluoride present is
   designed to stop yeast and other micro-organisms actually
   producing alcohol within the sample.   For that purpose
   these are quite adequate. The vials which the Home Office
   Laboratory uses are for blood alcohol samples in road
   traffic cases and are actually glass with a rubber septum
   on the top rather than like this. The problem with these
   samples is that every time you open the top and put it
   back on again you potentially lose a certain amount of
   alcohol from them. So it makes testing over and over
   again slightly problematical in that there can be a
   decrease in the amount of alcohol in the sample if you do
   it.

0. That is really the point I am coming to.      The problem with


                                 5                                  58
                                                                DR,   A.R.W.   FORREST



                         these as I understand it is not that if you repeated the test
                         that the alcohol levels would have gone up but that the
                         alcohol levels might have gone down because you would have
                         lost some when you open the bottle.  Is that right? - A. Yes,
                         sir, that is correct.
                     3   And the Home Office sample bottles which you are referring to,
                         are they bottles which  are used presumably when drivers are
                         being tested for blood  alcohol levels, and you certainly don t
                B        want to lose any? - A. Yes.
                     3   So if one puts blood into that bottle and tests it the level
                         of alcohol if anything will be lower than it might have been
                         if it had been in a sealed road traffic offence bottle.-' " A .
                         Yes sir.   I should say that these bottles if they are keptm
                         a refrigerator, if the samples in them are kept in a
                         refrigerator, are quite reliable, and you do get some
                         diminution in the alcohol content over a period of several
                         months, but you certainly don't get an increase.

                     2 . That is right.  So if we were to take all these bottles out of
                         your fridge now and retest them we might well get l°wer
                         levels, but we should not get any higher ones, within 2.9. -
                         A. I think it is very unlikely that you would find any higher
                 D       levels.  I have one example from a recent case which perhaps I
                         won’t identify because it is still to appear before the
                         criminal courts, where over a period of eight months in a
                         container similar to this a blood alcohol sample went from 109
                         mg/100 ml blood to 77 mg/100 ml of blood.

                     3. So it was a fall? - A. Yes, sir.
                     Q. As far as you are concerned it makes no difference whether the
                        blood is put straight into that little yellow top bottle or
                        goes into one of the larger ones which I think are known as
                        universal containers and then decanted? Is that right? - A.
                        Yes.  In general one prefers as little sample manipulation as
                        possible, but provided it is done by one person at one time
                        with adequate controls there is usually little problem.

                     Q. Are you aware that the practice of pathologists varies as to
                        how they take the blood alcohol sample? - A. Indeed it does,
                        sir.
                     Q. Some put it straight into the container and others decant from
                        a universal container? - A. Yes, sir.

                     Q. And I presume”you d o n ’t know the reason why they might be
                        doing that? - A. I think it is usually a matter of
                        convenience.  If, for example, one is looking at circumstances
                        such as an aircraft crash where the body has been disrupted
                        and there are various problems then it would usually be direct
                        into a primary sample container, and one would take samples
                        from different parts of the body.

                 H   Q. Now, I want to turn to another aspect of the matter which is
                        endogenous manufacture of alcohol in deceased persons. Can


_ l H arp h am Ltd
                                                                                         59
                                      DR.   A.R.M.   FORREST



you just help me a little bit.about that, both the occurrence,
the risk and prevention? - A. Yes, sir.   First of all, it is
perfectly correct to say that if a body is left lying for a
significant period of time, particularly at high temperature
then there will be production of alcohol within that body. The
classical case is, of course, the Moorgate Tube Disaster,
where the driver’s body was not retrieved for several days
after the incident.  There- were high temperatures in the
tunnel, and there was significant argument at the Inquiry and
I believe the Inquest as to the nature of that alcohol,
whether it was as a result of endogenous generation of alcohol
or as a result of alcohol consumption before the incident.

     What happens when death takes place is that first of all
the immune systems of the body do not instantly die or cease
functioning at the time of death.  There is some residual
ability of the body which persists for a variable length of
time to resist infection.  But micro-organisms usually from
within the gut eventually spread through the lymphatics and
into the bloodstream, and some of those micro-organisms, in
particular yeasts, will be micro-organisms which are
capable of fermenting the sugar in the blood to form
alcohol. There are also some other micro-organisms present
which can produce other volatile compounds, butyric acids,
fusile alcohol, other higher alcohols.
     First of all, it certainly does not happen within four
hours of death in a temperate climate.  It probably does not
happen within 12 or even 24 hours of death in a temperate
climate, particularly if the bodies have been stored in a cool
and ideally in a refrigerated environment. Where you tend to
see this in this country is where bodies have been some time
before they have been found, particularly in summer.  There
are usually obvious signs of putrefaction on the body where
this is a problem, and there are various techniques which
pathologists can use to attempt to get samples that give
meaningful results.
     In this particular case I understand that the bodies were
cooled fairly rapidly after death, and my recollection is that
the weather was not particularly hot on the day in question,
and I was informed by Sergeant Turner that these samples were
in fact refrigerated between being taken and being delivered
to me.
  There is a final point. On the analysis, if endogenous
fermentation has taken place, when one looks at the gas
chromatrography pattern there are virtually always peaks
present due to other volatiles and in particular higher
alcohols and butyric acid and other fatty acid
derivatives formed by other bacteria. Now while some
other peaks were seen in these samples other than ethyl
alcohol which you may ask me about later, there were no
signs whatsoever that any of the higher alcohols which
I would expect to be associated with post mortem
endogenous production of alcohol present in any of the
chromatographic peaks that I saw.
                                                                                         1




                                                          DR   A.R.W.   FORREST




                    The day in question in fact was a sunny day, I believe, and
                    the bodies were removed from the temporary mortuary to the
                    Medico-Legal Centre any time - say the last body was about 6
                    o'clock in the morning or may be a little bit earlier than
                    that.  So that would give you what, about 12 to 15 hours from
                    the time of the incident at 3 until 6 in the morning.  Does
                    that alter - assuming all bodies were removed at that point m
                    time - does that alter your answer in any way? - A. No, sir.
              B
                    In fact, what vou are saying is if there was endogenous
                    production you would have expected to find the peaks of the
                    high alcohols? - A. I would have seen the peaks of the higher
                    alcohol and I would have commented on as such in my report.

                    That bringsus conveniently at this stage to the other peaks
                    which you mentioned which were acetaldehyde acetone? - A. Yes,
                    sir. When one does blood alcohol analysis by this technique
                    one seems two major peaks in the chromatographic and the
                    chromatogram in the tracing that the instrument produces.  One
                    is the N-Propenol alcohol that one has added as the internal
                    standard and the other is an ethanol peak, if indeed there is
                    any ethanol present in the blood sample.  Occasionally there
                    are tiny little peaks, and for example, if a person has been
              D     fasting or if a person has been in diabetic ketoacidosis,
                    diabetic coma, before the blood sample has been taken, one may
                    see a very large acetone peak, and this is quite clearly
                    differentiatable from ethyl alcohol.
                         Rather less common is a peak due to acetaldehyde which is
                    an oxidation product of alcohol. Such peaks were present in
                    many of the samples. The nature of these additional peaks was
                    confirmed by repeating certain samples on a different gas
                    chromatographic system which gives different relative
                    retention times to the internal standard one is using than
                    does the standard column that we use in alcohol analysis. The
                    acetaldehyde peaks were in any significant amount virtually
                    only present in those samples which contained alcohol.
                    However, many of the acetone peaks present were present
                    whether or not there was any ethyl alcohol, ethanol, detected
                    in the samples.
                  4>. If we can just stick to the acetone for a moment, I think you
                      said that acetone is something which you would expect to find
                      say in a person who was fasting? - A. Yes, sir.

                     Would that mean that it is a product - perhaps you should tell
                     me why that should be? - A. What happens, when one is fasting
                     one is living off one’s fat, quite literally.  There is only
                     enough sugar in the body or glycogen in the body to keep one
                     going for a very few minutes.  Very rapidly one converts on to
                     running off fat. and when fat breaks down, and that is the
                     only source of fuel that the body has, it does not use it
                     particularly efficiently and it produces several compounds
                     which are known by the generic term, ketone bodies. One of
              H      these ketone bodies is in fact acetone, and this acetone can
                     appear in the breath, and even with people who are perhaps


_ H srph sm Ltd                                   8
                                                                                    61
                                                             DR.   A. R- W.   FORREST



                       overdoing a Cambridge diet or something like that will know
                       the-smell that this can produce on people's breath, although
                       if a Cambridge diet is used properly it should not produce
                       acetone on the breath.  This acetone is associated with the
                       body taking its energy by breaking down its fat stores.

                            Under circumstances of extreme stress and extreme anoxia
                       there is evidence also that the body can b r e a k down fat and
                       usl tha? as a source of fuel for a very limited period-of
            B          time   I should add that it is anima- experiment by and large.—
                       My belief is that this may be the source of the acetone in
                       these particular samples.
                 b     It was an unusual finding when measuring blood alcohol? - A.
                       it is not a particularly unusual finding.   One quite often,
                       when as you say. a whole variety of cases, you instruct me to
                       example blood samples for alcohol, it is not unco“ ° 2 _ ! ? ? L
                       when is doing that that one notices the presence.of aoetone
                       perhaps in people   who have not been    eating before they die
                       under different circumstances,   and I could quote specific
                       cases if you wish me to.
                 13.   no, I don't think   so. So that from a scientific point of view
                       is an interesting   observation? - A.   It is en interesting
            D          observation and it is perhaps one that should be followed up.

                 5. Does it make any difference to your assessment of the alcohol
                    levels which you found? - A. None whatsoever, sir.

                 3.    Can we now come to the acetaldehyde, which I think you said
                       was an oxidative product? - A. Yes, sir. The normal mechanism
                       bv which the body breaks down alcohol is by converting it with
                       an enzyme called alcohol dehydrogenase to acetaldehyde, which
                       is then handled by the body in a variety of ways-
                       Acetaldehyde can also be formed in samples collected at pos
                       mortem.   The reason for this is that haemoglobin, when it
                       breaks down, it can actually oxidise alcohol to a small
                       extent, and in so doing produce acetaldehyde.   So the question
                       I had to ask myself when we found these acetaldehyde peaks in
                       the sample, was. was this acetaldehyde present because t“e
                       acetaldehyde was present in the person’s body at or about the
                       time of death, or was it a product of post mortem change.
                       Now. I should say that we don’t normally see large
                       acetaldehyde peaks of the size that we saw. Quite often one
                       sees a tiny little trace of a peak in a position where one
                       would expect acetaldehyde to be, but one does not see peaks of
                        the magnitude that we saw in these cases.

                             On the balance of probabilities I feel that the
                        acetaldehyde present is likely to be endogenous, formed as a
                        product in most cases of alcohol breakdown and for some reason
                        which perhaps we could go into it has not proceeded beyond
                        acetaldehyde.   Normally acetaldehyde does not hang around for
                        very long.   It is quite nasty stuff in the body, and the body
                        has got very efficient mechanisms for removing it under most
             H          circumstances.



H arp h am Ltd                                                                          62
                                                             DR.   A. R. W.   FORREST



                 p. But presumably it would not remove it at the point of death.
                    A. No, sir, but plenty of people die with alcohol on board,
                    and one does not often see large acetaldehyde peaks.

                      Do you have an explanation for it, or not yet, because it is
                      an unusual finding? - A. It is unusual.   Because you asked me
                      very specifically not to discuss these results with anyone I
                      have not been able to share these findings with colleagues in
                      the scientific and medical community.   So I have not had the
            B         opportunity of discussing that with colleagues.   My own view-
                      is that it is possible that in situations of extreme, hypoxia,
                      and again there is perhaps experimental evidence to support
                      this that there may be inhibition which in the metabolic
                      processes which prevent alcohol from going further down the
                      metabolic pathway to acetaldehyde - from acetaldehyde further
                      down the pathway.
                 3    Would the fact that you found acetaldehyde have any bearing on
                      your levels of alcohol? - A. It might suggest that the true
                      level of alcohol at the time of death, it is generated as a
                      result of artefact in the test tubes after the sample has been
                      collected was rather higher, but it would be less than 1«.

                      So it would not enhance the level of alcohol that you found?
            D         The acetaldehyde does not enhance the level of alcohol. - A.
                      No, sir.
                      And the differences it might make is marginal? - A. Very
                      small indeed.
                      I think we have dealt more or less with the peripherals of the
                      findings.  Can we now turn then to your statement of 20th
                      April. - A. Yes, sir.
                      On it you have listed the names of cases. There are, I think,
                      three or four where there are some errors, so as we get to
                      them in names may be we will pause. - A. Yes, sir. The names
                      in the statement are in fact the names on the documentation I
                      was given.
                 G>   Yes, I accept that. What I am saying is we may want to
                      correct them as we go along. If we just work our way through
                      this statement.
                           THE CORONER:        Before I do, gentlemen and ladies, you
                      will   see some of the names are in error in the sense that the
                      spellings may be a little bit wrong.       For example. No. 2 it
                      says "Inga” , "I-N-G-A” , whereas we know it is now spelled
                      "I-N-g -e -R” • I d o n ’t propose to stop every time we get that
                      sort of error because we know who we are talking about. Are
                      you content with that? So long as we are clear who we are ---

                            MR. FRASER:    Sir, you mention a list.  I don’t know
                       whether the list has been circulated.  I certainly have not
                       seen it.

                            THE CORONER:   You have not seen i t , but you know what


H arp h am Ltd                                      10                                  63
                                       DR.   A.R.M.   FORREST



the results are?

     MR. FRASER:   Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Nobody has seen Dr. Forrest's statement as
it is. That is the reason why we are dealing with his
evidence now because it is more convenient to deal with his
evidence together rather than separately for each individual:

If you start with No. 1. - A. Yes, sir.  No. 1 was identified
as Howard, Thomas Anthony, with the number ACJ 8, and I found
a blood alcohol concentration of 20mg alcohol/lOOml blood.

Stop.  I don't think you need give me the identification
letters. - A. Sample No. 2 was Shah, Inger, and no alcohol was
detected.

That in fact was the lady ca^ed, as we know now, Xnger Shah.
Her name was incorrectly noted at the time when these samples
were sent to you. Right. - A. Sample No. 3 was from
Harrison. Gary, and no alcohol was detected in the sample.

     Sample No. A was from Rimmer, David, and the alcohol
concentration present was less than lOmg/lOOml of blood.

Can we just stop for one minute at these "less than 10s” ,
because there are several of these. - A. Yes, sir.

What is the difference between those and "none detected” ,
apart from the obvious answers? - A. Well, there is a trace
of alcohol, and I would not wish to attempt to accurately
quantitate a figure of less than lOmg/lOOml, but there is some
alcohol there;  a very small amount;  the sort of thing....

Would it be fair to say that it is negligible? - A. It is
negligible.  It is the sort of thing that one might get if one
had had a couple of pints the night before.

Thank you.   Press on. - A. Ashcroft, Colin Mark, none
detected.

     Whelan, Ian, none detected.

     Hennessy, James R, 35mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

     Hawley, David, none detected.

     Aspinall,' James Gary, none detected.

     Brown, David S, 15mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

     Harrison, Peter Andrew, 21mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

     Hamilton, Roy, 118mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

     Wafer. Colin, none detected.
                                                                   DR.   A.R.W.   FORREST



                                 Church, Gary, none detected.

                                 Rimmer, Carl William, I44mg of alcohol/lOOmg of blood.

                                 Murray, Paul, none detected.

                                Devonside, Christopher Berry, 32mg of alcohol/100 ml of
                           blood.
                     B     If you can just pause there, in fact that is "Berpy" spelled
                           with an "E”? - A. Yes, sir.
                           In fact it should be spelled with an "A” .     It is Christopher
                           Barry.
                                MR. DEVONSIDE:     It should be spelled with an "O’', with
                           respect, sir.
                                  THE CORONER:   It is spelled with an "0” in this list,
                            ’’Devonside” :
                         q. Carry on. - A. Smith, Paula Ann, and with a name like Smith I
                            would like to give the identification number, AFW 1, none
                            detected.
                     D
                                 Cox, Tracey, none detected.

                                 McCabe, Marian, none detected.

                                 Fitzsimmons, Vincent Michael, none detected.

                                 Matthews, Brian, none detected.

                                 Burkett, Peter, 99mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                 Rogers, H.C., identification number DMG 15, none
                            detected.

                                 Clark, Joseph, 177mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                 McAllister, Francis, none detected.

                                 McCarthy, Daniel Joseph, 18mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                 Robinson, S.J., 141mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                 Hankin, Eric, 132mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                 Johnston, Alan, 34mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                 Burke, Henry Thomas, 16mg o f .alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                 McGrath, Keith, none detected.

                                 Delaney, J.P., identification number ACJ 9, 38mg of
                     H      alcohol/lOOml of blood.



l   H arp h am Ltd                                       12                                 65
                                                                      DR .   A . R . W - FORREST



                                    Owens, Jonathon, none detected.

                                    Jones, Christine Anne, none detected.

                                    Tyrrell, Kevin, none detected.

                                    Glover, Ian, none detected.
                                    Edwards, C. , identification number ACJ 2, none detected.
                     B
                                    Tootle, Peter, none detected.
                                    McDonnell, P., identification number DMG 12, 172mg of
                               alcohol/lOOml of blood.



     •
                                    Hughes, Eric, 32mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                     C              Hewitson, Paul Anthony, 88mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                    Wright, Graham Sean, less than lOmg of alcohol/lOOml of
                               blood.
                                    Hewitt, Darren Carl, less than lOmg of alcohol/lOOml of
                               blood.
                     D
                                    Jones, Nicholas, 72mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                    Brown, Carl, 83mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.
                                    Birtle, David William, 42mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                    Collins, Gary, 29mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.
                     E
                                    Thompson, Patrick John, 93mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                    Brookes, Andrew, 89mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                    Williams, Kevin Daniel, 56mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                    Bell, Christopher Michael, less than lOmg of
                         F     alcohol/lOOml of blood.
                             Q. Can you just stop there. This is in fact Simon, despite what
                                it says in this list. Christopher Michael is in fact the
                                father’s name.   We will be dealing with that during the
                                summaries. An error was made on the labelling, not by you,
                                but there is an error on the labelling. So be careful. This
                                is a wrong name, No. 52. - A. Perhaps I should say it is also
                     G          labelled DC l, sir.
                             0. And the body number you have got is 52, is it? - A. That is
                                correct, sir. Thompson, S., identification number TIB 8, 78mg
                                of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                     Kelly, Anthony Peter, no alcohol detected.
                     H
                                     Hewitt, Nicholas M . , none detected.


.   l.   H arph am Ltd
                                                             13                              -     66
                                               DR.    A.R.W.   FORREST




     Mather,    D.W.,       identification ACJ -4, none detected.

     Traynor.     Martin Kevin,      60mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

     Clark,    Paul,    67mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

     Horn, G. . identification number PHR -4, 55mg of
alcohol/lOOml of blood.

     Traynor, C.J., identification number DMG 13, 54mg of
alcohol/lOOml of blood.

     Sefton,    Colin Andrew,       none detected.

     G l o v e r , Barry,    I38mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

     Jones, R., identification number DMG 20,             less than lOmg
of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

     Hicks, Sarah Louise, none detected.

     Pemberton, W. Roy, none detected.
     Fox, Thomas Steven, 82mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood".

     Chapman, Raymond, 91mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

     McBrien, John, none detected.

     Baron, Gerard, none detected.
     McGlone, Alan, 75mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

     Copol, Stephen Paul,           49mgof alcohol/lOOml of blood.

Can you stop one minute.            This is No. 71.     Is "thatright? - A-
71, RDW 4.
"Copol*’ is in fact Mr. Copoc. This I think is a transcription
error, not Dr. Forrest’s, but that is what he had on his
label, •’Copol". Thank you. - A. Kelly, Michael David, none
detected.
     Carlisle, Paul, 6ling of alcohol/lOOml ofblood.

Can you stop one moment.            This is No. 73.     Is that that? - A.
Yes, sir.
"Carlile” in this case is spelled with an "S". In fact the
correct spelling is without an "S", but on your label it is
shown as an ”S". That is right, but the number is 73? - A.
73, PHR 19, sir.
      Ball, Kester Roger Marcus, none detected.

      Godwin, D.G., identification number DC 11, none
                                                            DR.        A . R -M.   FORREST



 detected.                                                                                   __
      Anderson,      John Alfred,          76mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

      Wild,    Martin Kenneth,           none detected.

      Thompson,      Peter Reuben,           none detected.

      Roberts,     G.J.    identification number TIB 11, 79mg of
 alcohol/lOOml of blood.

      Benson.     David John,          less than lOmg of alcohol/lOOml of
  blood.
      Howard,     Thomas,     34mg      of a l c o h o l / l O O m l     of blood.

       Steele,    Philip John,          none d e t a c t e d .

       G i l h o o l e y . Jon Paul,    none detected.

       Brady.     Paul,   13mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

       Lewis. Carl James, none detected.

       Jones, Gary Philip, none detected.

       O'Neill. Stephen Francis, none detected.

       Bennett, Barry, 78mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

       Hicks, Victoria Jane, none detected.
       Thomas. David Leonard. 48mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

       Harrison. Stephen, 30mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

       Horrocks, Arthur, 92mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

       Hamnond,     Philip, less than lOmg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

        Spearritt, Adam, none detected.

Q. Can I just ask vou one other thing. This list which you have
   very kindly read out to me, in addition to the names, the
   alcohols and their identification numbers, is also numbered
   from 1 to 94. Is that right? - A. Yes, sir.
Q. And Thomas Anthony Howard is No.1? - A. Thomas Anthony Howard
   N o .1, sir.
Q. And Adam Spearritt is No. 94? - A. Yes, sir.
Q. And everybody else whom you have read is listed in numerical
   order from 1 to 94? — A. Yes, sir.
O. Dr. Forrest, you mentioned that you also had another sa»Ple
   with some tablets or something inside a vial? - A. Yes, sir.


                                               1F>
                                                                                             68
                                                  DR.    A.R-W.     FORREST




If you could     remind me in respect of which body number.                   Was
it No.   79? -   A.' 79, yes.

D o n ’t give the name.    - A. Mr.   Roberts,        sir.

It does not matter.       - A.   I am sorry.

In fact, you     did analyse for this? -         A.    tfes, sir.

And you found a conventional drug            in therapeutic dose? - A.
Yes, sir, no problem at all.


wfrenaikeSnby°P?of.CS!ndy!                             a special analysis for
cholesterol.      Is that right?       - A. Yes.        sir.

. , rh_ level that you found was somewhat high for a person of
And the level that you   ^        ^ cholesterol concentration
ofS7 3! m m m i t r e in a supernatent of the b l o o ^ t h . t
it had been centrifuged and the red cells removed               JJjave
been involved in some research in post ®°rtem                        ^              ^
and a typical concentration from a person of that g
about 5.4mml of cholesterol/l00ml of blood.
I just wanted you to refer to this. We will deal
with Prof. Hendy when we come to the Inquest. Th
level you found? - A. Yes, sir.
 It has got no bearing at all on alcohol levels or anything
 like that? - A. None whatsoever, sir.
 Now it is. of course, notoriously difficult to say. as 1
 understand it, and you may correct me. how many Pints of bee
 equals X mg/lOOml, but can you give us some help. - A. Well,
 it depends first of all on the weight of the person and to
 some extent on their sex.          What a c t u a U y d e t e r m i n e s t h e blood
 alcohol concentration that is reached after drinking a
 particular amount of alcohol is the amount of ^tej* in t e
 body. That depends on basically the person s
 much fat they have got in their body. be£&   u    s   e    *
 relatively low water content, and women have got less wate .
 more fat in their body per kilogram of body weight than men
 hav t III   So a woman of the same weight who drinks the same
 amount of alcohol as a man of the same weight will actually
 finish up with a higher blood alcohol concentration.

      Typically, a 70 kilogram, a fairly small man, w°u1^
 to drink something like 2-and-a-half Pints of *    J^Ichi^e
 of the sort which is sold in the North of England, to achieve
 a blood alcohol concentration of around 80mg of alcohol/lOOml
 of blood over the next hour or so.
  So about 2-and-a-half pints, subject to your qualifications,
  equals 80mg drunk over an hour or so? - A. In very roun
  terms. yes. sir.
                                                                DR.   A. R. M- .   FORREST



                        And the reason why we pick 80mg is because, and if you don’t
               a        know please say so, that is the level above which you are not
                        allowed to drive? - A. Yes. sir.

                        As far as you know? - A. Yes, sir.

                    Q   The question of the level of alcohol for driving is a fixed
                        standard. - A. Yes, sir..
               BQ       But the effect that is either perceived- by tfee.--individual, the
                        subjective effect, or the objective effect which other people
                        see varies from person to person. Is that right? - A. Yes.
                        that is correct, sir.

                    Q   I want you to be careful before you answer this question    Are
                        you able to make any comment as to when a level of alcohol
                        becomes perceptible to any individual? - A. I think that is a
                        very difficult thing to say. People do vary enormously in
                        their response to alcohol. Objective tests by the Road
                        Traffic Research Laboratory and also studies on the rate of
                        accidents after people have particular amounts of alcohol in
                        their blood, show that people with a blood alcohol
                        concentration of between 20mg to 40mg of alcohol/lOOml of
                        blood are perhaps somewhat impaired in their ability to
                D       respond to a novel situation.
                             I have seen individuals with blood alcohol concentrations
                        of the order of 200mg to 300mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood who
                        on cursory examination would appear to be perfectly sober and
                        to be able to conduct a normal conversation. I should say
                        that those individuals have all been individuals who have had
                        a problem with chronic excessive ingestion of alcohol.
                             On the other hand, I have seen a young man from this part
                        of the world who with nothing else to show for it was dead
                        with a blood alcohol concentration of less an 80mg of
                        alcohol/lOOml of blood.
                        So it is terribly individual? - A. Yes, it is, very, very
                        individual, indeed.
                        I won't press you further about that.

                             THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser?
                                        Cross-Examined bv MR. FRASER:

                        Dr. Forrest, just two things. You kindly explained in very
                (?      scientific terms, and I am grateful for that, the effect of
                        perhaps heat and stress on the individual. Can you express
                        in perhaps less technical terms and confirm my understanding
                        if I am correct, and put me right if I am wrong, I think
                        what you said that under extreme tension or pressure or may
                        be fear, the blood alcohol level when taken would be
                        slightly but not significantly higher than it might have
                        been if that sample had been taken from somebody who had not
                H       been subjected to stress? - A. No, sir, I don't think I said


t   H arph am Ltd
                                                       17                                    70
                                      nR.   A.R.tt.   FORREST



that.
I understood what you were saying was there might be a very
slight increase but nothing of any significance? - A. No, I
don't think that was the impression I intended to give, and if
that was what I said it was wrong.
It was an impression that -I got, and I am grateful for the
correction. Thank you for that.
     THE CORONER:   Mr. Fraser, I wonder whether, I think what
you were talking about was acetone at the point in time as I
perceived your question:
Would that be right? - A. Oh, yes, acetone, under the
circumstances we have described, one might well expect an
increase in acetone in the blood as the body in response to
stress goes over, and lack of oxygen, goes over to running on
fat rather than on sugar.
     MR. FRASER: But that would not of itself generate a
higher blood level? - A. No, sir.
I am grateful for that. Just one thing. I have done some
very quick arithmetic. If your analysis of approximately 80,
which as we all know is the breathalyser level is right, my
arithmetic, and please correct me if I am wrong, in fact 15 of
the deceased had alcohol levels above that? - A. That is about
right, yes, sir.
Which is about one-sixth of the 95 who died? - A. Yes, sir.

Were over the breathalyser level? - A. I would accept that
figure, yes, sir.
There is no suggestion that any of them were going to drive,
but as a matter of fact it is about one-sixth who were
effectively too drunk to drive? - A. Yes, sir.

Thank you very much.
     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen of the Jury, did you
follow that? Some of it was a bit technical, as I am sure you
appreciate, but it is actually very interesting, and I thought
it was right we should let Dr. Forrest explain some of these
peaks and things to us so that we knew what he had found,
really. You are happy with that? You have understood? (The
Jury assented)
Dr. Forrest, thank you very much, indeed? - A . May I be
released for today, sir?

Indeed, you may. I think the hospital is waiting for you.        I
am sorry I have kept you for so long.

     THE CORONER:  It looks as though we are going to
overshoot today. Will that be all right, ladies and


                             18                                 71
                                                 J. WAKDKUPE


gentlemen? Would it be very inconvenient for you?  I would
like to do what we are planning to do today.  We will be as
quick as we can, but as I said, I want to do it properl>
want you to know what we are talking about.  We will listen,
think  to Mr. Wardrobe next, and then we will break for a few
minutes and then come back and do Prof. Usher and the two
Inquests.  All right?  We will certainly do one of the
Inquests.

                   JAMES WARDROPE
                               —r—       Sworn

                       B y THE C O R O N E R :

Mr  Wardrcpe, can you give me your full names, position and
qualifications? - A . My name is James tfardrone-  I am
consultant in Accident & Emergency Medicine -'to the Sheffield
Health Authority based at the Northern General Hospital,
Sheffield.

And in fact there are two consultants in A & E at the moment?
- A. At the moment.  At the time of Hillsborough I was the
only one.
You were the only one. Could you give your qualifications as
well, so that we know what you have got? - A. I am a Bachelor
of Medicine and Surgery, University of Edinburgh, I hold a
Fellowship in General Surgery from the Royal College of
Surgeons of Edinburgh and a Fellowship in General Surgery from
the Royal College of Surgeons, England. I also hold the
Fellowship in Accident & Emergency Medicine and Surgery from
the Royal College of Surgeons and Physicians of Edinburgh.

Mr. Wardrone . the reason why I have asked you to come is
because I want you to very briefly describe the set up or at
least what happened at the Northern General so that we can
understand a little bit better the problems that you faced,
and also what happened to one or two of the cases. Can you
perhaps outline for me, it is quite a big department. I think
you say about 55,000 patients a year.   Is that right? - A.
Yes, sir, there are 55,000 attendances per year to the
department.
 And that is 365 days a year, is not it? - A. Yes, Fir.
 And I worked that out at about 150 a day.              Would you agree? -
 A. That is correct, on average.
 Of those 150, -and obviously this is just an average figure,
 how many are admissions? - A. Our admission rate is about 10«
 of that total.

 So about   15 per day? - A. yes.
 Of those 15 how many would you expect to go to the intensive
 care unit or the coronary care unit? - A. There would be on
 average about one seriously ill patient per day.
                                                J.   WARDROEE



       So really, quite a small number to intensive care? - A. Who
       are seriouslv ill, yes.

       The others obviously need treatment and help? - A. Yes.

    D. But they are not life threatening? - A. That is correct.

       Now  the department is set-up with the usual facilities,
       including a resuscitation room? - A. That is correct.
B
       And the resuscitation room has got how many beds or tables
       within there? - A. There are two beds in the resuscitation
       area .
       So you are   really aiming to be able to cope with two    seriously
       ill people   at any one time? - A. Yes.

       On the day in question on the 15th how   m3ny doctors were
       actually on duty,   A & E doctors? - A. There were two accident
       and emergency doctors on duty.

       That is the average number for the hospital? - A. There are
       always two on.

D 2.    Both SHOs or.... - A. Both Senior House Officers,yes.

    13. You carry a bleeper.   Were you on call that day? -     A. I was on
        call that day, yes.
    3. That does not mean you have got to be at the hospital? - A.
       No.
    0. You have got to be contactable? -A. Yes.

    3. In fact, you were contacted? - A. Yes.
    Q. What time was it? About half-past-3 or so? - A. At about
       15.23 I was contacted.
    Q. And you made your way to the hospital? - A. Yes.

    0. Can you remember about what time you arrived? - A. 15.33.

        At that point had any patients arrived then? - A. Yes, and
        there were three patients in the resuscitation area and three
        also were in other parts of the department.

     Q. So at that time about six patients had arrived? - A. Yes.

     Q. And then within the next hour how many patients approximately
        did you receive? - A. 87 patients.
        So you got more than half-a-day’s work, on average, within an
        hour? - A. Yes.
      . And of those patients how many went to the coronary care
        - I mean intensive care or coronary care? - A. There were

                                                                        73
                                                                          J.   WARDROPE



                                patients went to intensive care units.

                        0   .   So a large number? - A. yes.

                        0. In addition to that there were also patients who never made it
                                to coronary care,   unfortunately,   who were dead? - A. That is
                                correct.

                                And I think you made arrangements - I don t know whether you
                   #            did it or whether this is part of your planning - that one, of
                                the plaster rooms should act as a temporary mortuary.  Is that
                                right? - A. Yes, sir, that is part of the major incident plan
                                for the hospital.

                        Q       So that was a pre-planned arrangement? - A. Yes.

                                O bviously the department was o verrun with patients, I think it
•                  ©            would be fair to say? - A. We wer e extremely busy, especially
                                initially, yes.

                        0       And it is probably true to say, is not, Mr. Wardrobe, that in
                                those circumstances yours and everybody else s objective was
                                to try and help those who could be helped? - A. That is
                                correct.
                   D
                        o . Paper came a very long second? - A. I am afraid that is
                            correct.

                     0 . I am not in any sense criticising you for it. I am just
                         trying to establish the facts so that we know. The upshot of
                         that is that documentation for at least some of the patients
                         either does not exist or is not adequate. Is that right? - A .
                    E That is correct, yes.

•                       0
                                Now, we will *come to the individuals who have died in a
                                moment, but you I think, having initially had to help with the
                                actual resuscitation of individuals, but as soon as some more
                                doctors came down from various parts of the hospital you in
                                fact cast yourself in a different role, did not you? - A. That
                                is correct, yes.
                        F
                                And what was that role? - A. My role in the major incident
                                plan is to stand at the ambulance receiving door and see every
                                patient as they come through that door, and to try and
                                categorise those patients into those that require immediate
                                care to safe life, those who have obviously serious injuries
                                and require admission, those who have got minor injuries but
                                require treatment to the minor injuries area, and those who
                        G       are dead.
                            a. And the technical word for that is "triage” , is not it? -
                               A. That is correct, yes.
                            i. And really the objective is to sort out those patients for
                                 whom the limited number of doctors/nurses have got to be aimed
                        H        at? - A. Yes.



    H a fph am   L td
                                                                                                   74
                                             J. WARDROPE


      With the hope of doing the most good? - A. Yes.

Q. And people who have only got a minor injury, and that might
   mean a broken arm, would have to wait? - A. Yes.

G.    Painful or not.   - A. Yes.

Q. If there is a life threatening situation? - A. Absolutely.
B.    1 think part of the major incident planning is that people
      should get tagged with different coloured labels? - A. That is
      correct.

0. And they are given Majex numbers,      I think is what you call it?
   - A. That is correct.

Gj-   In fact, the different coloured labels were never used.    You
      just used white labels. I think? - A. Yes.

      And would I be right in saying that in the end everybody did
      get a Majex number? - A. Eventually, some time after the
      event.

 0.   They may not have got them straight away, but they did in the
D     end finish up with numbers? - A. Yes

      So it is possible to identify the people who died, and I think
      excluding Adam Spearritt and Lee Nicol, there were 11. Is
      that right? - A. That is correct, yes.

      By their Majex numbers? - A. Yes.

5>. Have you got a copy of your statement? - A. Yes, I have.

      Before we come to that I just wanted to dispose of one other
      matter. The people who dealt with the numbering once the
      system worked are medical records officers? - A. That is
      correct, yes.

      It is their task.    They are not medics? - A. No.

      They are admin people, but it is their task to do the
      labelling and the administration so one knows who is who and
      where they are? - A. Yes.

 O. And of course, they had to deal with all the live ones as well
    as all the people who had died? - A. That is correct, yes.

      If we turn to your statement and in particular I think it is
      your statement of the 6th. I want to go through one or two of
      these because I have a few problems with some of the
      information and 2 want to be clear in my own mind. Majex No.
      2 is Lee Nicol? - A. Yes.

 G. And he is a lad who actually went up to the intensive care
H   unit? - A. That is correct.



                                    22                                 75
                                                J. WARDROPE


        And there are notes about him-, proper hospital notes and
        records? - A. Yes.
        So we will leave him.    Philip Hammond,   who is No. 8. is that
        right? - A. Yes.
        He was at the hospital because he had a Majex number? - A.
        Yes .
B       But there is no documentary evidence as to what happened? - A.
        That is correct.
        Except that there are some ECG electrode marks on him? - A.
        ?hi post mortem report did state there were three ECG
        electrodes attached to his chest.




                 ?'Uls lenSin| ^ o p ! e who came in with a cardiac


        room initially to see whether they could have a                   that
        being brought round, to start the hear *          ■ilectrocies    j
D       the only post mortem evidence were t h r e e E C G electroaes,    i
        think possibly he was sent to the ^ s c i t a t i o n ro,>m but   the
        E C G showed no cardiac activity, and because of the Sre*
        pressure on the resuscitation beds at that time he would          be
        sent to the mortuary.
         To the mortuary, yes.    Then No. 9 is Barry Bennett, I believe?
         - A . Yes.
         And aeain it is exactly the same, there is a needle mark but               .
         w rellrS’ii til hospital? - A. No record in the notes, no.

         Victoria Hicks, No. 20. - A. Yes.

         There is obviously post mortem evidence that something was
         attempted for this young lady? - A. Yes.
         And there is in fact, I believe, quite a lot of medical
         evidence that people tried? - A. Yes.
         Are there actually any properly written up notes in respect of
         ihis SErl’ - A.' There are no properly written up notes, but I
         kSoS from other people that she was in the resuscitation room
         and had intensive resuscitation attempts.
          Co although the notes are defective you are satisfied from the
          information you have been given by the doctors that attempts
          were made. We will find out later quite a lot of attempt-
          were made. - A . Yes.
          No. 21 is Stephen Harrison? - A. Yes.
    H     And as far as you can find there is absolutely nothing, either

                                                                               76
                                            J.   WARDROPE



 post mortem or in the hospital records.         Is that right? - A.
 No.
 I bee vour pardon.     There is a medical record.   I misread it.
 - a     There is no definite evidence in medical records, sir,
 but'from the post mortem report it would appear that Mr.
 P r i s o n received intensive resuscitation efforts.

 Let us just get this right, because I have confused myself.
 There is post mortem evidence of intensive therapeutic
 efforts? - A. Yes.
 is there a medical record as well? - A. And there is evidence
 in medical records,    yes.

 When you say •'medical record", are you saying it is actually
 in the notes? - A. In the notes, yes.

 S O   there are proper hospital notes “h        i   c      h   ^   A
 this person by name,    so to speak,   o
 Yes.
 a h am
      cnpsrritt No 29 you know I think that attempts were
      ^ h i l p ^ i " lad a £ he in fact he went all the way up
 to intensive care? - A. Yes.
 And unfortunately arrested there but I have ^ t u a l l y seen his
 notes.  In fact, I have got them here, and I can t find
 anything in them, and yet you seem to say that there is
 evidence in the medical notes. Can you just with
 that? - A. There is nothing in the medical notes but
 the hospital major incident list which notes all the P^ i e n t s
 who were admitted on that day, and that list clearly states
 that he went to the intensive care unit.
     I see   When you are saying there is definite evidence in the
     medical notes you are basing it on the fact somebody has made
     a record in your register, so to speak, what happened to him?
     - a . Yes.
     But you could not from that register say precisely what was
     done? - A. No.
     uihat about No. 30, Gary Jones? Is the position the same
     there"5 - A No, there is evidence in the hospital notes and
     from the post mortem record that Hr. Jones received intensive
     resuscitation efforts.
     So he must have come into the resuscitation unit? - A. Yes.

3. No. 61, Stephen O ’Neill, there is some evidence from post
   mortem but nothing in your notes? - A. Yes.

3.    Now, the one that gives me a bit of problem       Pa£l
     Brady. No. 62. I believe there is a statement from a Dr.
     Jacobs? - A. Yes.


                                                                        77
                                  24
                                                  J. WARDROPE


    . Or Jacob. - A. Jacobs.
 o. Uho states that he attempted to do          certain   things but was
    unsuccessful? - A. Yes.
 u. Mr. Jacobs I think is actually a consultant, is not he? - A.
    He has recently become a consultant, yes.

go. He is a fairly senior doctor anyway? - A. Oh. yes.

 (). But there is nothing in the notes? - A. No.
         And there is nothing on the PM findings either? - A. That is
         correct, yes.
 4. And I think you said you thought he »as triaged as dead? - A.
    Yes .

         resuscitationConPh i m ^ i f 'h e ^ a ^ b e e n S i a ^ S ^ h e would
         have, been diverted to the post mortem room, would not he.
         That is correct, yes.
 di. Whereas if Mr. Ja'cobs worked on him he must have been diverted
D    somewhere else? - A. Yes.
         Can you help me on that?     What do you think actually happened?
         Can you jeip                        given the circuBStances. I
         know that I did send at least four people to the mortuary in
         the latter stages of the incident coming in as de«d because of
         the great pressure on the resuscitation area, and 1
         statement only with the evidence I had                report*
         medical notes - and that given to me, the post mortem report-,.
         Usually if someone has had resusciTa^ ° "         Ihtlt has *
         be a needle. ECG electrodes, some indication that there
         been resuscitation. I can’t explain it.

    u. What I am trying to find out from you is are V°“                    ^   Mr*
       Jacobs did do resuscitation on this young man could he
       been triaged as dead? - A. no.
          He could not have been, could he? - A. No.
          That is really all I am trying to establish.        No. 63 is David
          Thomas. Is that right? - A. Yes.
          And there is no evidence at all about him, and you conclude
          that this must have been one of the people whom you triaged
          as dead? - A. Yes.
          No. 64 is John Gilhooley, and again we have got post mortem
          evidence but nothing else. Is that right. - A. Yes.

     o      Philip Steele, No. 99, is in the same situation as Paul Brady.
          Dr Caulder and Dr. Davidson I think were involved with this
 u        man; not for very long; but they were involved. Would
          accept that that is correct? - A. If they say so, yes.
                                                                                 78
                                                                J . WARDROPE



If they say so. and if trsy do say that would it be right to
say he could not have been triaged as dea j.- - A. Yes.

Because he would have been in a different part? - A. Yes. the
re s u s c ita tio n             u n it.

No. 119. Arthur Horrocks, I believe Dr. Nidu - do you know Dr.
Nidu, a lady doctor? - A. Yes, I do.
I think.had something to do with this gentl ema ^ ^ g a i n . ^ f

No^    i f   S o m e o n e underwent          1   resuscitation attempt he would
not have been.

i;,-r
such? - A . No.
                                                                                ;r. s
Now. traumatic asphyxia is not something, fortunately, you
have many cases of? - A. No.
 But you had quite a lot on this day.                             A. Yes.

 And I think you observed that fro. ^constructionstf people7"


 getS?he                        t ^ o i n g ^ b u t Unfortunately in - e t.ree cases -e

 h
                h   e   a   r




        survived^as                                        S S ^ S S i. K   S S S S A ,
 was brain dead.
 Would it be fair to say that everybody who came in in cardiac
 arrest in fact died? - A. Yes.
 we all know about c a r d i a c arrest and heart                              ther^i^not
 saying then that if a person is ^ Qcar^          ea" ef                           move
  I?oo?°af tie p J e J e ^ o encourage people to perform cardiac
                 because in a patient having a cardiac arrest in
  the streetT for instance, ?hen given the ideal circumstances
  then there is a reasonable chance of that patient being
  ^   Sc £ t a ^  but it does require a lot oi: effort and a lot of
  infrastructure in the community to back that up.
  So what you are saying, it can work in ideal situations? - A.
  In ideal situations it can work, yes.
   Is there any difference between a person who arrests, say,
   because of myocardial infarct as opposed to somebody who
   arrests because of traumatic asphyxia as to the chances of
         .-/-•itati nn'? - a I would say that I have no experience
   personally of resuscitating anyone from traumatic asphyxia who
   has had a cardiac arrest, but it is a very rate c - d i t i o ^
   ni.1- aicsn I know of no case reports in the literature wnere
   that has occurred. I think perhaps the other situation where

                                                                                          79
                                                     2 6
                                              J. WARDROPE.



A pne has a s i m i l a r clinical P - ^ ^ c h e l t ^ f or o t h l r ^
  bsthmatic who can t get air                    ^ able to restart the
  Ceasons.      In my experl^ e *           if the arrest has occurred
  b r i t ^ h ^ ^ r J h l s e ^ t t S n t s have died from the effects on
  the brain of the hvpoxia.
                                   ■ =,,;np iS if you have a cardiac
i. In other words, what you             hyp o xia then that is a much
B b r s e r ? o u s i ! t u a t ^ “ han cardiac arrest on its own? - A.
   Yes .
            THE CORONER:   Mr. Fraser?
                       r'rn^-Expnined by MR. FRASER:

<£ Just very briefly, over
   which the hospital put into                after 3 .3 0 . At what time,
   you a r r i v e d a t the hospital shor y               as it were? - a .
   If  at all.
   if at   all .was was the
                         the disaster pl-n
                             * - - ^ f?    £°
                                        ^ a^ °°
                                              s2t tood
                                                  o o d 'down
                                                         do“  as far
                                                           wn Is far as
                                                                     as I
                                                                        I am
                                                                          s
   The disaster plan was not officially
   aware.
    It was an ongoing thing in terms of treatment? - A. Yes.

    hospitaiT'disaster^plan^wa^pu^into^ef f ect^t 15*27.


    little^distanc^away                                           - A. Yes.

    I am sorry, I willrePhrasethat^          The                 hospital
    SiTaErSS                          a major incident       was taking

     P   S •                 in'? - a  I was actuallycalled      in prior to
     And you were      called      in. a .   a
     that.
     I appreciate that. Once the           i|ha?dwillWd e ^ n d on
     take to put the Pla" int“ f ,'f,,nce ue had to try and put
     circumstances.   In this              as having to treat
     large 1 numbers
     Ifli    -  ----
                       S'SSiEs^iU        patients, which does
     compound the problem.

      I appreciate that, and                                                 of
      about paperwork coming    P        d ble in the circumstances,
      the families that is     ^ s t a n d a b l e ^ i n ^ a disaster plan put
      What comes over clearly                       disaster, and it was one
      into effect within 20 minutes o f ^ h e a i s ^ resQUrces
      which hopefully °Per^ ® d       briefly what extra staffing is
      available. Can yqu tell         b£ief y^                 effect? Can you
       brought in once the              * involved? - A. The numbers
       give us an idea of the number overall are really enormous. I
       involved in the hospital P ^                  25 anaesthetists involved
       think giving an instance, there were
                                                   J. WARDROPE
                                                        — fa— 'jT'~


in a very short space of time-in the disaster plan, and these
verv skilled doctors were essential in treating the effects
hvpoxia especially in the intensive care unit, and there are
not many hospitals have 25 anaesthetists in total.  bo we were
fortunate in having them, but the numbers who responded to the
incident ran into hundreds.

I am most grateful to y o u . • Thank you.

                         Further bv THE C O R O N E R :

So within a very short           there were an awful lot ofpeople
there? - A. Yes, sir.

Well,   a relatively short time,         anyway.     - A. Yes.

Can we be a bit more precise.  When did you have 25
anaesthetists present, approximately? - A. Approximately
within two h o u r s .

Within two hours. So it did take a little while to get a
complement? - A. Yes. There would be an initial rush and
I am not sure when the last anaesthetist arrived.

     THE CORONER:   Is everything clear,members of the Jury."
Yes? When we are at the Medico-Legal Centre I won’t have to
sit with my back to you. I am very sorry about that.

     Ladies and gentlemen, what we are going to do is to rise
for a few minutes because we need a break, and then, Prof.
Usher, we will listen to you, if we may, and go from your
introduction, so to speak, straight into the Inquest.

                            (Short Adjournment)

     THE CORONER:   Members of the Jury, I understand you had
difficulty hearing me. I apologise.   At the Medico-Legal
centre it will be easier for all of us, but if you can t hear
then - who is the Foreman - then get out and shout.  Do
something to attract my attention, because I want you to be
able to participate and to hear.

        Right, Prof. Usher?
                          prof   . At a w USHER Sworn

                                 Bv THE CORONER:

 Good afternoon. Prof. Usher, before we begin I want to tell
 you one thing.  You have just taken the oath, but in a few
 minutes I am going to ask you to take another one, because
 what I am asking you to do now is to talk in general terms,
 and then I want you to take the oath in respect of the PMs
 which you dealt with, just so that you know why I am doing
 that. - A. Yes.
 Prof. Usher, you are Alan Usher, that is right? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                                                  PROF.   A-   USHER.



        oAcould you please t®11 mJ ^ ^ ^ J i ^ o / M e d i ^ i n e and Bachelor
           qualifications i - A. I am a Bacne±                 pathologists, and
           of Surgery, a Fellow of      R°y-1 ^ollege of P           ^     Qffice
                  ; hold t h e      Diploma in                                      East Midlands, and I
                  ethologist tor i>outh Yo^ksn^ ® J “ vears
                  iave held that position for about ^5 years.

        Q
            Bp r o f e s s o r ' a ^ U n i v e r s i t v ^ m    a n ^ ’ a p a «
                  Pathologist? -            A.    Yes,         s ir .

              J • ,h.t sense you are totally unconnected with the
         Q. Northern General Hospital? - A. That is right.

                  And , indeed, with the Hallamshire except i - f a - s ^ t h a t misht
         0.
                  have the University section as well-
            C
                  in fact, you are based at the Medico-Legal Centre?                                    - A. I am.
         o.

         Q.

                  t e r r i b l e had happened at Hillsborough?

            And I think in fact we met initially at Jhe^edico-Legal
         <D Centre if I remember rightly? - A.
                  And I think Prof. Stephen Jones came as well at that tune.
            o.
                  A . Indeed.
                   Eventually we made our way to the temporary mortuary? - A.
            Q.
                   Yes.
            E
            G.
                   organisation of the pathology? - A. Yes, we di                                .

              0, And ! think what «e de c i d ^                                                                  “
                 point No. I?1-"*. Yes, that was your decision, sir.
              F    And also, I think we felt that as far as Possible we were
              G
                   going to use forensic pathologists.
                    In fact, how many forensic pathologists were used? - A. I
                    think we used four or five, sir.
                                           j * i.»et a couDle of other Professors who were
                    L r f S r e ' i f S t i o l i g i s t s . but obviously very senior people? -
                    A. Right.
                  . NOW. you, how many years have you actually been doing
                    pathology? - A. Now more than 30.



            H
                     w asps                        s.'sst*- ?“
                                               - A I am getting the hang of it.
                                                                                   e = .-a s *
                  i. so that is a fair number, - a. ^   6

Marpham Ltd                                                                 29                                       82
                                                              PROF.   A.   USHER




                        Amongst these you have dealt with over 700 murder
                        investigations, I believe? - A. \es.

               o. And very many traumatic asphyxial cases? - A. Yes,            I have seen
                  at least AO to 50.

               0. So although it is not an everyday occurrence,            it is not
                  totally strange to you? - A. No.

               0. As a pathologist? - A. Yes.

                   O.



•          c

                        sudden disaster.

                   O. And also it was possible to divide it off so one could section
                      part of the building from reception areas? - A. Yes.
           D
             O. And although it is not terribly relevant, you I think were
                there when the decision was taken with regard to the
                photography of the deceased? - A. Yes. We were very fortunate
                in that unlike some disasters the deceased were not in fact
                badly disfigured, and so it was possible to use Polaroid
                photographs, which meant it spared the relatives the very
                painful business of walking through the actual mortuary and
           E    looking at the people.  The photographs were just exhibited
                outside with the appropriate number.

                   0. Because obviously, are you saying that to walk and look at
                      bodies can be a very distressing experience? - A. Indeed.

                    }. Before we get down to PMs in particular and so on, having
               r       dealt with identifications at the gymnasium the bodies were
                       then moved to the Medico-Legal Centre? - A. Yes.

                    3. I think you were actually here when the Medico-Legal Centre
                       was built,were not you? - A. Yes, I was.

                    3. And in fact you had a part to play   in that? - A. I played a
                       little part in that, yes, sir.
           c
                    3. Just from a mortuary point of view, what sort of facilities
                       are they? - A. I don’t think there are better facilities in
                       the United Kingdom, and I think that is a generally accepted
                       view.   By coincidence, when we were planning the place we
                       said, "Let's pretend there is going to be an incident
                       involving 100 dead people".   We were thinking of an
                       aeroplane crash, actually, but in fact the place was
           H           planned to deal with that and I think it did pretty well.



M arpham Ltd                                         30                                   83
                                                               PROF.   A.   USHER



                         In fact, of course, the problem was that there were already
                         deceased people within the building? - A. Yes.

                         So we did not have quite as much space as - it was not empty,
                         in other words? - A. No.
                         Which did create a few problems for us. - A. Yes.

                         But I am right in thinking that there is a r o o m which we know
              B°         as the Special PM room which is in fact chillable. - A. Yes. ...

                   a. And that was done? - A. Yes, it was.

                   Cl.
                         Prof. Usher, what I want to do was, I wanted to go through one
                         or two of the terms which we use in post mortems.

                              THE CORONER:   This, ladies and gentlemen, forgive me, is
                         a short course in pathology.  What I am going to do is to ask
                         Prof Usher to explain some ot the words which are used,
                         because you will hear them over and over again, and it may
                         easier if you have had them explained at the beginning, jus
                         as words:
                         If I start off by saying, can you help by a word that occurs
              Dl         very often is ••petechia,, and "haemorrhage". Could you just
                         explain what the word "petechia" means and what the word
                         "haemorrhage" for that matter means in that context? - A. Yes.
                         I could do it perhaps better if I said that petechial
                         haemorrhages are signs of asphyxia and then define asphyxia.

                         Yes if you would. - A. Asphyxia is a process which takes
                         place when there is some mechanical interference with normal
                         breathing.   The causes of the interference might be external,
                         as when a pillow is put across the face. That is called
                         suffocation.   It may be hands or a l igature round the neck
                         which is called strangling.   It may be the inhalation of some
                         foreign body into the throat, which is called choking,    or it
                         may be, and this is relevant in this case, the fact the
                         person's chest is simply not allowed to move in and out as it
                         does in the normal course of respiration.    If that happens
                         these people are asphyxiated in all the examples I have given.

                               In traumatic asphyxia the picture is usually fairly^
                          typical.  When respiration stops oxygen cannot be given into
                          the blood from the lungs and the haemoglobin which is present
                          in the little red cells and which is used to carry oxygen from
                          the lungs to the tissues where it is needed, these little
                          packets of haemoglobin give up their oxygen and then turn into
                          what is called reduced haemoglobin, which is a bluish colour,
                          and this gives a bluish cast to the face and often elsewhere
                          in the body to a person who is being asphyxiated.

                                 When this happens the heart begins to fail and there is
                          back pressure on the very small blood vessels called
                          capillaries.  So the pressure in the fine vessels of the skin
                          and elsewhere in the body increases, and the cell walls which
               H          are only one cell thick, are not getting oxygen either, and so


* H arp h am Ltd
                                                       31                                84
                                                               PROF.   A.   USHER


                     these fine vessels burst, and little bursts of red cells pass
                     through the wall into the tissues.          If this happens in the
                     skin they can be seen as little pin-point haemorrhages in the
                     skin.  They are not entirely specific for asphyxia, but it
                     would be difficult to diagnose asphyxia if there were not such
                     petechiae.  Larger haemorrhages which are formed in exactly
                     the same way are call e c c h y m o s e s .

                          So that the general picture of a person who has died from
               B     asphyxia is of bluish c y a n o s i s , as it is c a l l e d , bluish
                     appearance about the face and elsewhere, and the presence of
                     petechiae somewhere in the body, frequently in the eyes,
                     frequently in the lax skin of both the eyelids, frequently
                     internally on the surfaces of the lung and on the heart
                     itself, and sometimes elsewhere.          The picture that we saw in
                     general in the people who died at Hillsborough was an
                     asphyxial picture, and it was due to the fact that at some
                     time they must have been packed so close that they were unable
                     to move their chests and thus asphyxiated.

                          If the asphyxia is prolonged it begins to affect other
                     organs and in particular the brain. The brain is very
                     sensitive to oxygen lack, and so after four or five minutes of
                     asphyxia then damage occurs to the brain. The more prolonged
               D     the asphyxia is the more damage there is to the brain, and
                     eventually the vital centres in the brain are damaged and then
                     the person is technically dead.
                     How long does it take for a person who is asphyxiated to (a)
                     lose consciousness, and (b) get to the stage where irreparable
                     damage has been done? - A. Well, once the chest becomes
                     absolutely and finally fixed in the situation I imagine as we
                     had it at Hillsborough - there were moments of intermittent
                     fixation of the chest in many of the cases - but once the
                     chest becomes finally fixed then it is a matter of minutes,
                     between four and six minutes usually, before the person dies,
                     but it is a very short time mercifully before they lose
                     consciousness. They may lose consciousness in 10 to 15
                     seconds.
                     So in other words, once asphyxia actually takes hold properly,
                     shall we say, then the loss of consciousness is very quick? -
                     A . Yes.
                     And death between four and six minutes, of that order? - A.
                     Yes, that is the usual.

               Q§.   If a person is active and struggling, does it make any
                     difference? - A. They use oxygen. They use what oxygen they
                     have up more rapidly, of course. It is also true to say that
                     if someone has a disease say of the chest or the lungs or the
                     heart, where they are already hampered with regard to their
                     use of oxygen, then of course they will stand asphyxia very
                     badly, and they may die in a much shorter time than that.

               Hr- Now. in some cases we will hear in these PMs there was what is
                   known as coning. In other words, there was an enlargement, a


H arpham Ltd                                        32
                                                         PRQF. A .   USHER



                   swelling of the brain and in others there was not.  If we deal
                   with the cases where there is coning, that is a very serious
                   situation, is not it? - A. Yes, it is.  It is unfortunately a
                   non-specific situation.  If you insult the brain in more or
                   less any way it reacts by swelling.  If you cause it to be
                   shaken around inside the head or if you fail to supp y 1      ,
                   oxygen, it reacts by swelling, and since the skull is a closed
                   boney box with only one outlet and that outlet is where the
                   spinal cord leaves it at the base, then it tendsto       *hf
          B        brain down into that cone.  Unfortunately, the part
                   brain that is pushed down is the part that contains the vital
                   centres for respiration and for the regulation of heart beat
                   and blood pressure.  So if that happens then it is likely to
                    cause death.

               o    But it is not an absolute requirement for asphyxial death?
                    A . Oh, no, by no means.
                    Because it is at the cellular level I think you are saying the
                    damage is done? - A. Yes.
                    Which is microscopic, I believe, if you like? - A. Yes.
                    You were talking about the very short period when a person
          D         actually becomes asphyxiated before he loses consciousness.
                    A . Yes.
                    What is the position if as I think you have also said there
                    are intermittent episodes of asphyxia, shortish periods,
                    compression and then relaxation and then compression and
                    relaxation and then final compression? Does that make any
                    difference? - A. In the intervals when they are able to
                    breathe properly then they to some extent replenish their
                    tissue oxygen stores, but of.course once the pressure is on
                    again then the same process operates.
                   . Operates again. So if a person has been squashed, if I can
                     say that, and the pressure is taken off him before he loses
                     consciousness, and there is no further pressure on him, then
                     he ought to be able to breathe and recover? - A. Yes.
                    If he breathes and then a further episode of pressure is put
                    on then the effect of that additional pressure will depend on
                    how much oxygen he has managed to take in in the interval.
                    A. In the interval, yes.
                    And of course, the shorter the interval.... - A. Exactly, sir.

                     We know in some cases - in fact in many cases - there is some
                     reference to vomiting? - A. Yes.
                     Can you deal with the whole question of vomiting in traumatic
                     asphyxial deaths and what it signifies? — A. Well, in any
                     asphyxial death, as a terminal event, right at the end, there
                     is often vomiting, and for that reason many pathologists when
                     reporting such cases simply say, and I do this myself, if
                     there is vomiting I simply say, "Traumatic asphyxia", and I


H srpham Ltd
                                                 33                                 86
                                         PROF.   A.   USHER


take it that the vomiting is part of the last phase of that
death.  It is true to say that it is particularly liable to
happen in traumatic asphyxia because the airways are free,
which they are not if the person is being strangled, and of
course, compression is being exerted on the abdomen as well
with a tendency to force material up. So you would expect to
get vomiting in cases of traumatic asphyxia.

And you would say it is probably part of the terminal events?
_    Yes, it is just part of the act of dying, .c

In some cases one inhales? - A. Yes.
If one inhales any vomit, if there had been no mouth to mouth
resuscitation presumably that would mean it was breathed in.
A. Yes.
A gasp must have been made? - A . Yes.

If there is artificial respiration does it make any
difference, do you think? Can it be blown in? - A.   It could
be if the mouth had not been cleared of vomit first.  In that
case the kiss of life becomes, of course, the kiss of death,
because you are forcing the material down into the airways.
It is also fair to say it has been shown, principally by the
South Africans, that material in the stomach can be, after
death, forced up into the nasal fount and even down the
bronchi.
How does it get down after    that, because that can'tbe
inhaled? Are you saying a gravity mechanism, or what? - A.
Yes, that is what is thought to be the answer.

So it is not entirely explained how that happens? - A. That is
right.
So the mere presence of stomach content in the lungs does not
necessarily mean it was inhaled before death, is what you are
saying? - A. That is right.

But in many cases it may be, of course? - A. Yes.

And inhalation is a very serious matter, is not it, because it
irritates the linings? - A. Yes, that is right.

I think you prepared a report for Lord Justice Taylor, and one
of the questions which are dealt with in that, I think, was
the question of eye haemorrhages and the effects of people
lying or standing? - A. Yes.

Can you just summarise your conclusions on that? - A. Yes.     I
think it was put forward that you could differentiate between
people who died standing up and people who died lying down
because the people who died standing up did not have eye
haemorrhages and the people who died lying down down d i d , and
that in my view is completely wrong.
                                                            PROF.   A.   USHER


                    . You can't draw any conclusions.from eye haemorrhages? - A. No.

                O. You can get those whichever way you are? - A. Indeed.

                          THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, any questions- on the general
                     points?
                                    Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER:
            B(J Prof       Usher there is only one question, arfcT tlfat is that you
                     have graphically described the effect of crushing.    One only
                     has to note when one is shallow breathing to realise how
                     little movement is needed of the chest and one imagines the
                     effect of stopping that must be intense pressure.    You then
                     described traumatic asphyxia for us in laymen's terms for
                     which I can assure you your attitude is appreciated.    Can you,
                     for the benefit of the families perhaps confirm that the
                     description which they sometimes heard of the effect of
                     traumatic asphyxia as being a little like going to sleep
                     rather quickly and without a great deal, if any, pain, almost
                     a rapid onset of sleep? - A. It is not an experience, of
                     course, I have had, sir.

                      I      appreciate that. - A. But it is true that it is chronicled
            Dl        that these people become unconscious extremely quickly.  I
                      don't think I can say more than that.

                <Ji. Professor, I am asked to place on formal record the thanks of
                     the people behind me for the simple and sympathetic way you
                     have given your evidence. Thank you for that.

                           THE CORONER:   Did you follow that? You will be hearing
                      more about some of these words as you go along.

                           Now, that concludes what I call the generic bit of these
                      Inquests, and we are now going to turn to Inquest No. 1:


                O. Was there anything else you wanted to say, Prof. Usher? - A.
                   No, sir, I d o n ’t think so.

                           THE CORONER:   Are we all happy to carry on?      Yes, Mr.
                      Fraser?
                           MR. FRASER:   Sir, before you start, I am conscious of
                      the time.  I am also aware that you have agreed that the Jury
                      should see the ground in the morning.  I wonder, sir, whether
                      it is still your hope to start your day's Inquests tomorrow at
                      9.30? I appreciate even the best laid plans of mice and men
                      often gang to gley, and I wonder whether if tomorrow’s
                      timetable might be rearranged slightly to take perhaps a
                      family who would not be attending first so that if there is
                      any time lost in the Jury’s attendance at the ground it might
                      be made up at that stage? I do not have the benefit of
                      knowing who will not be here tomorrow, sir.  You may have.  I
                H     make the practical suggestion in an effort not to disrupt
                      tomorrow too much.


H arph am Ltd                                      35                                   88
                            THE CORONER:    Can I just.refresh my memory on our
                       timetable, if I may?   We have got Colin Wafer, and I believe
                       the family are here?

                            MR.   FRASER:   They are,   sir.

                            THE CORONER:   So I would want to deal with that Inquest
                       today because it would be a terrible shame, I hope you would
                       agree, not to deal with it.  The second Inquest is Mr.
               B       O'Neill, and they are not attending, I believe.* That is
                       right, is not it?

                            MR.   FRASER:   I understand so, yes, sir.

                            THE CORONER:    So what I propose to do, bearing in mind


  •
                       we have all had a hard day, is let us take Colin Wafer today.
                       We will start tomorrow at 10 with out Inquests p r o p e r . It is
               C       Simon Bell's family.   Are they here, Mr. Fraser, do you know?

                            MR. FRASER:   I know somebody is present in Court who has
                       an interest on behalf of the Bell family.  Mr. Alexander, I
                       understand, is present, and may be he can assist you direct.
                       I understand the family are coming over from Liverpool. They
                       are in fact here already, sir.
               D
                            THE CORONER:   Mr. Bell, will it be in order if we start
                       at 10 tomorrow as far as you are concerned? We will have to
                       push everybody on by half—an—hour. As it happens, we have two
                       families at the tail end who are not attending tomorrow as
                       well as far as we know at this stage.  I think it is easier
                       than trying to fit the non-attenders in in the morning, to fit
                       them in in the evening.
                   E
                            MR. FRASER:   I appreciate that, sir.   I merely made the
                       suggestion in an attempt to face the reality of
                       rearrangements.

                             THE CORONER:   I think you are right.    I think we are
                       being optimistic if we think we can get there and back and get
                       started at 9.30.Arrangements for viewing      as agreed, quarter-
                   F   to-9, but hearing* 10 o'clock. We will deal with Colin
                       Wafer’s Inquest this evening and we will adjourn Stephen
                       O ’Neill's Inquest until tomorrow, if possible, and fit it in
                       then.   That is a possibility.   If by chance we are back before
                       10 then we might do Mr. O ’Neill’s Inquest first thing
                       tomorrow morning.   We will do it like that.

                            Prof. Usher, would you sit down for a couple of minutes.
               G       I will call you back because there are one or two other things
                       I need to do.

                                (The Preliminary Proceedings then concluded
                              and there followed the Inquest into the death of
                                  Colin Uafer. (See separate transcript))

               H

n a ro h a m Ltd                                        36                                  39
  HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      (WEST D I S T R I C T )



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




          CONCLUDING PROCEEDINGS




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER. LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS. MRCGP

             (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                        At

            The Medico-Legal Centre.
                 Watery Street,
                   Sheffield.

                         On

                    4th May 1990




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham. Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers.
      55. Queen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX
                                                     1247
                                       r~
                                       I                            )   *1   I   — —   /   •'J '- r ' _        . *

                                      )zc       I, r ^/ /       ^                                         ‘
                                                1             ..                            A t_£ - -- *
                                                                                                          /’




                                             CONCLUDING PROCEEDINGS
                                              FRIDAY, 4th MAY. 1990


                       THE CORONER:   I want to say something to the press
                 Regain.   This is in a slightly different vein but it is on
                  tne same topic that I usually have to address you on.
                              Somebody has drawn my attention to the "Liverpool
                    .cno" and they have got a big article about Hillsborough,
                   cuite properly in a sense.                      They have written about one
                    iarticular
                    >a 1. u i u u i a L case.
                                        w a*?w«   It*• —is -Philip
                                                             ••— - — r Hammond.
                                                                       ... ... ......   This was a case
                   vhere the alcohol level was less than 10 mg/100 ral.
                  Crhere were two cases where this arose.                             It was not the
                   rost recent one.               It was the previous one where the
                   lamily were very distressed about this because this was a
                   young lad.               It was a question of whether or not he had
                   crunk a snandy or whatever.
                           Now the "Liverpool Echo" has dealt with this and has
                       aid that Philip's blood alcohol level was declared less
                       han 120 rag.   Now you can imagine what that has done to
                      the family.    They were upset enough with less than 10 mg.
                        am not saying this has been done deliberately, ^
                      ilaliciously, you know, "Let's get at the Hammonds , or
                      Anything like that.    It is a mistake and I have no doubt
                      vhatever that the paper will publish a correction.
                  p             fly complaint is not that there is somebody who is
                          <oing something wrong but the point I want to make is that
                          :t is essential that we get it right.     Anything you
                          publish has got to be right because whatever retractions
                          i re published and however hard the paper now tries, the
                          <amage, in a sense, has been done, and particularly with
                            hat family who were already so upset.
                      r   This afternoon you have heard some terribly
                    complicated stuff, if I can use that word.    Please make
                    iiure that if you are going to put it out and want it
                    published in your paper, get it right, because if you
                    <on't get it right first of all you are not reporting,
                    which is what you are supposed to be doing, and secondly,
                    "ou will be upsetting people.    Please make sure that the
                    reporting is accurate.    I used that word, if I remember,
                  (Jon the first day when-I spoke to you.    I said, "Get the
                    reports accurate."
                                Hay I stress that again. As it happens it is
                          convenient I can remind you of it, but if you don't get
                          ^our reporting accurate it is hurtful, upsetting, painful
                          lind wrong.   Please do your best and please tell your
                           iditors to make sure they do their best.   I am not
                      H
                                                        - l -
                                                                                                                     1248
.   L H w ph am U d
                      suggesting this is deliberate with intent or anything of
                      tnat nature.   I am sure it is a mistake, but it is a very
                      painful one.
                      Mil. FRASER:   Sir, I only rise because I act for the
                lammond family and I have also had the benefit of a
                conversation this morning with a representative of the
              B :cho.      I have no instructions directly from them but as
                a result of a conversation with the young lady in court to
                whom your comments were address ed, I know that she deeply
                regrets the mistake, for it is a mistake.     They realise
                the seriousness of the mistake and they are very, very
                sorry.     Mrs. Hammond is to be contacted by the editor of
                the Echo.     I have no brief for the Echo to say that but I
                feel I cannot let at least the views of the Echo, for
                those that I know, go unsaid on their behalf, sir.
                           Mrs. Hammond telephoned me last night. She was very
                      upset and immediately wheels were put into motion to
                      correct the mistake.   I accept, of course, the damage has
                      been done, but it was certainly, as I understand it from
                      the Echo, wholly unintentional and very much regretted.
                           THE CORONER:   I am glad you have said that.   I am
                      sure that was so, but in a sense the point I am making is
                      that what we have dealt with this afternoon is even more
                      potentially upsetting if you get it wrong, so please be
                      careful.
                           We will just rise for a few minutes.

                                         (Short adjournment)

                           THE CORONER:   Can I just come back to the press for
                      one more moment?   I just want to make it quite clear.
                      I used the word "reporter" and the implication of that is
                      that of course the error was made here and correctly
                      transcribed at the other end.    In fact I understand that
                      is probably wrong.   That the report was absolutely right
                      and that somebody made an error at the other end.    I
                      understand errors being made. After all, I have made
                      dozens myself, it is just that it is so unlucky, if you
                      like, that ithappened in this particular case.     I want
                      to make it clear that the mistake which I was talking
                      about wasn't made here.
                           Now, ladies and gentlemen, we are not taking any more
                      evidence on any Hillsborough cases and we have heard
                      evidence of ninety-five.   All that remains to be done,
                      and I will be as brief as I can, there are one or’ two
                      things I feel I have to do and say.

                           The first is to say this:      I have not given you any
                      directions at all on verdicts.       That is deliberate
                  H
                                              -   2   -

                                                                                     1249
H arp h o n U d
                         Decause there is no point in my directing you on that. We
                         lave not reached that stage.   If and when we come to that
                         stage I will give you as much guidance as I am able and as
                         Ls appropriate but I just wanted you to know I had not
                         forgotten it.
                             The second thing is I have already indicated to you
                     gthat what will happen depends very much on what other
                       people decide and that is still the case.      I don't know
                       «mat the DPP will do and when I do know I will then have
                       :o decide what to do next.     You have all very kindly
                        :illed out a form which you were given where you have
                       written your name and address and telephone number. We
                       need that so that we can contact you.      If you move house
                       ar anything like that, please make sure you let us know so
                       >/e don't lose you.    Probably at some point or other we
                       rfill need you back. We will try and take your holiday
                       commitments and so on into account and do what we can.       I
                       vill also try and indicate to you how much time we
                       astimate we are going to need.      We will keep you
                       informed, but if you do move     please let us know andditto
                       If you decide with holidays.       You are entirely free to
                       lave your holidays whenever you like, but tell us so that
                       «/e can keep a log and then if we do have to resume if
                       possible we will do it when you are here rather than when
                       you are not.     If you do tell us when you are going on
                       holiday also tellus where you are going, particularly if
                       you are staying in England if you can give us an address.

                              However, as I say, I don't intend to call you back if
                         I can possibly avoid it.

                              The third thing is, and   this is difficult, try not to
                         discuss thesecases.    There is going to be a long gap now
                         so in a sense you ought to go back to the situation as if
                         none of this had ever been, because you are still the
                         Jury, you are still sworn and we still haven't finished.
                         These are still current inquests and until we terminate
                         them in some way or another you are part of them.

                              The fourth thing I want to say at this point, in case
                         Iforget it later, I want to say when I eventually rise
                         now all the inquests are going to be adjourned to a date
                         to be fixed.    I hope that phraseology is satisfactory to
                         you.   It does seem to me the most sensible way of putting
                         it because I cannot give you a firm date.    Is everybody
                         content with that? ~ -

                              I say it now in case I forget right at the end.   It
                         shall be deemed to be effective as of the end of this
                         session this afternoon and that is in respect of all the
                         ninety-five people whom we have thought about.


                     H
                                                  -   3 -

                                                                                        1250
_ n m p h ai n Ltd
                          Now you know, bccause you have been here, we have
                    done ninety-five inquests and as far as possible we have
                    tried to tnink of each one as being unique, important,
                    special,.and I think that was right and I hope you feel
                    that way too.    I want to say again that although it is a
                    lot of cases, that is in fact the truth.    If there had
                    just been one death it would have been just as big a
            B       tragedy for that one family as the ninety-five have been
                    for ninety-five families.    We must never, ever forget
                    that.
                         Coroners, of course, only deal with dead people, as
                    you have already discovered, but I want to say that I do
                    recognise there were a lot of injured people there as
                    well, people who suffered; some with trivial injuries,
                    some more serious.   I think a lot of these injured people
                    have recovered and that is good.    I am pleased but there
                    are still some who may be, to a greater or a lesser
                    extent, affected from injuries which they received at
                    Hillsborough.   Insofar as I am able to say anything I
                    would like to say to all these people that I do hope they
                    will get better and make as good a recovery as it is
                    possible to do.
                         There are others who weren't injured at Hillsborough
                    at all, but who have been very grievously affected by the
                    events.   That is, may be family members, professionals,
                    police officers, people who in some way got involved or
                    were impacted by the event.   I also want to remember
                    those and say that yes, this has been a very big disaster.
                    It is bigger than just the ninety-five, although, of
                    course, the ninety-five are the ones who have lost their
                    lives.   We must always remember that because although our
                    sympathy has to be with the bereaved and with the
                    families, other people are or may also be suffering.    It
                    is no use saying these are the only ones that matter.
                    Everybody matters.

                         Now I cannot possibly name all the injured people,
                                      tre are too many,
                    First, because there          many.    Secondly, I don't
                    know them.   However, I want to mention two people because
                    these are two boys.    One is called Tony Bland and the
                    other one is called Andrew Devine.     These two lads, and I
                    think probably Dr. Gumpert knows these, these two boys
                    unfortunately suffered the most horrific insult to their
                    brain but did not die in this technical sense which we
                    have been talking about - brain stem death.     They are for
                    all practical purposes comatose and I want their families
                    to know that in many ways I feel very much for them
                    because not only do they have children who are alive, but
                    in many ways they are almost dead and so they go and see
                    them and I do feel for them.     I want them to know that I
                    hope you feel with me for these families, and I want them
                    to know although they are not dead and they have got
                H
                                             - 4 -
                                                                                   1251
H arph am U d
                nothing to do with me as a Coroner, I only hope to
                goodness they recover, at least to a certain extent.   It
                would be wonderful to think there was some improvement in
                their state.   I want these families to know that I am
                conscious of them.
                    Now the next group of people I want to think about,
            B now and a the
              and  in    sense I have stopped talking about the injured
                            deceased and the two boys and their families,
               lr. Fraser on quite a lot of occasions he has risen and orr
              at least one occasion I think it was Mrs. Matthews who
              wanted to read her thanks direct to us, but Mr. Fraser has
              on many occasions risen and, indeed, Mrs. McBrien as well
              she had specifically written out something which Mr.
                raser read to us about - was it Mr. Gray?    I did
              appreciate that.     Not because of me. After all, it
              doesn't matter to me, but it matters to them      t they
              have been recognised as people who have tried.     However,
              we have not read everybody's name out, have we?      You know
              better than any how many names have been mentioned in
              these summaries - dozens and dozens.     I have not counted
              up how many there are, but there are probably several
              lundred different names that we have heard in this court
              who have tried.     Some of them were fans, some of them
              were off-duty police officers, some were off-duty
              ambulance people, nurses, doctors, South Yorkshire Police
              Officers.     Very many we heard mentioned and they too
              tried.
                     I want now to talce the opportunity of collectively
                thanking everybody.    I don't care what badge, label or
                whatever one puts on tnem. everybody who tried to help on
                that day to save somebody s life or to help somebody who
                was injured, or to get involved, we thank them.

                      Of course we thank the people who dealt with the
                deceased.    Those are the ones we have been thinking
                about, but we thank them all.    I hope you join me in
                that.
                      I want to thank one other group.   There were a lot
                of people who helped on the day you would be surprised,
                and you will hear in a moment some of the organisations,
                because I am going to read the organisations out, who were
                here at this Medico Legal Centre on the Saturday, the
                Sunday and the Monday.    However, there weren't just
                organisations.    There were loads of people from all walks
                of life, doing their best.    Now whether their best was
                good enough, that is an arguable point, but I would like
                to think that anybody who made an attempt to be helpful,
                to be kind, to ease things, even if they got it wrong
                sometimes, I want to acknowledge them as having been here
                and as having tried to facilitate things which had to be
                done.
            H
                                        - 5 -
                                                                                    JV)




H am H am Ltd
                                                                              125
V




                                  I want to turn from all those people now and talk
                             about the people we have seen - the lest Midlands Police
                             Officers really to a large extent, and in particular the,
                             shall we say, Coroner's Croup who have been present during
                             these last two and a half weeks. As you heard in the
                             beginning there were about 500 officers.   I don t know
                             most of them and, indeed, even if I knew them I could not
                     B       list their names.   I know quite a lot of other people who
                             I will not be mentioning who have done wonderful work, who
                             lave really tried, but they were not in this group I am
                             now thinking of.   I thank all those and I don t want them
                             to feel slighted but time would not allow me to mention
                             everybody.
                                  I want to thank in particular several people who were
                             involved.    The first are people whom you have not seen,
                             but without whosp work we would not have succeed.     If I
                             start with Sue Harper.    She is the lady who, if you like,
                             set it up.    She organised the Memorial Hall.    She
                             organised the bookings.    She has dealt with a lot of the
                             work so that we are comfortable here and so that we can
                             manage.    She said, "I will sort it all out for you. ^ I
                             did not have to worry again.     I never thought about it
                             any further because I knewit would be done.      She did not
                             do it entirely on her own.     Obviously she had people who
                             helped and it is only fair to say that she got assistance
                             from people in Sheffield.    The City Council and in
                             particular John Batley who was the manager of the building
                             who had to co-operate with her because otherwise it would
                             not have worked at all.    I thank him and other people in
                             the City Council who have been involved in that, but I
                             pick her out particularly.
                                  Then there are various other people.     There is
                             Detective Brian Fairfield.    He has been in this building
                             but I don't suppose any of you will have seen him.      He
                             did an awful lot of running around.     He did a lot of
                             preparatory work.   lie was the chap who, if we needed
                             something doing, he could go and sort it out.
                                  There were the press officers.   You had nothing to
                             do with them, but the press did I have no doubt.    I know
                             they looked after you well and I would like to thank the
                             press officers for everything they have done.    It is a
                             very important task.
                                  Ilow do you think you would have managed to do ninety-
                             five cases without any pathologists turning up?    The
                             families all being here?    Nobody complaining because it
                             was inconvenient.    It was done because Sergeant Treadgold
                             and in fact this young man over here, Peter Griffiths,
                             whom I will mention again in a moment, were listing
                             officers.    Uhen we started doing the listing we realised
                             what a terrible task we had set them because I set certain
                         H
                                                      -   6   -

                                                                                            1253
    _ H a rg fta m U d
                    criteria.   I said, "Look, this is what I want.   Now go
                    away and do it."   I could see poor Sergeant Treadgold,
                    vho is not here today for very proper reasons, he wilted a
                    jit when I said it, but he went and he did it and we have
                    nad unbelievably smooth running and it is entirely due to
                    the fantastic work which was done by the listing officers,
                    Sergeant Treadgold and Peter Griffiths.
                B
                         Perhaps I snould also mention all the secretaries,
                    3iane and various other people - Vicky - who did typing
                    and who kept us going really.

                         Peter Griffi ths you have met.   I remember when we
                     hose him we were in this room and I think it was Mr.
                    Jones who looked up and said, "You can do it", and he did,
                     nd he has been a fantastic choice, hasn't he?    We are
                    very, very gratef ul to you for the way you have looked
                    after the Jury,    That was the primary task. The way you
                    have looked after me and Mr. Jones and the way you have
                    looked after the court.    You could not have done better.
                    I think you would agree with that, wouldn't you and I am
                    very, very happy to be able to acknowledge that.
                D        Over there, you may have seen those two gentlemen who
                    have been sitting there on and off most of the time, doing
                    nothing!   This one over there I demoted on the first day
                    I am afraid and I apologise now.    I called him Inspector,
                    but I do know that you are a Chief Inspector.    Chief
                    Inspector Tope has been an absolute lynchpin in the whole
                    of this organisation.    You have probably seen him walk in
                    with these books.    It was his task to make sure they were
                    prepared and that was not a minor undertaking either,
                    ninety-five volumes and I don't know how many copies so
                    that we all had sufficient. They had to be right. They
                    had all to be checked.    They had all to be read and then
                    they all came to me and I read them because, Mr. Fraser,
                    you may remember I did say I would read the statements and
                    look at the summaries so you would have an assurance so
                    that if possible we would get the summaries as accurate as
                    we could.    I will come to the summaries again in a
                    moment.
                          It was Chief Inspector Tope and Superintendent
                    Beechey who had an awful lot to do with that and with many
                    other things.    Poor Superintendent Beechey and Chief
                    Inspector Tope when they sent them out I then sent them
                    back with dozens of comments and everybody had to go back
                    and re-check.    Very often it was making sure I had
                    understood it correctly, but there was still a lot of work
                    I gave you and I am very grateful for everything you have
                    done.
                         That was in the preparation, but throughout these two
                    and a half weeks that we have been here they have been
                H
                                             -   7 -


H w ijw m u d                                                                     1254
                          making sure that things were 0going smoothly, doing the
                          oack-up, watching, undertaking anything that needed
                          checking.    Thank you very much indeed. We could not have
                          ■nanaged without you and I do appreciate it.
                              Mow'we come to the presenting officersand these you
                       lave met. We know them quite well.        This is not in any
                       order.     There  is Graham NcCombie,  John Killoch, Geraldine
                     B Evans, Gillian Parks, Julie Appleton, Matthew     Sawers and
                       Peter Gadsby.      They were the presenting officers.    I
                       iave already mentioned these summaries and I think this is
                       a good opportunity to say what I want to say.       They had
                       Deen prepared, they had been checked, I had read them
                       through.     If you like, I had approved them, in a sense.
                       The number of times the presenting officers came to me and
                       said, "I have read them through.       I want to change it.
                       I am not happy with the tone."       Or, "We want to change
                       the words.     We want to improve them."     That is why the
                       poor lawyers sometimes had a tough time because they
                       looked at the drafts which were prepared and what they
                       heard was something totally different, not because we were
                       trying to trap you, I assure you, but because we were
                       trying (a) to get it righter, if one can use that work and
                        (b; because we wanted to make the very best job we could,
                        knd they did.     May I say to you that not only am I proud
                        of you, I am exceedingly proud for you and I am
                        privilegedto have had a group of officers like you to
                        rfork with.     It has been a privilege and a pleasure and I
                        would like to thank you very, very much indeed for all you
                        lave done.
                                   I know for many of you it has been hard because these
                              officers, a lot of them knew the families.    I am
                              shielded.   I don't know the families.    There are very
                              few people whom I know.   However, they have been to see
                              them, they have spent time with them, they have talked to
                              them and for them some of these people were friends.     So
                              you have done wonderfully well.    Thank you.   I cannot
                              tell you how grateful I am to you.
                                   We have forgotten him!   This young man here, Michael
                              Layton.    Hepresented the visual evidence at every single
                              inquest.    Ithink I can say that from the first to the
                              last one the quality of his presentation was excellent.
                              There is no other word for it.   Not only was it excellent
                              in the technical sense, it was excellent in the humane and
                              human way in which he dealt with the evidence and with his
                              thoroughness in trying to make sure that we knew the times
                              correctly, that we knew exactly where it was on these
                              plans.   Michael Layton, I don't think we could have had
                              anybody better.   Thank you very, very much indeed.

                                   Sitting next to me here, this gentleman, the
                              Assistant Chief Constable of West Midlands Police.    Very
                          H
                                                       -   8   -

                                                                                            1251
,   l.   H w p n am U d
                    few Coroners have had the privilege of having the
                    Assistant Chief Constable sitting next to them for two-and
                    half weeks, watching, making sure I did not make too many
                    mistakes.    Not only did he do that for two and a half
                    weeks, for a year now he has been working not only, of
                    course, for the Coroner, but for various other activities
                    connected and involved with Hillsborough.     I have praised
                  B the officers  and I meant every single word I  said, but
                    there is no doubt whatever in my mind that this inquiry
                    and these inquests at this stage could not have been done
                    without the leadership and the guidance from Mr. Jones.
                    He must take a very, very large responsibility for the
                    success of the inquests.
                           I don't want you to think I look at the inquests as a
                      success, but they have gone relatively smoothly.    We have
                      had the information.   It has been presented in an
                      intelligi ble form. A lot of work has been done and he has
                      encouraged and made sure that all this was done.    I also
                      want to thank Mr. Jones personally because he has been to
                      me of enormous personal support.   I would like you to
                      know that, Mr. Jones, as indeed you have heard on other
                      occasions, but it is absolutely true and I wanted to say
                      it publicly how very, very grateful I am to you4 not only
                      operationally for your acting as Coroner's Officers, but
                      for your very real support to me as a person.    Thank you
                      very much indeed.

                           However, there have been other people in this court
                      as well.   Nearly every family came with some social
                      worker.   Now those social workers, on the whole I don't
                      know them, but they have done a fantastic job and they too
                      have carried this very heavy burden of being close to the
                      families.   It is not as easy as all that to be with
                      people who are upset, grieving, who need support.    You
                      can t break down.   You have got to stay up otherwise you
                      are not helping them much, are you?   So, social workers,
                      I haven't said anything to you before, you have done a
                      good job, well done, and I am very, very grateful for
                      everything you have done for everybody who has been in
                      this court room.   Thank you very much indeed.

                           Within this building, as I said to you on day 1,
                      other work goes on.   Unfortunately people are dying and
                      many, many of the cases get reported to me. The only
                      reason why the system has not broken down is because my
                      deputies and assistant deputies have been holding the fort
                      in the coronal capacity and my officers and my other staff
                      have made sure that things have worked properly.   Not
                      only my staff but the receptionists downstairs. All of
                      you will probably know them, Linda and Doris, and the
                      people whom you don't know in the mortuary and so on, all
                      these people have continued to work and have been
                      supportive and helpful and I want them to know that I do
                  H
                                              - 9 -

_ H arph am Ltd                                                                     1256
                       acknowledge their contribution as well, not directly to_
                       Hillsborough, but without them it could not have taken
                       place.   We would have been in a terrible iness.
                          We are very, very grateful to the WRVS who fed us and
                     who made our teas and our coffees and every time I saw
                     them they seemed to be smiling.    I thank them on my
                   B behalf and on everybody else's  behalf  for coming in during
                     these hearings and also last year.     They were here
                     quietly.   Thank you.
                            I want to read a list of people, of organisations,
                       basically, who were here last year and who were helping.
                       Ihis seams such a good opportunity to acknowledge these
                       activities.   There were people here from the British Red
                       Sross.   There were people here from the WRVS, from Cruse
                       in Sheffield, from Cruse in Rotherham.   There were people
                       from Sheffield Victim Support Scheme.   The Church Council
                       for Community Care.   Family and Community Services
                       Department.   Social workers and others - psychologists,
                       community nurses, a nurse, a volunteer helper, the staff
                       of the Medico Legal Centre, of course, and a lot of police
                       officers, in the first instance South Yorkshire police
                       officers and then the West Midland police officers.    They
                       too did a tremendous job and all of these people helped
                       and I am thankful to them for the time and effort which
                       they put into it.
                            May I say I would like to thank the shorthand
                       writers. They just sit there and write and write, but I
                       am very impressed with the quality of the transcripts.
                       You have not seen them but I have seen some of them,
                       certainly, and I am very, very grateful to all of you for
                       the quality of your work and the way you have helped with
                       these inquests.   Thank you very much.
                            I want to thank the legal representatives too.   I
                       usually do that in inquests but we have got Miss Addleman.
                       I have been a bit worried about you from time to time
                       because I thought you were lonely over there, but at least
                       you had space which I suppose is something.
                            MISS ADOLEMAN:   Sir, I am obliged.   My colleagues
                       have made sure I have not been lonely during the breaks.

                            THE CORONER:   That's good!    Mr. Patrick Limb and
                       your predecessorMrs. Norcliffe, and Mr. Catchpole and,
                       of course, Mr. Fraser, and you Mr. Wood too.

                            Lady and gentlemen, I don't think you could have
                       conducted yourselves any better than you have done with
                       regard to these inquests. Quite apart from the fact you
                       only asked questions when it was appropriate, which of
                       course is exceedingly helpful, your questioning was
                   H
                                               - 10 -
                                                                                     1257
l_   i im plrair Ltd
                      sensitive and correct. Also you showed great sensitivity,
                      if I ma.y say so, when you raised - and the illustration we
                      nad was what we did this afternoon, because you could have
                      stood up and asked a question there and then with possibly
                      ^reat upset to the family and I am very, very grateful to
                      you for the way you have, if you like, responded to me and
                      to the situation.    Mr. Fraser, of course, particularly to
                    B you, you  have been more on your feet than your colleagues,
                      inevitably so, but may I say how pleased I am, from my
                      joint of view, I had the privilege of"'having you bgfdre me
                      sver these last two and a half weeks.
                             It has been quite hard for the legal representatives
                        as well because I don't suppose for a minute they knocked
                        off when we went home.   They had to do some work and
                        prepare and be ready so thank you all very much indeed.

                             Finally, ladies and gentleman, I want to thank you.
                        You have been a wonderful Jury.   You have been cheerful.
                        You have been attentive.   You have been present, the most
                        important thing, and you have listened for two and a half
                        weeks to some very touching cases sometimes.   Thank you
                        very much indeed.   You are not discharged, of course.
                        As I have already explained to you we will need you back
                        but I take this opportunity of saying how fortunate - you
                        were chosen at random so I did not pick you.    In fact, I
                        still don't know any of your names, but I think we have
                        been very fortunate in having you as a Jury and thank you
                        very much indeed.
                             Uhat I want to say now is I want to adjourn these
                        inquests to a date to be fixed in respect of each and
                        every one of the ninety-five cases.    However, before I
                        stand up I want to read you something.    It is a passage
                        from the Bible and it has a relevance to these inquests, I
                        think.   I am not making any comment on it, I am not
                        preaching a sermon or anything like that, I just want to
                        read it. This is II Samuel, Chapter 12, Verse 15:
                             "15. And Nathan departed unto his house. And the
                             Lord struck the child that Uriah's wife bore unto
                             David and it was very sick.
                             16. David therefore besought God for the child; and
                             David fasted, and went in, and lay all night upon the
                             earth.
                             17. And the elders of his house arose, and went to
                             him, to raise him up from the earth: but he would
                             not, neither did he eat bread with them.
                             18. And it came to pass on the seventh day, that the
                             child died.   And the servants of David feared to
                             tell him that the child was dead: for they .said,
                    H
                                                - 11 -

_ l tarp h am Lid
                                                                                     1258
                  Behold, while the child was yet alive, we spake unto
                  him, and he would not hearken unto out voice: how
                  will he then vex himself, if we tell him that the
                  child is dead?
                  llJ. But when David saw that his servants whispered,
                  David perceived that the child was dead; therefore
              B   David said unto his servants, Is the child dead?
                  And they said, He is dead.
                  20. Then David arose from the earth, and washed, and
                  anointed himself, and changed his apparel, and came
                  into the house of the Lord, and worshipped: then he
                  came to his own house; and when he required, they


 •
                  set bread before him, and he did eat.

                  21. Then said his servants unto him, What thing is
              C   this that thou hast done?   thou didst fast and weep
                  for the child while it was alive; but when the child
                  was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread.
                  22. And he said, While the child was yet alive, I
                  fasted and wept: for I said, Who can tell whether
          D       God will be gracious to me, that the child may live?

                  23. But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can
                  I bring him back again?   I shall go to him, but he
                  shall not return to me."


              E




              F




          G




          H
                                       1 2   -


                                                                         1259
- HerghamUd
SECTION 3
      HEP. MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                    (WEST DISTRICT)



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

        VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                  STADIUM DISASTER

               ON THE 15TH APRIL. 1989

*
              INOUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                 MICHAEL DAVID KELLY




                       Before

    DR. S.L. POPPER. LL.B. B.MED.Sci. BM. BS. MRCGP

                (Her Majesty*s Coroner)




                          At

               The Medico-Legal Centre.
                    Watery Street.
                      Sheffield.

                          On

                    1st May 1990



               TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




         From the Notes of J.L. Harpham. Ltd.,
              Official Shorthand Writers.
          55. Oueen Street. Sheffield Si 2DX
                 A




                  B


                                                             INDEX


                          DR. JOHN CLARK - Called

                            By THE C O R O N E R .......................................... 3


                          POLICE INSPECTOR ROBERT MATTHEW SAWERS - Called




                                                                                            U) M D
                            By THE C O R O N E R .............. ......................
                  D         Cross-Examined by HR. FRASER.........................
                            Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB ..........................


                          DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                            By THE C O R O N E R .......................................... 9




                                                        —   00 - - 00 —




                      G




                      H
                                                                                                     951
J L. H arp h am U d
                      1st Wav   1990

                                 INQUEST   IN T O   THE DEATH OF M IC H A E L D A V ID K E L L Y

                              MR- FRASER:   Sir, the next evidence you will hear
                         relates to Michael David Kelly. Michael’s brother and
                         sister and their spouses are present in Court this morning
                         with the help of social workers.   I appear in a personal
                  B      capacity for the family but obviously for today I appear as
                         a member of the Steering Committee, in fact, as agent for
                         myseIf I suppose.
                                THE CORONER:         Yes-     Is it brother and sister, did you
                         say?


•                 C
                                MR. FRASER:
                              THE CORONER:
                                                    Yes, sir.
                                              Which are the brother and sister? Yes,
                         thank you. Good afternoon. Let me briefly describe to you
                         the general format of the Inquest so that you can follow
                         what is going to happen.   I am going to read to you in a
                         moment the evidence I took on 18th April 1989. There are
                         one or two minor errors which I will correct when I have
              D          read it. Then I am going to tell you what Dr. Forrest said
                         with regard to the blood alcohol and then Dr. Clark is going
                         to come, that is the Pathologist, and he will tell us the
                         relevant parts of the pathological findings. When he has
                         completed his evidence the West Midlands Police Officer will
                         present the summary and Inspector Layton will deal with the
                         visual side of the evidence. As I said, the Jury must be
                         getting tired of this because I say this in nearly every
                  E      case. The visual evidence when it is first presented is
                         very confusing because it refers to plans and numbers and
                         things, but hold on because he is coming round here in a
                         moment'and he will demonstrate to you on the big plans what
                         he js talking about and then the whole thing becomes very
                         very much clearer.   So don't despair when you hear all the
                         numbers.   We need them for the record so that we can find
                         our way around the paperwork later on if we should have to
                  F      do it. Is that clear? Then when I have done that we will
                         take no further evidence at this point.

                               This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened on
                         ■the 18th April 1989 and on that occasion Neil Anthony
                         Parkin, Acting Coroner's Officer said:

                                "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                  G             identified to DI Timms of the South Yorkshire Police as
                                that of Michael David Kelly by Stephen Paul Kelly, his
                                brother.  He was 38 years of age having been b o m on
                                1st March 1951 at Liverpool. He was a divorced man and
                                he lived at                        ^     Liverpool. He
                                was a warehouseman by occupation. He died at
                                Hillsborough Football Ground following an incident
                  H
                                                                  1
H arp h am L id                                                                                    952
       there on Saturday, 15th April 1989. PC 1791 Wilmott
       caused the body to be removed to the Medico Legal
       Centre and there he identified it to D*te<r*iv*       .
       Constable Simon Weigo. d who subsequently identified the
       same body to Prof. Usher and DI Timms.   It is the
       family wish that the body should be cremated."

Just bear with me for one moment.   Simon Weigold did not as
such identify the body to DI Timms.   I think they were
probably together at Ihe same time but that is not *tri<ctly
rieht as I have read it out to you.   In iact, Dr. Clark,
Ti the Pathologist, was present when Prof. Usher was there
and Dr. Clark, perhaps you will deal with the identification
in a little bit more detail on this occasion.

       I wrote to Stephen Paul Kelly.    Is that Y°u?
(inrii cat ins agreement ) On 13th May you Bignmd a form which
I sent to you and, in fact, you confirmed that the
information that we had was correct with regard to
address age, date of birth, occupation and that is still
so   isn’t it? Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol levels in
the case of Michael and gave us the evidence on the
day     on the Wednesday, and  in fact in the case of Michael
none w a s detected. It wasnegative. Dr.      Clark.

     MR. FRASER:   Just before you call Dr. Clark there is a
question which may not matter for your records but the
family are keen to clarify it and that is the question
the legal next of kin.
     THE CORONER:   Yes, we sent you a copy of that sheet
but we aren't using it. It ie really a summary sheet for roe
but I understand technically the next of kin is Joanne
Kelly, isn't it, the daughter?
       MR. FRASER:   Michael's daughter. Strictly speaking,
yes.    She is a minor but she is the legal next of kin.

     THE CORONER:    I quite accept that. It isn't relevant
to my proceedings but I do know if there was a child she
would take precedence over the mother-

       MR. FRASER:    Thank you.
     THE CORONER:      You are happy for me to record that,
aren't you?

       MR. FRASERj    Yes.
     THE CORONER:       I believe you represent that firm on an
agency basis?
        MR. FRASER:   It is a bit complicated but, yes.



                                   2

                                                          953
                                                                       D R . JOHN CLARK



                              THE CORONER:     Right.     Are you happy now if we go on to
                         Dr. Clark?

                               MR. FRASER:    Yes, sir.

                                             DR. JOHN CLARK - Called

                                                 Bv THE CORONER:

                   B   Q. Yes- - A. Dr- John Clark, Forensic Pathologist, University
                          of Glasgow.
                       Q. Dr. Clark can you just tell me how this lad was identified?
                          Well he isn't a lad he was 39. We will call him gentleman
                          I think? - A. As I recall he was identified to me by Police
                          Officers of South Yorkshire Police whose names I don't know


 •
                          at the moment but also with certain information which was
                          with the body, a name with the body and a number.
                   C
                       Q. In fact, the serial number was 72 I believe? - A. Yes, 72.

                       Q. You are quite satisfied you are telling me about Michael
                          David Kelly, aren't you? - A. Yes.

                       Q. On that basis can you tell me what your findings were?
               D       A. Cause of death was crush asphyxia.  This was based on
                          finding signs of asphyxia in his face. His face was rather
                          congested and had a bluish discoloration- These changes, I
                          have to say, were fairly mild in comparison to a lot of the
                          other people and one of the other features of asphyxia is to
                          find little haemorrhages on the skin. These weren't in fact
                          present.
                   E   Q. Were not present? - A. Were not present on the skin. They
                          were present internally. So really what I am saying is that
                          there were signs of asphyxia but it was really relatively
                          mild in comparison to other people but it would nevertheless
                          be consistent with pressure on his chest preventing him
                          breathing and thereby being able to get air into the body.
                          There was no other obvious cause of death. He hadn't
                   F      inhaled vomit and he had not suffered any internal or severe
                          injuries and there was no natural disease to account for his
                          death and so I still think he died of crush asphyxia and for
                          some reason the signs of that were rather mild.

                               It may be with some people who die an asphyxial death
                          there is an additional element in that there can be pressure
                          on nerves, particularly in the neck, which can stop the
                   G      heart very quickly and it may be an element.  It is
                          something which is impossible to prove but it may be his
                          heart stopped for some particular reason very very quickly
                          and he died.  In Any event there was nothing to indicate he
                          suffered for any great length of time. He probably lost
                          consciousness within a short period of time, ten or fifteen

                   H                                      3

                                                                                          954
L H arp h am Ltd
                                            DR. JOHN CLARK



seconds or so, and then knew nothing about it after that.
As I said, there wasn't any major injuries internally.

     He did have a number of grazes and bruises on his body,
his face his arms and his legs, some caused by fingers, by
people gripping his arms, and the other is probably caused
by pressure against other people cr some surface like the
ground.   Again these may well have occurred after he lost
consciousness.   So the cause of death, as 1 said, was crush
asphyxia.
     The only other finding was evidence of a past
operation, probably an ulcer operation on his stomach. I
don't know but I suspect that is what it was. That had no
bearing at all on his death.
     MR. FRASER:    The family have no questions.   Thank you,
Doctor.
      THE CORONER:  I believe this is, in fact, the last^
Inquest you are giving evidence at, isn't it? - A. That is
r ight.
It is right you have given evidence at 20 Inquests and have
done 2 0 -post mortems? - A. Yes, that is right.

I know and we all know that you come from Glasgow. People
might wonder why you were here but, in fact, you were on a
private visit last April? - A. That weekend, yes.

You very kindly agreed to help and, in fact, you did agreat
deal of work and if I may say so you have given your
evidence in a most admirable manner, clearly understood by
the Jury and also by the families and also I believe you
have done it in a compassionate and helpful way.   I would
like to thank you very much indeed both for your assistance
at the time and since, and in particular at these Inquests.
Thank you very much indeed. - A. Can I say in turn as
someone dealing with this sort of work and investigation of
death very regularly how impressed I have been with the
professional ism and sensitivity with which the proceedings
have been carried out here, in particular your handling and
explanations to the relatives of the bereaved people.   I
think it has given comfort to everyone who has worked here
and I felt it a very appropriate atmosphere.

     MR- FRASER:      Could I add my thanks on behalf of my
Committee and' m y .clients for those words you have expressed
to Dr. Clark.    I have certainly spoken to many families who
have spoken to Dr. Clark and they have very much appreciated
the time he has spent with them personally.     It is very much
appreciated.

     THE WITNESS:    Thank you very much.


                             4



                                                             955
                                                   P-T.   MATTHEW R O B E RT SAMERS




         CORONER:
       the            Mr. Fraser. is it likely the family will
want to speak to £ r . Clark?

       MR. FRASER:          They may do, sir-

    kTH?ocfhe
            0N^miiycr£h^tskth:j1iiy
                                  rtra
                                     drSo:nrhenfhave
course       Y -l
            e n t irely'free to leave us. Than, you again.                                     I
take it none of you have questions of Dr. Clark.

        MR .   CATCHPOLE:      No,   s i r .


        MR. LIMB:      No, sir.
        Pm rrF INSPECTOR 11ATTHEU ROBERT SAWERS,- Called

                              Rv THE CORONER:

Yes Mr. Sauers. - A - Matthew Robert Sawers, Inspector, Best
Midlands Police. I am already sworn, sir.




re a o y .
             ’!Y‘ s.ssr,ss
Kelly travelled to Sheffield on the Avon
                                                   ^uA    h tio n   S o u th
                                                                                 '£•£
                                                                               U6St   & n fl

South Wales Liverpool Supporters Club coach.             Coach.
William Macey and a number of other supporter
It w a s their intent ion to watch the FA Cup Semi Final
football match at the Hillsborough Stadium.

     The coach party arrived in Sheffield at about
hours. Michael made his way towards the ground
with Alan Warden, Karl Thomas and Dean             and
exception of Michael the others stopped at a shop ana
Michael continued to the ground alone.

        Paul Kelly, a Liverpool supporter, en^ere^ t^®     .
 Hillsborough football ground through Gate C.    He stoo
 t h e concourse waiting fo meet friends and whilst s a n d i n g
 there saw Michael, whom he knew, and he saw                 * d
 ground through a turnstile. The two men spoke briefly and
 Michael stated he was going to the terracing.
      At about 1535 hours Police Constable Hilmott made his
 way on to the Spion Hop end of the ground. There he saw.a
 man whom he now knows to be Michael lying on th« P lt«J* ®n
 his back. Michael appeared to be unconscious. *°Se         .
 with Police Constable Lally the Officer checked for vital
 signs of life but could not find any- Michael w a s placed on
 to a temporary stretcher and carried to the gymnasium where
 a temporary mortuary had been set up. Police Constable
 Wilmott remained with Michael.
       At about 1559 hours, Dr. Andrew Byrne examined Michael
  in the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.


                                               5
                                                                                               956
                                      P. I. MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS




          At about 0530 hours on Sunday, loth April, Police
     Constable Wilmott escorted Michael's body here to the Medico
     Legal Centre where he confirmed the identification by
     reference to Detective Constable Weigold. At this time
     Michael had not been identified by name.
           At about 2110 hours on Sunday, 16th April, Stephen Paul
     Kelly attended at the Medico Legal Centre where he
     identified the body of his brother to Detective Inspector
     T imms•
          On Monday, 17th April 1989, following identification by
     DC Weigold, Dr. John Clark carried out an autopsy and
     submitted a report giving cause of death-

          No match ticket was found in Michael's personal effects
     but Paul Kelly saw him enter via a turnstile. Further, sir,
     1 would add that Michael's jacket has never been found
     despite exhaustive enquiries to trace it and, of course, it
     in possible that the match ticket could have been contained
     in that jacket.
Q. As we have already said on many occasions in circumstances
   like this the presence or absence of the ticket itself
   doesn't prove - well, it may help in certain cases but you
   c a n ’t draw too many conclusions from it, particularly in a
   case like this. Now, Paul Kelly whom we are talking about,
   that is no relation, is it? ~ A. None whatsoever, sir.

Q.    It is just coincidence he happens to have the same name? -
A.    A complete coincidence, sir, yes.

Q. Paul had an unfortunate encounter with a horse, is that
   right? - A. Certainly he had an injury to his right foot and
   toe which he attributes to the actions of a horse.

Q. From our point of view we are not too concerned with how he
   got the injury but it meant he wanted to get into the ground
   rather more quickly and rather more comfortably than going
   through the turnstile? - A. That is so, sir, yes.

q. That is page 15, isn't it? Paul Kelly isn't here, is he? -
A- He refers to it first on page 13 and describes the same
   injury on page 15 with the horse.

Q. In effect, what he says is that he was told the gate was
   going to be opened which we take it to be the concertina
   gate, or one of the big gates, and he would be able to get
   in? - A. He does refer specifically, sir, to Gate C.

Q. Yes, that is right, he does. - A. It was certainly brought
   to his attention he may be admitted through that gate.



                                  6

                                                               957
                                             P .I . MATTHEW ROBERT SAUERS



q   . I think he says, ’’1 walked, in the gate", doesn’t he, on page
      15? - A. Yes, sir, he does.
o     He savs "1 walked in the gateand I walked behind the
      turnsciles and I saw Michael David Kelly come through the
      turnstile? - A. He does, sir, yes.
0     You have not got it in front of you but we have.  Up to now
      we have only referred to three gate openings, theearliest
      being the 1448 opening? - A. Yes.

Q. You      can remember that, can't you? - A. Yes.
o     uould 1 be right in thinking that these gates were opened on
      earlier occasions as well for short periods of time, - A-
      That is true, sir, yes.
Q. We don’t know which opening Paul refers to, do we? - A. We
   have no precise information.

Q. He gives no time? - A. He gives no time that we can
   attribute to the opening of the gate.
            THE CORONER:   Can you deal with the openings of the
       gate, Inspector Layton, or not?
             INSPECTOR LAYTON:       Only in general terms.

            THE CORONER:      Yes, Mr. Fraser.

            HR. FRASER:      Would you give roe a   moment please?

             THE CORONER:     Yes.
                       Crpgfi-Examined bv HR. FRASER:

    Q. Just to deal very quickly with the question of the fact that
       there wasn't a ticket with nichael. you say he was seen
       going through the turnstile which is suggestive of the fact
       he almost certainly had a ticket. Correct roe if 1 am wrong,
       but 1 believe it is the practice of this particular coach
       operator you may not know, not to allow anybody on the
       coach who hasn't got a ticket of the game. Th®
       behind that are fairly obvious.    Is that s o m e t h i n g which has
       come up in your invest igat ions? - A. It is certainly
       mv knowledge that the coach operators who operate on behalf
       of the Liverpool Supporters Football Club are                        *
       administered and tickets are usually checked on boarding the
       coach. People aren't usually allowed to travel on a
       Liverpool Supporters' sponsored coach, if 1 may use that
        term, without a ticket.
             MR. FRASER:      1 am grateful for that.



                                         7
                                                                       958
                                        P.I. HflTTHEM ROBERT SAMERS



         THE CORONER:    Can I just explain this to you
  it is obviously a matter which concerns you? These Officers
  c l n only %   wh.t is in the statements. They can g u e s s l i e
  all of us can but it would be unfair to expect a n Officer to
  hl'ard a guess on Oath. So he can only say what is in 'the
  statement and if there is nobody there who saw
  rlctet and can say “I saw him hold a ticket" and if we have
  not found it, he can't say somebody saw it or that ”e foun
  it because both of those things would be guesses but that
  \              to <^av you need to be too concerned-  I am not,
  particularly concerned about this point, not with regard to
  Michael- All right-
        THE WITNESS:  It might be helpful sir if I make one
  r-nmment. There are statements in the tile which I have se
  from three supporters who travelled on the same coach and
  H h -uDoorter refers specifically to being in possession of
  their own ticket.  It is an assumption that the same aPP*ies
  in Michael Kelly's case but that, taken together
  evidence of Paul Kelly through the turnstiles, leaves us no
  reason to suppose he didn't have a ticket.

                    Cross-Examined by MR- LIMB:

Q. Paul Kelly states he went through Gate C but he is
   as to time. Does he give any evidence as to-
   part of a crowd or a party of people going through Gate C or
   he found himself on his own in the end?
        THE CORONER:     I think you will find it on page 15.

        THE WITNESS:     Yes.   Mould it assist you, sir, if 1 set
   this in context?
Q. Yes. go ahead. - A. Briefly. Paul Kelly has made two
   statements and refers to this incident in both sir. Be
   refers to having acquired an injury to his foot in the
   vicinity of the enclosure between the outside        °
   Leppings Lane and the turnstile entrances. He refers t
   speaking to a Policeman and being led to believe the gate
   may be opened at some time in the future. He refers to a
   witness whom he was standing with who spoke to the
   and said words to the effect that the gate is opened, Can
   you get this person in because he has injured his
   does not refer specifically to how many other people entered
   through the gate at the time he entered through Gate C.

        MR. LIMB:      Thank you-
        THE CORONER:   You will see in a moment why we are
   stressing this because it comes up in the visual evidence.
   Ue can come back to it if necessary.




                                    8
                                                                      95$
                                        D .I . HICHAEL LAYTON



     MR. CATCHPOLE:     Sir, 1 only rise as a matter of
clarification.     I don’t think we have got the wrong
impression but    itwould be right to say I think that the
only two openings of the gate, in which a substantial number
of people went through, were those you have referred to
previously-   If there were any earlier openings for a very
short period of time, if. there is any evidence of people
going through,    it is only one or may be two people.

     THE CORONER:     Yes, that is a very good point.   We
haven11 mentioned any of the earlier .part because what was
happening was that the gate, I was going to say, was
continuously being opened. That is not true          butitwas
being opened intermittently, usually to throw people out and
not to allow them in. For example, one is timed at 1438, an
opening, and there is another one timed at 1439 where, in
fact, somebody was actually taken in on that one, one boy,
on the picture.   There were other openings but they haven’t
been terribly relevant until this particular Inquest and you
will see in a minute why it is relevant.     Shall we leave it
at this stage with the gates and we can come back to it in a
minute when we have heard Inspector Layton? Any more
questions?

     MR. LIMB:   No thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER:   In fact, it is only fair      to saythat
Paul Kelly does mention a time, I have just noticed, but the
first time he mentions is that he says it is after three
o'clock and then he gives a supplemental statement when he
says that can't possibly right or words to that effect.
That is true, sir, yes.

His timings can't be relied on? - A- His timings can't be
relied on.  I am satisfied the witness is doing his best to
recollect but certainly his information about timing can't
be relied on, sir.

There is an interesting sentence here. Turn to page 16
because this may actually help. The last paragraph, Paul
Kelly says, "Once I was inside the ground I saw the gate
open again. This was about five minutes after I entered the
ground. This was the last time the gate opened and
everybody came in and went down the tunnel• I now know the
gate was opened at this time about 1450." - A. Yes.

As I say, I wouldn't be too reliant on his timings but that
is what he says? - A. He does say that, sir, yes.

         DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                      Bv THE CORONER;

Mr. Layton. - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
                                                                     n . I . MICHAEL LAYTON



                             West Midlands Police.  Sir, an examination has been made of
                             video film and photographic evidence and Michael has been
                             identified alive in Enclosure No. 3- Stephen Kelly,
                             Michael’s brother, as you have heard is in Court, has viewed
                             visual evidence and identified his brother alive in
                             Enclosure No. 3 on a number of photographs.

                                  Photograph referenced DB16/30 is timed at 1445 and
                   B         that sir is if* Enclosure No. 3.   I wonder, sir, at;that
                             point whether you wish me to elaborate slightly in relation
                             to Paul Kelly’s evidence.
                             Yes please. - A. As I have said, that photograph is timed
                             at 1 4 4 5 . Paul Kelly is seen in a BBC video tape outside the
                             ground which was taken between 1437 and 1450- As you have
                             already heard, he cannot be specific and his description is
                             he is entering via Gate C and from my knowledge of the gates
                             doesn't accord with the two openings at 2.48 and 2.5... So
                             we can be sure he was outside the ground between those two
                             times but we can't be sure at what time he actually entered-

                           Q. This Is? - A. Paul Kelly, sir. Sir, on a photograph
                              referenced PR2/21 which Is timed at 1508 that shows Michael
                   D          In Enclosure No. 3 and whilst the detail again is not great
                              It appears to show him certainly alive at that time but 1
                              can't say at what stage of the process medically he Is at.
                              1 think It Is fair to say at that point as well that
                              Michael's sister has also viewed that visual evidence and
                              so, In fact, both brother and sister agree that the
                              photographs show Michael.

                           Q. He looked a bit distressed you think in that? - A. That Is
                              my 1 mpressIon•

                           Q. You can't say whather he is conscious or unconscious, alive
                              or dead, at that particular point? - A. It is difficult.  I
                              would say he is probably still alive, sir, but certainly in
                              distress.  In respect of the photograph at 1445 he is
                              certainly alive and there are no problems at that stage.
                              The later photograph does show him.

                           Q. That is the one, yes. - A. Yes. PC Wilmott has viewed
                              visual evidence and he was unable to identify himself
                              dealing with Michael but the Officer has signed a plan of
                              the pitch indicating the approximate location at which he
                              first came into contact with Michael at the Spion Hop end of
                              the ground. That plan, sir, is referenced CRH1•

                                   PC Maughan attempted to resuscitate a man at the
                              Leppings Lane end of the pitch but without success. He
                              assisted spectators to carry the man to the Spion Hop end of
                              the ground where he states that he left him with a St. Johns
                              Ambulance Officer who has not been identified. The Officer
                              has viewed visual evidence and feels Mr. Kelly may be the
                       H
                                                          10
                                                                                         961
„ l   H arp h am Ltd
                                                 n . I . M I C H A E L LAYTON




     man he assisted.  Sir, if I can just say this, in fact, I
     saw PC Maughan.  At the time of making his statement l- th
     best of his belief he believed that it was Michael but
     think it is fair to say that Michael's sister has since met
     PC Maughan and following that meeting I think they are both
     satisffed that it was actually Michael that he attempted to
     assist■
0. But in the statement he gave whenever it was he, said, it ,
   mieht have been? - A. To the best of his knowledge, bearing
   in mind the time and the description.  Sir, can I re£*r you
   to a plan which has been given the reference number MWJL9->.

Q.   C 185• - A. And perhaps, sir, PC M a u g h a n 's plan next JRK1,
     which I think is a little bit further back in the file.

Q.   C186. - A. And do you want PC Wilmott's 7       an, sir?

Q. Yes, I think we will have that one as well? - A. CRW1.

Q. C-187. - A. (moved to plan) If w© can deal with the
   plan MWJL93 in respect of the earlier photograph at 1445,
            is shown in ?his position here in E n c o . u r . N o _ 3 .
   In respect of the later photographs again it is shown in
   Enclosure No. 3 at this point here. Sir in                     °f the
   plan by PC Maughan, JRW1, on the pitch plan, the first
   position that is indicated is here (indicatin&) on the pitch
   at the Leppings Lane end and the second position he refers
   to is at the Spion Kop end here (indicating) and then m
   respect of PC Wilmott on the plan, CRH1, he actually
    indicates a position here (indicating).

Q. That again is a recollection, is it not? - A. Yes, so there
   is a slight variation between his recollection.

          THE CORONER:      Hr. Fraser.

           MR. FRASER:      No questions, sir.

           MR. LIMB:     No questions, sir.

           MR- CATCHPOLE:      No questions, sir.

          MR. FRASER:   Again, sir, before you conclude the
     evidence in this case, Michael's mother, who as it were is
     the head of the family, is unable to be with us today. She
     is in Liverpool but through her son and daughter they
     specifically want me to thank through you everybody who
     helped Michael on the day obviously. Everybody's efforts
     are very much appreciated and they want to offer their
     thanks to the Officers of the West Midlands Police as well.

           THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed, Mr. Fraser.
      Would you make sure that you pass my thanks on to your mum.



                                                                           962
                                           n. I . M I C H A E L LAYTON




             kind of her to say that and it is much
             1 by me on their behaiC and I am sure by all the
people.
       Before I just finish, the reason why we were talking
        the other times with the gates is that this young man
                      U ieuallv at 1445. Just remind me of the


        INSPECTOR LAYTON:   In this position here (indicating ) ,
sir.




        MR. LIMB:   Most definitely, sir, yes.




        I am very sorry that we have spent so much time talking
about times and so on but in a way that is what Inquests are
about. He are here to try and sort out, you k.nov, wh°
M O D l a are. where they are identified and where they died,


confusing and also you may think unnecessary D e a n
we are
we are talking about your brother, your mum's son.
course Joanne's dad.
     I      try to be conscious, at least for a moment, in each
Inquest of the fact that we have spoken not about some
number, anybody, but somebody very very special to the
family who you represent and who you are and I would jiKe
you to know so far as 1 am able I am conscious of the loss
which you suffered when you lost Michael. Thank you for
being here this morning.
     Ladies and gentlemen, we now rise and have lunch and we
resume at two o'clock.
       (The Inouest into the death of Michael David Kell_y,
           was adjourned to a date to be fixed)




                                12
                                                                     96-
  HEP. MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)



       INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH.FOOTBALL

              STADIUM DISASTER

           ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



          INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

            PETER FRANCIS TOOTLE




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER. LL.B. B.MED.Sci. BM. BS. MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                      At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

            2nd May 1990



           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J .L . Harpnam. Ltd..
          Official Shorthand Writers.
      55. Queen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX
                           APPEARANCES


Wednesday. 2nd Mav. 1990



MR. D. FRASER                 Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                              Steering Committee

MS. A. ADDLEMAN               Police Federation of England and
                              Wales

MR. P. LIMB                   Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
                              Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE              Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                                     INDEX


DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Called

  By THE CORONER ..........................


POLICE SERGEANT JOHN        KILLOCH- Called

  By THE CORONER ..........................
  C r o s s - e x a m i n e d by MR- LIMB ..............



DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

  By THE CORONER ..........................




                                  — oo— oo_
                          ?nri Mav 1990
                                     TNQUEST          INTO THE DEATH O F PETER FRANCIS TOOTLE

                                     MR.    FRASER:           Sir, the first evidence you                       w i l l   hear
                             todav    r e l a t e s   to   P e t e r ' f r a n c i s   Tootle   P e t e r ' s     p a r e n ts   are
                             in Court with members of his family and I appear in a
                             personal capacity for the family but also, ot course, as
                             member of the H i l l s b o r o u g h Steering Committee in the usual
                      6      way -
                                     THE CORONER:                Good morning, Mr. and Mrs. Tootle and                             .
                             e v e r y b o d y else.       IhlO        is mutn and dad.         Yes.        Before we taRe
                             the evidence I am just going to describe to you the
                             procedure so that you can follow and so that you know what
                             comes next, so to speak, because it is easier for y°u to
                             follow if I do that, I think.   What we are going to do in
                             the first instance is I am going to read to you what
(                            happened on 19th April 1989 which is when I was in
                             Court and I dealt with the initial evidence so that I could
                             allow the body to come h o . for the funeral             and
                             done that i f there are any errors in that, we will try ana
                             correct them.  1 don't think there are in this particular
                             case and then I will tell you about the blood
                             When I have completed that, Dr. Slater, who is          UP
                      D      there and who is a Pathologist, will give his evidence
                             regarding the pathological investigation-

                                   On completion of that the Hest Midlands Police
                             who has prepared a summary for me will present the * ^ rY
                             and when he has completed it, Inspector Layton will de*
                             with the visual evidence.   He start over there, Inspector
                             Layton recount* it verbally and tells me all about it. «•
                             eives us all the references, the plan numbers and one thing
                             and another so the shorthand writer can get it all down so
                             that we all know what we are talking about.    It is a l*ttl
                             confusing at that point but then he walks round here and on
                             his bi R plans he will show us what he has been talking
                             about. So it does become clear as you will find out in a
                             moment. When that is finished that is all the              ”e
                             are dealing with at that stage.    Is that reasonably c 1ear so
                             that you know what the format is going to be.    It will make
                             sense as we are *oinS along, particularly if you have this
                              in the back of your minds.   If you forget it, it doesn t
                             matter.
                                   This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened on
                              19th April 1989 and on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin, my
                              Acting Coroner's Officer, said:
                                      ••The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                                      identified to PC 1929 Friend of the South Yorkshire
                                      Police a* that of Peter Francis Tootle by Paul Raymond
                                      Frodsha», his friend. He was 21 years of age having




                                                                                                                                       987
    J l Harpharr- t t d
                                            nR. DAVID NEIL SLATER



        been born on 2nd February 1968 at Liverpool.  He was a
        single man and lived.at            #          ______
        Liverpool. He was a labourer by occupation.    He diea
        at Hillsborough Football Ground following an incident
        there on Saturday, 15th April 1989. PC Friend caused
        the body to be removed to the nedico Legal Centre and
        there he identified it to Detective Constable Simon
        Ueieold who subsequently identified the same body to
        Dr. Slater.  It is the family wish that the body should
        be buried."
         I then wrote to you, I do not know if you remember
    Mr Tootle, but on 13th Way you signed a form for me and in
    effect you confirmed all this information was correct and
    that is still so, isn't it? (indicating agreement)

         Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol level in the case of
    Peter and he gave us the evidence on the first day when we
    resumed in    fact,a fortnight ago now and the result in the
    case of*Peter was negative. Perhaps 1 should mention that
    everybody who is giving evidence today has already taken the
    Oath so that has already been done.

                 DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Called

                         fty THE CORONER:

q   Dr. Slater,if you would start In   the usual way? - A- My
    name is Dr.   David Neil Slater. 1 am a Consultant
    Histopathologist and a Fellow of the Royal College of
    Pathology, sir.
Q. Now this young man we are talking about which you recorded
   as Peter Tootle because you did not know his middle name at
   that time, you also knew by identification number 39, is
   that right? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. Although we have said Simon Neigold did the identification,
   in fact one of the Inspectors who was with him. You
   perceived it was him who was identified to you? - A. He was
   the initial identifying Officer, yes.

Q. You are quite happy that the evidence you are giving relates
   to this young man Peter Tootle? - A. Certainly, sir, yes.

Q. Dr. Slater, perhaps you would be kind enough to tell us then
   what your findings were - your relevant findings - and cause
   of death? - A. By examination of Peter showed that the
   general findings were those of asphyxia. These were
   indicated by extensive blueness of the face extending to the
   upper part of the chest. This was also accompanied by
   numerous small haemorrhages on the face called petechial
   haemorrhages. Similar haemorrhages were also present
   internally including in the brain, lungs, heart and also the


                                 2

                                                                988
                                         DR.   D A V ID N E I L   SLATER




            The distribution of this blueness was such to
Indicate traumat^c compression of the chest and upper part
of the tummy and this was supported by a reasonably
scratch to ihe right lower side of the chest and also two
large scratches to the back.

     My examination of Peter showed that he was
developed   fit and healthy, with no evidence of any natural
disease 'which could have contributed towards death.    It is
my opinion that Peter would have had a normal I f .
expectancy and I submitted my cause of deat*v, .sir, as
traumatic asphyxia-
I Know the Jury have heard this but, of course, the family
L « n t    Can you just deal with what your view .s with
    _ j tD i0<rS of consciousness and the pain and suffering
^hich people"suffer because obviously^the                  »f

death°rri?d u n c o nsci ois neMUoccurs very rapidly, "“r m a U y
t i t l i k thrie to five seconds, and after that there is no
awareness of any pain or discomfort and death supervenes
after another three to five minutes.

In other words, we have had variations on »h.
consciousness of what you say up to fifteen or twen y
    r,ds     Anvwav it is a very short period of time
whichever wav you look at it? - A . I was reading a paper
“« t n i g «   sir w h H h -as quite interesting. It described
a case where somebody had actually recovered after it but
unconsciousness occurred virtually instantaneously•

Really? - A. Yes, that was the finding, sir, yes.

 I am pleased to hear that because although            *rinS
 the people back it does make it more easier to bear the
 t hought, doesn't it? ~ A . Yes■
        THE CORONER:   Thank you for mentioning that.
 H r . Fraser -
      MR. FRASER:   The family have no questions s i r b u t               I
 have taken the liberty of asking Hrs. T o o t l e whether she
 would like to spend a few minutes with Dr. Slater an
 would be so kind I am sure she would bemostgrateful.

      THE CORONER: Dr- Slater,       you do nothave        any
 objection? * A. No-
 You are here in other cases? - A. Yes.

 All today, in fact.  I will explain to Hrs. Tootle our
 normal procedure but that will be fine. - A. Yes-




                                 3

                                                                       989
                                                        P. S.     JOHN   KTLLOpn



               POLICE s e r g e a n t .TOHW- KTLLOCH   Ca 1 led

                             P.y THE CORONER:

O   ve-  - A. Police Sergeant J o h n K i l l o c h > the Best Midlands
    Police, sir.  I have previously' rtfiin the Oath.

«   Mould you please, when you are ready       <a*e me
    - mmaT-vo - A- At 0900 hours on Saturday, 15th April 1989,
    nr P-ter Francis Tootle senior uoke his son also named
    P e t e r 'Francis Tootle, who was to attend to the Sheffield
    footbal1 match to be played at Hillsborough.

         Peter left Liverpool at 1030 hours and travelled to
    Sheffield with his uncle, Stephen Tootle, and a friend,
    Colin F r o d s h a m . They travelled in Stephen Tootle's car
       . .      in eheffield at 1230 hours.      After parking the
    vehicle they~made their way to the g r o u n d a n d s t o o d o n the
    Leopings Lane bridge from 1300 hours until 1440 hours^
    thIS point Stephen Tootle left to take his seat in the
    stands.
          At 1445 hours, Colin Frodsham and Peter joined the crowc
    at the turnstiles.    Gate C was opened and both Mr. Frodsham
    and Peter entered the stadium via that gate.         They wen
    along the tunnel into Enclosure No. 3.         With the pre.su:re of
    the croud from behind they ended up approximately eight feet
    from the perimeter f e n ce/ Mr. P ~ d * h a m became unconscious
    for a short time.    When he regain consciousness he
    himself further up the terrace.     He could see Peter lying on
    his back about five yards away from him.         There was a
    Officer who has not unfortunately been identified, w o was
    attempting to resuscitate Peter.      The Officer-s attempts
    were Unsuccessful and he left Peter to attend to other
    casualties.    Br. Frodsham was assisted from the terrace and
     subsequently attended hospital.
          Shortly after 1505 hours following the severe crushing
     in the Hest Stand terracing Police Constable Friend went on
     to the pitch and assisted with several casualties.  At some
     time between 1520 and 1540 hours he saw a man he knows to be
     Peter lying on the pitch to the corner of the North _»tand
     and the Spion Hop.  He examined Peter and then, with the
     assistance of another Officer, PC Griffiths, he carried
     Peter into the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had beer.
     set up.
          At 1 5 5 4 -hours Dr. Matthew James Bull examined Peter in
     the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

           At 2230 hours Br. Paul Raymond Frodsham identified his
      friend Peter to Police Constable Friend in the temporary
      mortuary.



                                         4
                                                                               99
                                                  P .-q -   JOHN KILLQCH-




Q. Yes it is only a trivial point but we said 1440 they stayed
   on the bridge and on page three he said 144 5 or have I
   missed another reference? - A. Are you referring to his
   statsment, sir?
Q. I am sorry, I am referring to paragraph two and page three
   of his statement.   I arn sorry, I beg your pardon. ilu» i»
   Colin Frodsharn‘s statement.
          Police Constable Friend later escorted Peter to the
     Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the ident 1 1 1 cat 1 on to
     Detective Constable Ueigold.
          At 0810 hours on Sunday, 16th April 1989, Mr. Peter
     Francis Tootle senior attended at the Medico Legal centre
     where he confirmed that identification to Detective
     Constable Kinsella.
          Later that day, following examination by Detective
     Constable Ueigold, Dr. David Slater carried out an ^ t o p s y
     and submitted a report giving the cause of death.  It has
     been established that Peter entered via Gate C and although
     no ticket was found in his personal effects Mr. Frodsham
     does confirm that Peter was in possession of a ticket when
     they entered the ground. That concludes my evidence, sir.
     There is visual evidence.

Q     Can you just bear with me for a moment? This is only a
      trivial point but we said 1440 that they stayed on the
      bridge and I think on page three he said 1445? - A. Are you
      referring to the statement, sir?

Q.  Sorry, I am referring to paragraph two, page three of his
   statement. This is Colin Frodsham 's statement.     Yes, I can
   see where you get 2-40 from.    It is on page four actually.
A. Yes, from the statement.
Q. It is halfway down the page actually- - A. He does, in
   fact, give two times.
Q.    That is not surprising at all. The other thing, from the
      visual evidence we know - this is in paragraph four - you
      mention 1520. You say some time between 1520 and 1540
      hours. - A. That is right, sir.

 q   . He is identified at 1520 in that area.   Where do we get the
       1S40 from can you remember? “ A. The two times, sir, it is
       a'mixture'of -two times. One is a video source and the other
       is from one of the statements.  1540 hours, pages 16 and 20
       of your document, sir.

 Q. Thank you very much.      It was just that I couldn't recollect
    that.   One other point I think you said Francis Griffiths
    with a n . ‘s ’ but I think it is without an ‘s'. - A. My
    apologies, sir, it is Griffith.


                                                                       991
                                                                            P.S.      JOHN   KILLOCH



                T H E C O R ONER:     Mr.. Fras e r ,       a n y t h i n g else.-*

                HR. FRASER:          Peter’s family have no questions, thank
        you -

                                r.ross-Examined by Mr^— LIMB

3       is it known by which opening of Cate C Hr. Frodsham and
        pltir e n « r . d ? - A- Could I just have a second to refer to
        Hr- Frodsham's statement, sir?
                  CORONER:
                T H E       Certainly. Page S . third paragraph "By
        this time it was about 2.SO". Then he goes on talking a
        the Gate-
                 HR. LIMB:          The greater likelihood, sir, is that it is
        the 2-52.
                 THE CORONER:          Sorry?
             MR. LIKE:   The greater likelihood is that entry was by
        the 2-52 entrance.
                 THE CORONER-          You must bear in mind when people give a
                 THE CORONER.          i          ^ certain amount of caution
         bitehe°says 4 y H i s rime it was about 2-50 and Peter and
         myse?? were'in Ibout the same position as when

         5s;:.    - r - k-s v s
         it was the 2-52 or the 2.59 opening.
              THE WITNESS:   He does say further                           on, sir, that        he
         recalls being ushered through the gate.
                  CORONER*
                 the         Pardon? - A. He does say further on he
         r e c a n s   ushered t r o u g h the gate and that confirms the
                        being
         second opening.
    0    Hhere is that? Can you remind me? - »■ Further on in the
         paragraph we have just quoted, about halfway down the _
         statement, sir, "Everybody was being ushered through...

    0 . "A large gate” which would confirm the 2.52 entry, wouldn't
          it? - A. Yes.
                  MR. LIMB:          Thank you.
                   THE CORONER:          Is that satisfactory?                  Is that clear,
          Mr. Limb?
                   MR. LIMB:         Yes, thank you, sir-




                                                        6
                                                                                                     992
                                                       D.I.   M IC H A E L LAYTON




          THE CORONER:      Mr. Catchpole.

          MR. CATCHPOLE:      No thank you,        sirr

            DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON— — Ca 1 led.:
                                                          z




                             P.y THE C O R O N E R :

n    Y e -. - A. Sir Michael Layton, Detective Inspector, West
     m ■h i and' Police   Sir an examination has been made of Vlfe
     f n l a n S photographic'evidence and Peter has been identified
      in Enclosure No. 3-

            Brian Peter Tootle, Peter's uncle, who in f^nrifild
      Court today has viewed visual evidence and has identifi
      his n e D h e w alive in Enclosure No. 3 .on a photograph
      referenced PR1/10A.       That photograph is timed at 1503 and my
      perception of the photograph, sir, is that Peter is a
      ?ime still alive although it is not possible to say at
      stage of the medical process he has reached.
           PC Friend has viewed visual evidence but w a s unable to
      identify himself actually dealing with Peter on the pit
      but the Officer has signed a plan of the j^l^h^found Peter
      indicating the approximate location in which he
      That plan is referenced JEF1.
Q. Before you move on to the pl«n». I h.ve • i r e i d y r e f e r r e d t o
   his comment• He identified h i « M l f I think on HAP 7 at 1520
   page 22. Can you just double check that? He has identified
   himself in other places but the one he h a s m e n t i o n e d i s
   that? - A. That is right, sir. He refers to MAP 7 timed at
   1520:13:18. He says, "I can say that I was                    *           j
   area to the left of the Gate in the pen itself . Sir,
   refer you to two plans?
Q. Let me get this right. He goes on to say he hasn*t actually
   identified himself on that film? - A. That is right, si

q    . At that time had chosen a location where he remembers he was
       working? - A. That is exactly right, sir, yes.

    Q. Yes because I had misread that slightly. Thank you.
    A. If i can refer you to a plan HHJL63, the plan of the
       terraces.••
    Q. That will be C196. - A. And the plan by PC Friend, sir,
       JEF1...
    Q. That will be C197. - A. Which is the plan of the pitch
       (moved to Plan) if we can refer to MHJL63 first of al1 the
       plan of the terraces and the photograph we have referred to,
       the timed photograph at 1503, this is Enclosure No. 3 and
       the point at which we believe Peter is shown is


                                          7

                                                                                993
                                                              n.T. MICHAEL LAYTON



    annroximately this location here                  (indicating)   in Enclosure
    Z         P    2       ?h!s here (indicating) is Gate 3 so in this position      ■
    here.
         in respect of the plan of the pitch by PC Friend. JEF1,
    the position he has indicated is here (indicating) which is
    at the Spion Hop end of the pitch, the opposite end of the
    pitch-
n   Tn fact  it is right a lot of people      taken co that, part
    It the ground? - A. That is right, sir. yes.

0 . That               is where it refers to this WAP 7. 1520? - A. Yes. that
        i s       r ig h t .

                       THE CORONER:     Hr. Fraser,   any questions on that?

                       MR. FRASER:      No, thank you, sir.

                       MR. LIMB:      No, thank you, sir.

                       MR. CATCHPOLE:      No, thank you, sir.

              t h e CORONER:   Br. and Brs. T o o t l e , this is * case
        where we haven't got very much visual evidence. The Jury
        ^ o Save been h e r f for qiite some time will by now have
        realised but it will not be quite so apparent to you
        K f i e first we are dealing with this particular Inquest,
        there Ts a firaat C” iation f n the amount of visual evidence
        I£d ! think on* can only say it is a " » « er of c h a n c e
        whether a camera was pointing in the right directionor
        whether it has been possible because there are some scenes
        where we just can't make out who was who.
              I      do want to draw your attention to something which
         Br. Frodsham says and which was recounted in the summary
         He says when he saw Peter in the terrace he could see there
         was somebody trying to give resuscitation and he wasn t
         successful. That was Hr. Frodsham's assessment
         situation but it might help you a little bit bec*J^e
         although the only visual evidence is sort of on the side of
         the pitch, the verbal or oral evidence which has been
         summarised for you indicates that people were        Ly
         attempting to do something actually very much nearer the
         scene of the incident itself.
               The sad thing is that it was unsuccessful and nothing I
          can say can possibly diminish the pain and the loss which
          you have suffered and no doubt still are suffering
          loss of this boy. Please accept my very sincere sympathy to
          all of you at this loss.
                   As I h*v« indicated to you, that is all the evidence we
              are going to taka.  He are not going any further now. We


                                                  8
                                                                                    99
                                                                                      n-T.   M IC H A E L LAYTON




    will rise for a moment or two which is our normal practice,
    nr Fraser will explain to you the arrangements with regard
    to you speaking to the Pathologist. Tnank you for b ng
        here.
                            HR. FRASER:                        Mr. and Mrs. Tootle would just like to
        say something*
                            THE             CORONER:            Can you just, find out for me what it is?

                  FRASER-   Sir, Mr. and Mrs. Tootle simply want to
                            mr
              ="r he^r eratitude to everybody who helped Peter on the
        dayr0SThey recognise that everybody did
           ij  „j       are onlv sorry their efforts were
        u   n   f   o  successful
                        r   t   u   They recognise that everybody
                                    n   a   t   e   l   y             .



        tried their very best.
                            thf       CORONER*   Mr. and Mrs- Toot Is, thank you very
        much                        On behalf'of these people I hear that obvious , w.th



        mention it and it is much appreciated by me certainly-

                                                                <Short Adjournment)

                 THE CORONER:      Can we deal with just one small point on
            the e l s e of Peter Francis Tootle „h.re I mislead Inspector
            Layton.
                                    nPTRCTIVE INSPECTOR P TCHAEL LAYTON - Recalled.

                                                              P..rrhB r   bv THE CORONER:

q   . inspector Layton, this is to do with that v **e°
      identification at 1522 on HAP 7? - A. That is right, sir.

q   . 1 think 1 put it to you it was at the Spion Kop end of the
      ground? * A. That is right, sir, yes.

Q. Whereas the evidence is that he is seen himself
   within the terraces? - A. That is absolutely   g                                                    ,

o               Just show us                                so that the Jury aren't misled on that         point?

*                               ^,°P^                        i^c!    ra?at ling
            rrth-r^fon ^ .w:i3isnLr/Mihpi:s r Ps» .r «
                Luch « indicated th. right.   »lth r e f e r . n c . t o t h . v l d « .
                identification he is actually referred to working in
                Enclosure No. 3 and not actually at this end of the pitch
                although he doesn't actually see himself.

    0           He doesn't see himself or Peter but he Just looked at *h«
                v!deo and said. "That Is where I was".  That Is right. Isn t

                                                                                                              995
                            THE CORONER:   Is that satisfactory, Mr. Fraser?        We
                       wanted to make sure we got it right.

                            MR. FRASER:    Yes, sir.

                            THE CORONER:    Thank you, Mr. Fraser.

                          (The Inquest into the death of Peter Francis Tootle
                                was a d i o u r n e d until a date to be — fixed)
                   B




I •




                   D




                   H
                                                       10
                                                                                         996
 L H a rp h a m Lit)
  HEP. MAJEST Y'S C O R O N E R FOP. SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                ' (UF.ST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

             ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



            INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

              KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS




                       Before

DR. S.L. POPPER. LL.B, B.MED.Sci. BM, BS. MRCGP

              (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                          At

             The Medico-Legal Centre.
                  Watery Street,
                    Sheffield.

                           On

                     2nd May 1990




             TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




       From the Notes of J.L. Harpham. Ltd.,
            Official Shorthand Writers.
        55. Queen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX             1007
                                         INDEX


DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Called
                                                           o
  By THE CORONER ...............................


DETECTIVE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCH                  Called
                                                           5
  By THE CORONER ..............................


DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Recalled




                                                           to co
  By THE CORONER ..............
  C r o s s - e x a m i n e d by MR. FRASER.


DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

  Bv THE CORONER ..........................
  C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by MR- LIMB ..............
  C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by HR. CRTCHPOLE.........




                                      --00““00"“




                                                           1008
Plav 1990
      TNOUEST TNTO THE DEATH OF KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, you will now hear evidence relating
to Kevin Daniel Williams. Kevin‘s mum and dad are in Court
with the social worker from Merseyside who has been
assisting them. The solicitors for Kevin‘s mum and dad are
members of my Group and I therefore appear in the- usual
guise as their agent to the Steering Committee.

          THE CORONER:   Good morning, Mr. and Mrs. Williams.
Before we begin I am going to explain to you the general
f o r m a t of the Inquest because you w e r e n ' t here a tortnight
aeo were you, and even if you were you m i g h t have
forgotten.       We will start in a moment or two by me reading
to you what was said on 18th April 1989 which is when I
opened the Inquest in this very room. Then if                          J
amendments which need to be made, if we have got some of the
facts wrong, we will sort that out.           I will then tell you
what the blood alcohol levels were, as measured by
Dr. Forrest, and then we will turn to Dr. Slater who is the
Pathologist sitting up there behind you. He will grve us
the pathological evidence.        I think I can ****** *?* **         .fc
 if, after this Inquest over, you feel you would like to tal
to Dr. Slater privately he is quite happy to do that if it
would be of any help to you. When Dr. Slater has finished
 the Hest Midlands Police Officers have prepared a summary
 for me and he will deal with that and tell me about it.

     Then we will hear from Inspector Layton, another Hest
Midlands Police Officer, who will deal with the
evidence. He will first of all tell me all about the plans
and so on and that is sometimes a bit confusing J>eca'J*e
there are a lot of references given but when he has finished
talking about it he comes over and shows us on these big
plans so that all of us, that is me, you, the Jury and
everybody else can follow it. Then when that is done we
conclude and take no further evidence at this stage.    Is
that reasonably clear? I like to tell you so that you know
what to expect. Otherwise you don't know what is coming.

     This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened on
18th April 1989 and on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin,
Acting Coroner's Officer, said:
       "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
       identified.to PC 1269 Glave of the South Yorkshire
       Police as that of Kevin Daniel Williams by James
       Stephen Williams, his father.  He was 15 years of age
       having been born on 27th May 1973 at Southport. He
       lived at                              Merseyside.  He
       was a schoolboy by occupation. He died at Hillsborougf
       Footbal1 Ground following an incident there on


                                   1

                                                                  1009
                                           nB. DAVID NEIL SLATER



     Saturday, 15th April 1989. PC Glave caused the body to
     be removed to the Medico Legal Centre and there he
     identified it to Detective Constable bimon Weigold who
     subsequently identified the same body to Dr. -.later-
     It is the family wish that the body should be
     cremated."
      I             adjourned the Inquest at that point.       I wrote to you
shortly afterwards and you, Mr. Williams, very kindly signed
it on 1 st May 1989 and I checked with you the details and
you c o n f i r m e d t^e name, that we had got it r ' ^ A i l l ^ o f -
birth 27.5.73, that is right, isn’t it, and the plfce of
birth which wls Southport wasn't it? We typed it into the
wrong spot in your case but you spotted that.

     Dr. Forrest did the alcohol levels for many of the
people who died, including Kevin, and the level in respec
of Kevin was 56 milligrammes per 100 mils.

               DR. DAVID NEIL SLflTFR - Called

                         Ry THE CORONER;

Dr. Slater. - A. Sir, my name is Dr. David Neil Slater.  1
am a Consultant Hist©pathologist and a Fellow of the Royal
College of Pathologists.
     THE CORONER:   Before I go on. Hr. Williams, you are
true dad of this lad.

      MR. WILLIAMS:      Stepfather.
     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much. You are mum, yes.
Mr. Fraser, so that we get the record right.  is ***** an
informal or a proper adoption because obviously the
carries th* m m surname?
     MR. FRASER:   There is no formal adoption but it is a
twelve years plus.

      THE CORONER:      Pardon?
      MR. FRASER:   There has been no formal adoption by
 Mr. Williams as such but the relationship is more than
 twelve years old.
      THE CORONER:   I am very sorry, Dr. Slater, to have
 interrupted you. Just remind us of your name because I h a 'e
 forgotten wher* w* were up to? Just start again? - A. My
 name is Dr. David Neil Slater, Consultant Histopathologist,
 sir.
 Dr. Slater, in the usual way you are satisfied that the
 evidence you ar* going to give me in this case relates to


                                   2

                                                                   10K
                                                                    nP. DAVID NEIL SLATER



       K e v i n Daniel W i l l i a m s who was a l s o identified a s No-                       51,    is
       that right? - A. That is correct, sir.

0.     I d e n t i f i c a t i o n w a s d one by I n spector T i m m s s o f^r a s y o u ar.
       c o n c e r n e d ? - A. That was the initial identification.

Q.     But     there    is no doubt          in your m i n d about           the    identity?
A. No.
q       T h e r e were v a r i o u s m a r k s on the body itself to i d e n t i f y it?
A.      S ir     Kevin was c l e a r l y labelled bot h by n u m b e r a n d b y n a m e .

o       Dr       Sl a t e r    w o u l d you be kind e n o u g h the n to tak e me through
*•      the £ « « « « ?            -V           Ny e x a m i n a t i o n of K e v i n s h o w e d that
        the main find i n g w a s that of asphyxia.                            This opinion was
        formed thro u g h the e x t e n s i v e b l u e n e s s on t h e face a n d u p p e r
        oart of the chest.                    In a d d i t i o n t h e r e w e r e small
        h a e m o r r h a g e s in b o t h the face an d internal o r g a n s i n c l u d i n g
        th e brain, heart a n d lungs.                       T his a s p h y x i a ha d c l e a r l y
        r e s u l t e d fro m c o m p r e s s i o n o f the n e c k and c h e s t a n d thi
        o o i n i o n w a s s u p p o r t e d b y t h e p r e s e n c e of t h r e e small
        s c r a t c h e s o v e r t h e i e f t s i d e o f t h e nee* a n d a l s o o v e r t h e
        front of t h e v o i c e box.                T h i s h a d also r e s u l t e d in fou r
        f r a c t u r e s t o the small b o n e s in t h e actual v o i c e box.                      In
        a d d i t i o n t h e r e wa s e v i d e n c e of b r u i s i n g t o t h e lungs, a g a i n
        s u p p o r t i n g c o m p r e s s i o n o f t h e chest.

                  My a u t o p s y s h o w e d that K e v i n wa s a n o r m a l l y d eveloped,
        fit, healthy, y o u n g m a l e w i t h n o e v i d e n c e o f a n y n a t u r a
        d i s e a s e w h i c h c o u l d h a v e c o n t r i b u t e d t o w a r d s d e a t h a n d it
        w a s my o p i n i o n that K e v i n had a normal life e x p e c t a n c y ,
        t e r m s of t h e m o d e o f d e a t h th e c o m p r e s s i o n o f t h e n e c k o r
        chest has o c c u r r e d h e r e an d unconsciousness o c c u r s v e r y
        rapidly, c e r t a i n l y w i t h i n a few seconds, a n d t h e r e is o n e
        r e p o r t e d c a s e o f it o c c u r r i n g a p p a r e n t l y i n s t a n t a n e o u s l y .
        F o l l o w i n g u n c o n s c i o u s n e s s t h e n t h e r e is n o d i s c o m f o r t an d
        pain.         D e a t h t h e n o c c u r s a f t e r a p p r o x i m a t e l y t h r e e t o five
        minutes, sir.

    Q. S o b e c a u s e w h e n w e sa y a s p h y x i a p e o p l e t h i n k o f a g o n y f o r
       a g e s a n d ages.        H hat y o u a r e s a y i n g is tha t t h e P e r s o n
       himself w o u l d v e r y r a p i d l y not k n o w a n y t h i n g                                 .
       what wa s h a p p e n i n g ? - A. I s h o u l d s a y t h e w o r d             asphyxia           is
       u n f o r t u n a t e in t h a t s c i e n t i f i c a l l y it p a r t l y i n c l u d e s s i m p l y
       that t h e r e is not e n o u g h o x y g e n in the blood.                     It d o e s n t
       imply actual s u f f o c a t i o n a n d p r o l o n g e d death.

    Q. Did y o u s a y t h e r e w e r e four f r a c t u r e s t o t h e v o i c e b o x ?
    A Yes, t h e r e a r e t w o b o n e s in t h e v o i c e box, a s y o u know, sir,
         arid b o t h t h e s e s h o w e d t w o f r a c t u r e s each.

         N o w the r e a s o n w h y I a s k e d you w a s this, a n d I wan t t o put
         t h i s t o you b e c a u s e I w o u l d like t o get y o u r v i e w o n it      one
         O f f i c e r will be d e a l i n g wit h t h e value o f t h i s e v i d e n c e in a




                                                                                                       1011
                                                                    DR.   D A V ID N E I L   S LA TE R




                         moment but she says that at a point when this lad was in the
                         gymnasium, in other words he had already been moved across
                         the pitch, she says she helped him into the gym from the
                         pitch, presumably she carried him. He stopped breathing.
                         She gave him the kiss of life, did some heart massage, he
                         opened his eyes said a word and died. Now in the ligh* of
                         your pathological findings, is that in fact a possibility,
                         do you think? - A. Well, sir, 1 was aware of this statement
                         and therefore I have clearly given this matter considerable
                         thought, sir.                I think there are several comments to make
                  B      but the*moderately large number of autopsies I did from this
                         incident sir, this was certainly the most severe case of
                         traumatic asphyxia that I actually dealt with. This was
                         both in terms of blueness of the face and also the area of
                         pallor of whiteness around the mouth- Sir, it was a very
                         very severe form of asphyxia and I do not think that
                         u n c o n s c i o u s n e s s would have been quicker than three or five
                         seconds.            I have no reason to alter what I have already said
    (•            c      on that aspect.
                               The other very significant thing about this, and it alsc
                          supports the severity of this case, is that again of the
                          autopsies I did approximately 15 per cent had some sort of
                          fracture to the voice box, the larynx. This case was highly
                          unusual in that in fact it had four fractures to the larynx.
                  D       It was by far the most severe case of voice box fractures-
                          Not only does this indicate the severity of the traumatic
                          asphyxia at the time but it also in fact makes it virtually
                          impossible for the person to have spoken by virtue of the
I
!                         fact that there were fractures to the voice box, sir. So
                          all I can say, sir, that scientifically and medically I find
                          that inconceivable that the person could have spoken.

                   E   Q. The other thing I notice is that you show in this particular
                          case extensive congestion of the cerebral veins and
                          cereballum and cortical coning and if a person speaks his
                          neurons are working, aren't they? - A. That is right.
     m
                       Q. That evidence would indicate there had been extensive brain
                          damage and he couldn't really communicate.             Uould that be
                          right? I don't want to put words in your mouth but I want
                   F      to be sure about that? - A. The coning indicates the
i                         severity of the asphyxia and again that would have resulted
                          in i r r e v e r s i b l e brain damage which again would totally
                          prohibit any form of communication.

                       Q. I have thought about this comment as well, of course, and
                          there are several explanations (1) that it didn't occur and
                          that the observer is mistaken but another possibility that
                   G      has occurred to me and 1 want to put it to you and please
                          disagree if it is not either right or you don't accept it;
                          it is possible, is it not, that if a person having died is
                          moved air or stomach contents might be expelled and might
                          make a sound as it escapes, so to speak? Is that a


                                                           4
                   H
                                                                                                  1012
    J L. H*rph*m Ltd
                                            P. s.   JOHN KTT.LOCH




   possibility? - A. It is an interesting comment, sir, because
   it is a possibility I considered also myself and that is
   certainly an explanation to the noise which could have been
   made which may have mimicked the word •■mum" but it would not
   explain the opening of the eyes, sir.

Q. No. - A. Bun it would explain the noise.

        MR. FRASER:   No questions, sir, but thank you very
   much. Dr..Slater, for that sympathetic and detailed
   explanat ion.
        THE CORONER:   Any other questions for Dr. Slater?
   Thank you very much. Dr. Slater.  We spent a lot 01 time
   thinking about this sentence because it was difficult.    I
   didn't think it was possible from what I knew of the
   evidence but, on the other hand, we didn't want you to feel
   that we weren't telling you what was in the statements. We
   felt it was better for you to hear it and have it explained
   rather than for us to keep it under wraps, so to speak, and
   you might possibly find out some other time.  I hope I have
   taken the right decision.  I don't know.  The only person
   who knows that is you- We did spend a lot of time thinking
   about it wondering what to do for the best.

             POLICE SERGEANT JOHN KlLLOCIL*>- Cal led

                        Bv THE CORONER:

Q. Yes. - A. Police Sergeant John Killochi,/ sir, of the West
   Midlands Police.  I have previousTy taken the Oath.

Q. Could you then please, if you would, take me through the
   statement? - A. At 0700 hours on Saturday, 15th April 1989,
   Mr. James Stephen Williams saw his son, Kevin Daniel
   Williams, leave the family home with the intention of
   travelling to Sheffield. He was to travel by train with a
   number of friends to watch the Semi .Final football match at
   Hillsborough Stadium. Kevin had a ticket for the match.

        Andrew Duncan travelled to Sheffield with Kevin, Thomas
   James Nickson and Gregory Fagen. They travelled by train,
   arriving at Sheffield at 1040 hours. Gregory Fagen left the
   others at the station. The other three youths caught a bus
   from the station to Hillsborough Stadium where Thomas
   Nickson left them.

        Andrew Duncan entered the stadium with Kevin at about
   1330 hours via the Leppings Lane turnstiles.  They initially
   stood together in Enclosure 4 but shortly after they moved
   to Enclosure 3. At about 1445 hours Andrew Duncan saw other
   friends on the terraces, including Anthony Maxwell Grier and
   Stuart Thompson.  Stuart, of course, also lost his life at
   Hillsborough-


                                5

                                                                1013
                                              P. S. JOHN' KILLQCH




     Ac about 1455 hours Andrew Duncan was still with Kevin
and although the crowd in the enclosure was tightly packed
he was not too concerned at than stage.  As the metch
started he was pushed forward down the terrace and did not
see Kevin again.
         Following the severe crushing in the Uest Stand
terracine Police Constable Michael John Craighill went into
Enclosure 3 and assisted a number of casualties.              Police
C o n sta b le C r a ig h ill   assisted to carry £ youth, he now
believes to be Kevin, from the gate i n the perimeter fence
of Enclosure 3 and on to the pitch.              The Officer attempted
r e s u s c i t a t i o n but without success.
     Derek William Bruder, an off-duty Police Constable from
the Merseyside Police who was a spectator at the match,
recalls seeing a person lying on the pitch near the Spion
Kop/North Stand of the ground.   The person as having
convulsions.  Mr. Bruder went on to the pitch ar.u gave mouth
to mouth resuscitation aided by a St. Johns Ambulanceman who
carried out cardiac massage.   Mr. Bruder recalls that a
friend of the casualty was with him on the pitch.
Resuscitation was continued and they were joined by a - t .
Johns Ambulancewoman who took over from Mr. Bruder. After a
short time the St. Johns Ambulanceman said that the casualty
was dead- Mr. Bruder then left the scene.

     Neither of the St. Johns Ambulance personnel or the
friend of the casualty have been identified. The person
Mr- Bruder tried to resuscitate is now known to be Kevin.

     Special Constable Debra Martin went on to the pitch to
assist and-she helped to carry several deceased persons and
many injured persons to the gymnasium. She assisted to
carry one youth who she now knows to be Kevin into the
gymnasium where she remained with him.

     At 1606 hours Dr. Curpen examined Kevin in the
gymnasium which had been established as a temporary
mortuary. Dr. Curpen certified life extinct.

     Special Constable Martin later escorted Kevin's body to
the Medico Legal Centre and she confirmed the identification
by reference number to DC Weigold.
     On Sunday, 16th April 1989, Mr. James Stephen Williams
identified the body of his son to Police Constable Scott
Glave.
      On Sunday, 16th April, following identification by
 Detective Constable Weigold, Dr. David Slater carried out an
 autopsy and submitted a report giving the cause of death.



                                  6
                                                                    1014
                                               p.      JOHN ^KILLO-CH




           Evidence is included regarding the analysis of a blood
      sample taken from Kevin where the presence of ethanol was
      detected-  The witnesses proving continuity of the blood
      sample are Detective Constable Grsen, Detective Sergeant
      Turner and Detective Sergeant Fletcher.  Dr. Alexander
      Robert Forrest carried out the analysis.

            Found in Kevin's personal effects was a ticket
       counterfoil which is consistent with his entry to the
       stadium via a turnstile. That concludes my evidence, sir-
B      There is visual evidence.

    Q. 1 think 1 am right in saying, am 1 not, that ttr. Bruder (I
       am looking at page 47) identifies Kevin from clothing, is
       that right? - A. He has been shown photographs which show
       Kevin which Mr. Layton will deal with later and one of the
       photographs 1 believe does show Mr. Bruder actually giving
       first aid.
    Q. So there is no doubt about it that Mr. Bruder was involved?
    A • Ho.
    Q. His personal recollection isn't as strong? - A. No, but what
       he does recollect is corroborated by the visual evidence.

D   Q. We have already mentioned the evidence of Special Constable
       Martin who said about the lad speaking.  In no way do I want
       to run poor Special Constable Martin down because she had a
       very hard day but it is right she was obviously from her
       statements very distressed? - A. I also wouldn't want to
       criticise WPC Martin in any way but I have interviewed her
       twice, sir, and she was particularly upset as indeed many
       people were but it affected her particularly badly the
       events of that d a y .
            THE CORONER:   Well, I won't ask you to draw a
       conclusion.  Mr. Fraser.

            MR. FRASER:   There is a matter arising out of what the
       Officer says which may perhaps leave a doubt in Kevin's
       parents' minds.   Can I ask you to ask Dr. tolater to deal
       with the point that was made in paragraph     six of     the
       summary, sir?

            THE CORONER:    About the convulsions?

            MR. FRASER:    Yes, sir-

            THE CORONERs   Yes, I will do that.      I will ask
       Dr. Slater to come down in a moment.

             MR. FRASER:   Thank you, sir.

            THE CORONER:    Is there anything else you want to ask?


H
                                                                   1015
                                              HR. DAVID NEIL SLATER
                                              P. I. MICHAEL LAYTON



           M R . FRASER:   H o , 'thank you, sir.

           THE CORONER:     I will recall Dr. Slater.

                   DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Recalled

                             Bv THE CORONER:

q     j)r> slater the point that is being made, of course, you
      have got to remember that Mr. Brudex? was .at., Uva Spion Kop
      end the bottom end and not the top, and he says,       I saw
      this man lying on the floor having convulsions". Can you
      he I d u s about that? What does that add or not to your
      pathological opinion? - A. It is obviously very distressing.
      Unfortunately when people have not got                       tBe
      brain as I said in my earlier evidence, which is really
      what the word ••asphyxia** means, individuals can in fact have
       fits. This is one of the mechanisms that leads towards
      death and makes the asphyxia worse.    This does, however,
      only occur when the individual is totally unconscious.       It
      does not mean there will be any pain or discomfort. The
      person will not know they are fitting and actually I            to
      accept that some individuals do have convulsions and it is
       one of the mechanisms leading to death in traumatic
       asphyxia, sir-
Q. Does it make you feel the other evidence about the lad
   breathing and speaking either more or less likely because
   obviously this would be much closer in time to Special
   Constable Martin's evidence than what had happened on the
   terrace? - A. Yes. For somebody to have convulsions, this
   would imply that the amount of asphyxia is such that there
   must be virtually irreversible brain damage present an«
   again this would fully support the concept that the evidence
   of opening eyes and speaking is not really conceivable, sir.

           THE CORONER:     Does that help, Mr. Fraser.

                      Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER:

           HR. FRASER:   I am sure it does, Dr. Slater.  It is
      difficult to find the phrase to sum the situation up. Kevin
      at that stage was beyond help. He was as good as dead? ~ A.
      Yes, that is right, absolutely.

q    . And would feel nothing and know nothing? - A. Absolutely.
       He would know nothing.
              nFTFCTTVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                              Bv THE CORONER:

    Q. inspector Layton. - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
       Inspector in the Uest Hidlands Police.

                                      8

                                                                   1016
                                                               n .I .   K IC H A E L LAYTON




                           Sir, an examination has been made of video filp and
                      photographic evidence and Kevin has been identiried in
                      Enclosure Mo- 3, also, sir, being carried across the pitch
                      and at-tlie Spion Kop end of the ground-

                           On * photograph referenced DAC3/1 Kevin is shown
                      apparently unconscious near the perimeter rencing in
                      Enclosure No- 3- On a BBC video tape, referenced hAP 7
                      timed at 1 5 2 8 :3 3 : 2 2 this shows him being removed from the
                  B   terraces via Gate No- 3.
                           PC Craiehill has signed a plan of the pitch showing
                      where he first came into contact with Kevin and where in
                      fact he laid him on the ground arid that plan, sir, is
                      referenced MJC2- The Officer has identified himself on
                      video again a BBC video tape, WAP 7, timed at 15t 8:4-.:24

<   •                 carrying a youth who he knows to be Kevin " tha*
                      error there-
                                                                          1S a
                                     It says Keith in the summary but it should be
                      Kevin - from Gate 3 and on to the pitch. The Officer did
                      not know the identity of the youth and at first in *act
                      believed it to be another of the deceased but that has been
                      clarified.
                            Photograph referenced PR5/32 and PR5/33 which are both
                       timed at 1532 show Kevin being carried across the pitch on a
                  D    temporary stretcher by a number of spectators and two Police
                       Officers. PC Hayes has confirmed his identification on
                       those photographs. The Officer assisted to carry two people
                       on temporary stretchers, both of whom were deceased, but he
                       couldn1t recall any other details and he didn‘t know the
                       identity of the persons he carried. He merely, as it were,
                       assisted in carrying. He have mentioned that before.   It is
                       not an unusual feature that people*s recollections weren't
                       exact.
                            A number of photographs, including a photograph
                       referenced TT1/30 show Kevin being given mouth to mouth
                       resuscitation on the pitch by PC Bruder who confirmed his
                       identification. Sir, you mentioned this Officer earlier.
                       In fact, it is true to say Mr- and Mrs. Williams have
                       previously seen visual evidence. They have in fact seen
                       some of that visual evidence again today and I think I am
                       right in saying they have confirmed that Kevin is shown on
                       that photograph so, as it were, PC Bruder is confirmed as
                       having given mouth to mouth resuscitation to Kevin.

                        The reason I asked is because it refers to a friend and
                        there doesn*t seem to be any other evidence of that? -
                      . No, that is right.  It is true to say the initial
                        identification was from clothing but it has subsequently
                        been confirmed.
                            Six-, can I t ufvr you to a plan which has been given the
                       reference MWJL-*0 which is a plan of the terraces?


                  H
                                                                                              1017
_ L H a rp h *m Ltd
                                    n.I- MICHAEL LAYTON




Yes, C201. - And MWJL41 which is a plan of the pitch.

I1JC2 are they the same markings? - A. 1 would say, sir, that
in fact although there are two markings the reference to KAP
7 on the previous plan actually would deal with PC Craighill
on that occasion.

So I1UJL41 we make C202. Let us include that one as well
MJC2 will be C203. - A. Which is PC Craighill's plan.
(moved to plan) Sir, if we can deal with>the plan MWJL40,
which is the plan of the terraces, the first photograph
DAC3/1 referred to in this summary indicates the position
here (indicating) and this indicates Enclosure No- 3 and it
is at this point here (indicat ing) that Kevin is shown quite
close to the perimeter fence.
     The second identification, HAP 7, the BBC tape, refers
to the identification by PC Craighill and the point at which
we see Kevin is approximately here (indicating? and it is
prior to his removal via Gate 3.

     Then, sir, in respect of PC Craighill‘s plan, HJC2, it
is a terrace plan he refers to but he actually indicates a
position here (indicating) in front of Gate 3 and a further
position which is shown just off the plan but it is here.
It is just on to the pitch.

It is diagrammatic? - A-. Yes.

Certainly the second location can’t be taken as giving us
any sense of distance? - A. No, but factually the next plan
will do that.  I think, sir, just to correct myself I should
have been pointing there.

Yes. - A. Sir, in respect of MWJL41, the video reference on
BBC tape, HAP 7, indicates a position here (indicat ing)
which accords with PC Craighill's recollection. There is
also photographic identification on PR5/32 which is where
Kevin is being carried across the pitch and the location
referred to is there (indi cat- ing) .

Remind me, do we know the time for that one? - A. Yes, 1
think it is 1532, sir. Yes, 1532. A further photograph,
sir, TT1/30, which 1 think refers to PC Bruder, the location
of that is approximately this position here (indicating)
which is towards the Spion Kop end of the pitch.

     THE CORONER:    Hr- Fraser.

     HR. FRASER:    No questions.




                             10

                                                          1018
                                      Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB:

                    Q. Mai the photograph with the reference DAC3/1 a timed
                       photograph'' - A- No, sir.

                                   Cross-Examined bv MR- CATCHPOLE;

                    Q. Andrew Duncan, did he show any visual evidence or did he
                       give a plan showing where he last saw Kevin, when they
                B      parted company;' - A- 1 don't believe so. Can you just give
                       me a moment? The answer is we don't have a plan from    «
                       Hr. Duncan.
                           THE CORONER:   If I can help you a little bit on that
                      one, what Andrew Duncan says is, "We stood up and were
                      standing about two to two and a quarter yards from the
                      perimeter fence around the pitch-  We were waiting for the
                      game to start.  At about 1445 or so a group of friends were
                      standing behind me, Stuart Thompson and Tony Grier.  I was
                      standing with Kevin Williams". Then he describes the people
                      coming out and he says, "When the game kicked off I was
                      pushed forward down the terrace about two yards. After this
                      push I lost Kevin and did not see him again". His final
                      remark is that he saw Kevin for the last time on the terrace
                      just before the crush started.  "The last time I saw Kevin
                D     was on the terrace just before the crush started. After
                      this I did not see him again". That is his statement, just
                      so that we know what it is which one we are talking about,
                      dated 17.5.89. Anything else, Mr. Fraser, you want to ask?

                            MR. FRASER:   No, sir.

                £          THE CORONER:      Mr. and Mrs. Williams, that is the
                      evidence we are going to take. As I said to you in the
                      middle of the hearing we spent quite a lot of time wondering
                      what we should do for the best. Obviously we knew Kevin
                      lost his life and we were worried about upsetting you in
                      Court but I think on balance we have done the right thing
                      because you have heard within the limits of what we are
                      doing and summarising the evidence what happened and what
                F     went on. Fortunately, Dr. Slater has been able to be here
                      and he has been able to give you his opinion as to what
                      happened in his view and what in his view is possible and I
                      think I am sure that will help you - not to come to terms
                      with the loss of your son but it is very difficult to come
                      to terms with that loss at all but just to appreciate in the
                      stress situation in which people found themselves
                      recol lect ions .tend sometimes to be mistaken and indeed there
            G         are lots of mistaken recollections not only in relation to
                      Kevin but also in relation to many of the other people of
                      which we have heard. That is not at all uncommon and occurs
                      in normal fatal incidents as well.      It is exceedingly
                      difficult when you are suddenly confronted with a situation
                      to then recount exactly what happened.

            H                                        11

                                                                                1019
l H*rph*m Ltd
                                  I      realise Kevin was a young boy, just fifteen, which is
                             very very young of course and I would like you to know how
                             very sorry we are that he should nave lost his life at such
                             an early age in this tragedy.  The Jury have had to deal
                             with many cases but today, at this moment, we are just
                             dealing with yours and so far as we are able we would like
                             you to know we are conscious of that. Thank you for being
                             here.
                     B
                                  Ladies and gentlemen, we rise for a moment or two- and
                             then we proceed to deal with our next Inquest.

                               (The Inoufrst into the death of Kevin Daniel Willi ains
                                      was adjourned until a date* to be fixed)


cm c

                     D




                         £

(   9



                         F




                     G




                     H                                    12

                                                                                         1020
J   L   H arp h am Ltd
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



       INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

              STADIUM DISASTER

           ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



          INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

            KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS
                 (Further)




                   Before

DR. S.L. POPPER. LL.B, B.MED.Sci. BM. BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                      At

           The Medico-Legal Centre.
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

                 4th May 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham. Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,             1ft21
      55. Queen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX          AUfcA
      A
                                 INDEX

                                            Page

OPENRJ 3 BY THE CORONER                       1.

SERGEA NT JOHN KlLLOCH Recalled

       By THE CORONER                         2   .
INSPECTOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS Called

      Gil THE CORONER                         5.

DR. DA/ID SLATER Recalled

       Bly THE CORONER
       Qross-Examined by MR. LIMB
                                            10
                                            13.
                                                  .
DR.
      # JEST JOHN   WALLACE GUMPERT Sworn

       Ur THE CORONER                        15.
       Cc oss-Examined by MR. LIMB           18.
        urther by THE CORONER                19.




      H                                               1022
A
    ■Viriav,   4tn   Ma y ,   1990


                                 FURTHER EVIDENCE IN

                         THE INQUEST INTO THE HEATH OF
B                              KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS

            THE CORONER:    Mow you may remember on Wednesday I
       kept you late.    I said I had to go out and do a little
       bit of thinking, and that is what we are going to deal
       with this afternoon.
             What we were thinking about was that one of the
        inquests which we had done related to Kevin Daniel
        Williams.    I will remind you of this inquest.   This
        was the case of another young roan, in fact he was only
        15.    The problem in that case was that the evidence
        was difficult to unravel as to when he died and w“at
        had happened when he was being taken across the pitch
D       and had he said something in the temporary mortuary and.
        so on.
             After the inquest was concluded my attention was
        drawn by some of my legal colleagues, and very    ^
        rightlybecause they were realised it was a sensitive
        problem and did not want to upset the family, so they
        brought it to ray attention privately first.   The point
        which they were bringing to my attention was that one
        of the witnesses appeared to say that when he came to
        this young man at the Spion Kop end, more or less,- of
        the ground, he had convulsions and he also said he
        could feel a pulse.     We knew from the visual evidence
        - we are going to repeat all the relevant evidence in a
        moment - we knew that he was being taken across the
        pitch and we had a timing at 1532.    Assuming that was
        rieht, this convulsion or whatever it was, was
        happening after that point of time.    The question was:
        what on earth was going on?
             I agreed that this was a valid point.    I think we
        were so concerned about the event which happened after
        that, namely, what happened in the gymnasium, did he
        speak or did he no.t speak * this was the lad with^ the
        fractured voice box • that we may not have put quite
        enough concentration and thought into the earlier
        evidence, but we are going to do it now. We are going
        to sort it out so that we know, as far as we are able,
        so that we understand, if we can, what happened.

                I think if Sergeant Killoch could come back.

                                      -   1   -                    102
A               sERflKAMT JOHN KTLLOCH   R e c a lle d

                        By TilE CORONER:

          THE WITNESS:   Sergeant John     Killocb from the
     West Midlands Police.

     read the whole summary again because we don t need to
     but I think paragraph 5 which^ is where somebody starts
     I
     terracing Police Constable Michael John Craighill went
     into enclosure 3 and assisted a number of casualties.
                       Craiehill assisted to carry a young
     man he now  believes to De Kevin uaniei Himauis n.uu.
     the gate in  the perimeter fencing of enclosure 3 and on
     to the pitch.
     The officer attempted resuscitation but without
     success.
     Derek William Bruder is a Police Constable with     the
T)   Merseyside Police who was off-duty at the match     that
     day.   He was a spectator in the North Stand*       He
     recalls seeing a person lying on the pitch near     the
     Spion ICop and North Standing and describes that    person
     as having convulsions.
     Mr. Bruder went on to the pitch and gave mouth to mouth
     Following the severe
     resuscitation, aided crusmng
                          by a St. in  tne west
                                   John's       ouauu
                                           Ambulanceman who
E    terracing Police Constable Michael
     carried out cardiac massage.     Mr. Bruder recallswent
                                         John Craighill   that
     a friend of the casualty was with him on the pitch.
     Resuscitation wa* continued and they were joined by a
     St. John's Ambulancewoman who took over from Mr. Bruder
     and after a short time by a St. John s Ambulanceman.

     The St. John's Ambulanceman said the casualty was dead
_    and Mr. Bruder then left the scene.
F
     Neither of the St. John's Ambulance personnel or the
     friend of the casualty have been identified.
     The person Mr. liruder tried to resuscitate is known to
     be Kevin Daniel Williams and there is visual evidence
     to show that, sir.
G    Then the next paragraph deals with the lady police
     officer.   Just read that next paragraph as well. - A.
     Special Constable Debra Jane Martin went on to the
     pitch to assist and helped to carry several deceased
     and many injured to the gymnasium.   She assisted to
     carry one young boy, now known to be Kevin, into the
     gymnasium and she remained with him.
H                             2
                                                                  1024
                   Ai. Mow what she said we are not going to deal with because
                       that was satisfactorily explained. What we are
                       interested in is that bit which has been read.    If we
                       turn to page 41, I think I arn right in saying that what
                       Mr. Hruder says - he says he saw a person about a
                       quarter of the pitch length away from the Spion Kop? -
                       A. Yes.
                   Bq. He was lying on the ground or thereabouts? - A. That is
                       correct, sir.
                         He says he can remember this because he recollects an
                         ambulance going past which locates it in his mind and
                         in fact he tried to flag it down? - A. Yes.

                         Then he says:
                               "I saw this man lying on the floor having
                               convulsions.”

                         - A. That is his exact wording.
                         Then if we turn over the page and pick out the bits
                   D     that are relevant.   He says he went down and he went
                         up to this man:
                               "...and then went to the man having convulsions."

                         - A. Yes, sir.

                         Then he says:
                               "I was joined by a St. John's Ambulanceman."

                         - A. Yes.
                                That chap said, 'You do mouth to mouth and I will
                               do heart massage i ••

                          - A. That is correct.

                          He goes on to say:
                               "I then took his pulse in his neck.   I could feel
                               a slight pulse."

                          - A. Yes, sir. * - .
                          lie then tried to resuscitate him, mouth to mouth, and
                          undressed him so he could do it more conveniently
                          probably. - A. Yes.

                       <). Then he says:

                   H                              -   3 -
                                                                                    1025
J L H a r p lw n Ltd
     "We continued to work on the man but after about
     five minutes he went grey and his face was
     withdrawn."

- A. That is right, sir.
lie talks about the man vomiting and being sick and
having a peculiar smell - at least, the breath...
Well, his mouth had a peculiar smell? - A. Yes.

He also noticed there was something unusual about his
rib cage:
      "As I did heart massage his ribs were unnaturally
      prominent."

 - A. Yes.
•Then eventually another St. John's Ambulance person
came and he left the man? - A. That is right.
 This whole thing took quite a few minutes? - A. Yes,
 obviously the officer had no conception of time.

 Can you remind me about the visual evidence?    It is
 just to make sure I have got it right that there is
 visual evidence, both of Mr. Bruder.•• “ A. One ^
 photographic print was mentioned, sir, and was given
 the reference number TT.1/30.   That is a photograph
 which shows Kevin lying on the pitch.   The person has
 been identified by Kevin's parents.   Shown about to
 eive mouth to mouth resuscitation of Kevin is a man who
 has been identified as Police Constable Bruder.    PC
 Bruder has identified himself on that photograph.

, Then there is another timed print, is it PR.5/32 or
  PR.5/33, showing Kevin being carried across, paragraph
  18? - A. There are two photographs, sir: PR.5/A/J/,
  which is timed at 1532 and PR.5/A/33.   That is also
  timed at 1532.
      THE CORONER:   Inspector Layton, just show us
 where those photographs are.
       INSPECTOR LAYTON:    Yes, sir.   They are referred
  to in the plan MUJL.42.    PR.5/32 is approximately at
  this position here, on the pitch.   That is the timed
  photograph, sir.    TT.130 is not timed, but I believe
  it is somewhere in this area here.    From recollection
  I think I did that actually from what Hr. Bruder says
  in his statement, about the positioning on the pitch.




                                                            1026
     THE CORONER:   Now Inspector Sawers went to see
Mr. Bruder because we wanted to be sure we had the
facts.
       INSPECTOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS Called

                  By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   Matthew Robert Sawers, Inspector,
West Midlands Police.
I believe you went to see him yesterday? - A. Yes, sir.

In fact it was Mr. Bruder's day off but he very
willingly gave his time? - A. He did.

Now can you summarise for roe what he says? - A. Yes,
sir.   He starts off by referring and identifying his
two previous statements to us, sir, the first of which
was approximately a fortnight after the disaster
itself, and a second statement in August of last year
was a very short statement in which he merely
identifies himself on the photographs that you have
heard reference to, sir.
He goes on to say that I had shown him a number of
documents and plans, from which he was able to refresh
his memory.   He refers to the fact he had made some
notes on the day after the disaster but that they did
not refer specifically to his dealings with this
casualty.
He refers, sir, to joining Merseyside Constabulary in
1987 and receiving basic first-aid instruction during
his initial training.    That was both in theory and
practical application.    He refers, sir, following the
incident and his dealings with this youth, to feeling
he was inadequately trained in his own confidence,
although it is also true to say that he is absolutely
satisfied that the first aid he rendered on the day was
the very best he could do and he felt he could do no
more.    He goes on to say as a result of feeling
depressed about the incident he applied of his own
volition for further first-aid training within
Merseyside Police.    Indeed, he attended a full week,
Monday to Friday course, leading to a further
qualification and.much greater confidence in his own
ability.    However, with the benefit of that training,
sir, he is able to reflect on his actions of the day
and he is still absolutely satisfied that the first aid
he rendered in terms of mouth to mouth and heart
massage were correct and he could have done no more for
Kevin.
He coes on then, sir, to deal with specific matters
that I referred him to in his original statement.
Specifically, sir, from the transcript and police file
he deals with page 41 of the police f:lie statements,
which is page 6 of his original statement in April last
year.   He refers and confirms seeing Kevin a quarter
of the length of the pitch.from the Spion Kop end of
the ground.   He refers to his being on the floor and
clarifies that as on the grass surface of the pitch.

He has given very careful consideration, sir, to the
expression that he used of having convulsions and in
the light of his further training and what he now knows
and thinks about the incident was that "convulsions
was not the word that was applicable to these
circumstances.   He refers specifically to having seen
epileptic fits and says that what he originally
described as a convulsion was not anything like an
epileptic fit.   He goes on to say later, sir, that if
there was a part of the body that he saw move it was
his head and that the word that he best thinks
describes this movement is that of a twitcn.

He refers to comments he made originally about
approaching the body, the body that was
Having specifically considered it again, sir, he “oe
say that the body was not convulsing as he approached
it.    He referred originally, sir, tofeeling for a
carotid pulse and originally he thought he had detected
a slight pulse.    On reflection, sir, he feels he would
be much more skilful if he were required to perform
this action again and he cannot discount the
possibility    that he did not feel immediately in the
right place    for the carotid artery.   He            ?*lt
 in the neck region where he thought he would find the
artery but he cannot say he would have gone to it
directly.
 I put to him, sir, the specific point I believe Dr*
 Slater made in his evidence about this inquest a couple
 of days ago and PC Bruder s p e c i f i c a l l y discounts having
 felt for the carotid artery with his thumb.              He refers
 to the first two fingers of his left hand.
 He says in dealing with the carotid pulse that he may
 have touched other areas around the      neck region,
 including the Adam's apple and that whatever he felt
 t h e r e he cannot be categoric it was  a pulse.He feels
 he may well be mistaken in that matter, sir.

 Later in his statement of April last.year, sir, he
 referred to the face of Kevin Williams going grey ana
 being withdrawn.   He wanted you to know, sir, that he
 cannot specifically say he saw the face change from a

                           - 6 -
                                                                      1028
                        normal pallor, or colour, to grey.   He mentioned it in
                        his statement, sir, in the sequence that it occurred to
                        him that he was now noticing that he was grey.   He may
                        have been grey as he approached him before he mentioned
                        it, or it may have occurred as he noticed it.

                         In his original statement he referred to vomiting and
                   _    thinking that Kevin had been sick.    He has given this
                   ®    matter some further thought and he is absolutely
                         satisfied that Kevin was not sick.    He did not see
                         Kevin vomiting and he did not see vomit on the ground
                        or on his clothing.
                        Does he still confirm that there was a distinctive
                        smell? - A. Yes, he does, sir.
                        To finish with the vomiting aspect of his original
                        statement, he does have a clear impression in his mind,
                        sir, of a fluid of some sort in the mouth, but he
                        cannot discount that that could be spittle or phlegm of
                        some sort.
                        He referred in his original statement to the original
                   T)   resuscitation attempts whereby he gave mouth to mouth
                        resuscitation and the St. John's Ambulanceman commenced
                        heart compressions.   His original thought, sir, was
                        that that was for approximately seven minutes and, give
                        or take, he is happy with that time and thinks it is
                        reasonably accurate.    He then later referred to
                        swopping over with the St. John's Ambulanceman and PC
                        Derek Bruder was then involved in external heart
                        compressions and this was when he noticed the unusual
                        rib cage and he had earlier referred, sir, to
                        unbuttoning his shirt, I believe.    He referred to
                        unzipping his trousers and noticing some striped boxer
                        shorts that you will see in the photographs that have
                        been referred to, TT.1/31 and 32 respectively.

                        I have put to him the apparent difficulties in the time
                        sequence of the action that he describes near the Spion
                        Kop end of the ground and his specific reference to am
                        ambulance and asking the St. John's Ambulance colleague
                        who was assisting him and who has not been identified,
                        to stop the ambulance because he was considering
                        utilising it, sir.
                        1 have drawn his -attention to the problems in relation
                        to the known timing of ambulances arriving on the
                        pitch, both of St. John's and of the South Yorkshire
                        Metropolitan Ambulance Service and I have drawn his
                        attention to the apparent discrepancy in relation to
                        the time shown on photographs PR.5/A.32 and 3, sir.


                   H                          -   7 -
                                                                                  1029
H a rp h a m Ltd
 The point is that the ambulances were known to arrive
 at about 1515 and 1517 or thereabouts? - A. Yes, sir.

 And the photograph, PR.5/A/32 and so on, is timed at
 1532? - A. That is correct, sir.
. We are saying he was dealing with this young boy after
  that? - A. That is correct.
  In fact I put the wrong times to you.   It is 1515 on
  the pitch for the St. John's Ambulance and 1520 for the
  first South Yorkshire... - A. That is correct, sir,
  irrespective of which...
  It is still earlier... - A. It is still earlier than
  1532, sir, and that point has been put specifically to
  Mr. Bruder and try as he may he is simply ur. .ble to
  reconcile those differences.   I have put to him, sir,
  was it for instance a question of one of those
  ambulances actually exiting the stadium across the
  pitch rather than entering the stadium.   He has
  considered that point and try as he may his
  recollection is still of it being an ambulance that
  entered the stadium.
  He refers then to being joined by the woman St. John's
  Ambulance Officer, who he refers to pushing him out of
  the way to become involved as a trained first aider and
  recollects this was approximately six minutes after he
  changed places with the male ambulance officer.    for
  that reason, with the original seven minutes mouth to
  mouth resuscitation, PC Bruder feels that that total of
  thirteen minutes he could amend to a period of time of
  between ten and: fifteen minutes of sustained attempts
  to resuscitate Kevin.
  It was at this point, sir, that after approximately two
  minutes of the involvement of the woman St. John s
  Ambulance Officer, that the male St. John s Ambulance
  Officer stood up and said, "He's gone."    He referred
  to the expression being completely grey and would seek
  to reaffirm that choice of words as his description of
  Kevin at that particular moment in time.   He says,
  sir, and I quotes
       "There is absolutely no doubt in my mind, both now
       and with the benefit of further training, that
       then at the moment the youth I had tried to save
       was dead, certainly dead, and beyond any further
       help.   I and St. John's Ambulance personnel would
       not have stopped if there had been any glimmer of
       hope at all.   There was none."



                        - 8 -
                                                            1030
He refers to the personal description of Kevin again,
sir, and refers to the fact he is rbsolutely satisfied
it was Kevin Williams that he was attempting to
resuscitate.
     THE CORONER:   I just want to make it crystal
clear that there is no suggestion in any of this of any
criticism of PC Bruder.   I think he did absolutely
valiantly and did his best*   Not only did he do bis
best on the day, he is doing his best today as well,
through Inspector Sawers, to try and help us understand
what he remembers and I want that clearly understood by
everybody.   I don't want you to think we are knocking
him. We are not. All I am trying to do is finding out
what happened.
      Mr. Fraser, any questions of this officer on this
part?    I had better tell you who else I am going to be
calling.    Dr. Slater and Dr. Gumpert, whom I will tell
you about when he comes.    He is a neuro physiologist,
a clinician, and an expert on this sort of thing.

     MR. FRASER:   No, sir, I have no specific
questions, save to say that I understand, Officer, you
have spoken to Mr. and Mrs. Williams, having spoken to
the officer?   I rise because I appear for Mr. and Mrs.
Williams and obviously have their interests at heart.

     THE WITNESS:   I did go and visit Mr. and Mrs.
Williams, sir, yesterday evening, having seen PC Bruder
and I have outlined briefly to them the contents of PC
Bruder’s further thoughts and recollections for Kevin
on the day.
     MR. FRASER:   Sir, I understand they are
appreciative, both of the efforts the officer has made
and of his visit and they have no questions.   They
have decided not to come today, sir, for reasons which
I am sure you will understand but they are fully aware
of exactly what is going on on their behalf.

     THE CORONER:     Thank you.     Have you got any
questions?
     MR. LIMB:      No, thank you.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:      No, thank you, sir.
     THE CORONER:   When we have heard the rest of the
evidence I am quite prepared to recall any of these
officers, or, indeed, any of these witnesses because I
want us to understand it.

     Dr. Slater.

                                                           1031
                                      DR. DAVID SLATER Recalled
                                           Bv THE CORONER:

                      3. Dr. Slater, you have, of course, already dealt with
                         this case a couple of days ago.    If I remember rightly
                         you said, among other things, that (a) this lad had a
                         broken voice box.    It was broken in four places.
                  B      Also (b) he was, of all the cases yju dealt with,,
                         perhaps the most asphyxiated, if one can judge that by
                         cyanosis and so on.    Would that be a correct
                         recollection? - A. That is absolutely correct, sir. Of
                         all the cases I dealt with Kevin showed really the
                         worst injuries to the neck in that there were four
                         fractures to the voice box.    In addition there were
                         three very large scratches to the neck*     In addition
c •                      to the normal signs of asphyxia, the blueness and the
                         hemorrhages which were '/ery marked , there is no doubt
                          this was a very, very severe case of asphyxia and
                         probably the worst one I dealt with, sir*

                         Ue established to everybody's satisfaction what had
                         happened in the gymnasium and the account, we dealt
                         with that as to whether this lad could have spoken and
                         so on, so we don't need to be concerned about that.
                         What we are interested in this afternoon is the
                         evidence relating to Hr. Bruder.   I will also remind
                         you that in general that what has been said is that a
                         person becomes unconscious in an asphyxial situation
                         within anything from zero to twenty to thirty seconds.
                         There is a slight variation amongst pathologists, but
                         quickly.   Then that death usual supervenes within four
                         to six minutes or thereabouts.   The problem is, as you
                         have already heard, that whichever way you look at it,
                         Mr. Bruder was dealing with this young nan quite a few
                         minutes after he had been taken out froa the Leppings
                         Lane terraces.
                         In the light of the evidence can you help us as to what
                         you think was going on on? - A. Yes, sir.   I will deal
                         with this in three general areas and then Dr. Gumpert
                         certainly will come and enlarge on these and help us
                         out further.
                          Firstly, and I apologise if this is an emotive area, I
                          think I need just to spend thirty seconds in explaining
                          what death is.- --Death is a sequence of events.  It is
                          not one set event and the sequence I will put to you is
                          an individual becoming unconscious; whilst they are
                        * unconscious they quickly lose all sensation of pain and
                          discomfort; then there is a period of various tissues
                          in the body which are susceptible to a lack of oxygen,
                          dying.   The most important one of these is, of course,
                          the brain, and after about three to six minutes the
                  H                            - 10 -
                                                                                    1032
 l   H arp h am Ltd
brain undergoes irreversible brain damage.    There is
then a point which we call brain death.    This is a
difficult concept, but by this I am implying that the
brain is irreversibly damaged.   The brain is no longer
able to control respiration and in fact that person,
for effective purposes, is dead, irreversibly.    That
is a medico legal definition, at least one medico legal
definition, of death.
The problem now comes that I have not mentioned other
tissues in the body.   For example, the heart, a very
emotive organ.   When somebody is brain dead it is
quite possible that the heart is still alive and still
beating and this can go on for a few minutes or longer,
perhaps even half an hour.
Then we come to the point where the brain is dead, not
controlling respiration, and finally the heart stops
and that is really the point of whole body death and
that is really what the lay person understands by
death. A doctor going up, putting the stethoscope on
the chest, no heart beat, no respiration, then that
person is unequivocally dead.
I hasten to add there that although the person is truly
medico legally dead, in fact even then there are
tissues in the body that are still alive.^ The skin is
still living.   The kidneys are still living.    This is
how we can then transplant them.   In fact it is an
emotive area and although that person is dead, there
are still tissues living.   It then takes another six
to twelve hours for all the tissues in the body to die.

Really, when we use the word "death" we have to be
very, very careful we are not talking about one set
event at one point in time.   We are talking about a
whole continuum of events that go on.

 I mentioned that some tissues do not die as rapidly as
 the brain and this includes both nerves and muscle.
 In fact one can have a situation of somebody being
 brain dead but the muscles and the nerves in what we
 call the peripheral nervous system - not the brain -
 are still living and in fact these can occasionally
 function in some way.
 Sir, that is a -general comment on death.

 In relation to the Hillsborough incident, the sequence
 that myself has given, and although I have not heard
 the other pathologists I understand they have given a
 very similar sequence of events, has been a rapid loss
 of consciousness, perhaps five to ten seconds.   I
 understand I have been the nearest by quoting a paper

                        11
                                                           1033
where unconsciousness can be instantaneous.   That is
the rapiri loss of consciousness.

As soon as that person becomes unconscious I have sairi
several times that pain modalities, discomfort, again
disappear very, very quickly, perhaps within a second
or five seconds.
In very general terms, certainly myself « an# I have
tried to keep it general - I then said that death - and
I have used the word very broadly, as you will
appreciate in my previous evidence - that death occurs
five, ten perhaps fifteen minutes after.   I purposely
kept that very open because human beings are very
variable.   You cannot say that somebody is going to
die in fifteen minutes, and not in fifteen minutes.

I am trying to put the concept that although I have
talked about averages, very occasionally you are going
to have additional extremes.   I think Kevin was one of
these extremes that did not fall into this five, ten or
fifteen minute sequence of somatic death, whole body
death, but in fact this was extended.

Having said that, Kevin had extremely severe asphyxia.
1 have no doubt in my own mind that he had suffered
irrecoverable brain damage and death within the three
to six minutes that I said.   Therefore, I am quite
confident at that time that Kevin was dead and there is
nothing that anybody on this earth could have done for
him after that time, including PC Bruder and any
ambulance people who arrived.

Again, you will appreciate from what I have said to you
that although Kevin was brain dead I have not said that
other tissues in the body may not have been living -
the heart, muscles, nerves.    In fact I know Dr.
Gumpert will explain in a minute that in fact there are
mechanisms whereby when somebody is brain dead in fact
the muscles in the body can twitch.    This will come as
a surprise, and I apologise if it is emotive, this can
even happen to somebody who hasn't got a head.    That
person is clearly dead, they haven*t got a head, but
those persons can actually have twitches in their
muscles.   This is what happened to Kevin.    He died
early - brain death - but unfortunately in this
particular instance we are talking about an extreme
case where perhaps the heart beating went on for a bit
longer and we noticed these twitches, at least PC.
Bruder noticed these twitches in the body.

I feel this is what happened in the case of Kevin.
From the description - in tact it is only fair to say
you also had a word with PC Bruder because you were
concerned, you wanted to be quite sure that you
understood his evidence personally, so to speak? - A.
Yes, sir.
In the light of what you heard and what we have heard
now, do you feel that this lad died, if you like, in
the totality sense, I don't meant thai,his skin was
dead, but in lay terms at the point in time when Mr.
Bruder was. with him? • A. Yes, sir, I am quite
confident of that.    When one speaks to lay people who
have experienced people dying, a word which is
recurrent in these descriptions of death is the way
that individuals turn grey.    In fact I was very
impressed by the content in PC Bruder s statement of
the word "grey", recurring several times.    To me as a
doctor that implied that that was the point of whole
body death.    In fact I feel that it was probably
around that time that Kevin's whole body died.     His
brain had died twenty/twenty five minutes before that
at the time of the crushing, but his whole body died at
 the time PC Bruder was with him.
We have mentioned these twitches and I think sometimes
they are referred to as spinal reflexes? - A. that is
correct, sir.
     THE CORONER:   Now, Mr. Fraser, is that reasonably
clear?
     MR. FRASER:   Even to me, sir, thank you, and I am
sure it will be clear to the family.

     THE CORONER:   Any questions?

             Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB:

Doctor, it is an emotive subject.   I remember in your
evidence about Kevin you described death in terms of a
process rather than as a moment? — A. Yes.

 I would like to ask you a few questions about the
 process following unconsciousness.   As I understand
 it, in the cases of these victims, unconsciousness has
 come ten to twenty seconds after compression of the
 chest? - A. Yes*- .
 That is as a result of oxygen to blood mix leading to
 unconsciousness? - A. Yes.   There are various...    We
 are now not talking about the actual cause of death,
 but mechanisms.   One very profound view that has been
 put forward of crush asphyxia, traumatic asphyxia, it
 is not simply only the reduction of oxygen going to the
brain, but the fact that in fact there cannot be
circulation through the brain.   The pressure from the
chest is reflected up into the brain so in fact^
effectively the cerebral circulation stops, so it comes
up against a dead end and it cannot circulate round.
But, yes, your concept then is right.
Following unconsciousness, that is to say, twenty
seconds, say, after the start of tb6i ccu^i beccjning
fatal, is the body capable of facial expressions or
does it have a neutral expression? - A. First of all
the word "unconscious" itself is a very vague term, as
you probably appreciate.    There are varying degrees of
unconsciousness - superficial unconsciousness, perhaps
a sort of sleeping...    You are unconscious, really,
when you are sleeping, and then, of course,
unconsciousness becomes deeper and deeper and deeper.
The deeper bit is when one truly loses pain sensations
and in fact in this particular instance having spoken
both to Dr. Gumpert and, indeed, a consultant
anaesthetist, everybody I have spoken to is confident
that pain modalities have disappeared very quickly,
perhaps within one or two seconds, five seconds is the
longest I have heard somebody express.

As I understand your evidence, following that short
period of five, ten, twenty seconds at the most, there
is profound unconsciousness rather than, say, the
unconsciousness of sleep.   Is the face then of the
unconscious person, the profoundly unconscious person,
capable of expression of any sort, or is there a
neutral expression? - A. I think I prefer to leave that
to Dr. Gumpert because you are into a clinical area
there of what we call reflexes.      I am not trying to
avoid the question.   I think h e w i l l be able to give
you a very expert professional witness reply to that.
Would that be reasonable to you?
     MR. LIMB*.  Certainly.    Sir, may I pursue that
matter with Mr. Gumpert?
     THE CORONER:   Certainly.    I want to be as
helpful as I can.   It is a difficult subject and in a
sense we are slotting it into the inquest of this poor
boy, but it is a more general topic and it will,(of
course, apply in a sense to everybody, but I don t see
how we can avoid doing it.    Please do pursue it with
Dr. Gumpert.
     Thank you, Dr. Slater.




                        14
                                                            1036
                            DR. ERNEST JOHN WALLACE GUNPERT Sworn
                                       Bv THE CORONER:

                  Q. Dr. Gumpert, could you first of all give us your full
                     names, qualifications and.appointment? — A. Ernest John
                     Wallace Gumpert.   I am a Bachelor of Medicine of the
              B      University at Cambridge, Bachelor of Surgery of the
                     University of Cambridge.   A Member of the Royal
                     College of Surgeons and a Fellow of the Royal College
                     of Physicians of London.   I am consulting clinical
                     neuro physiologist and consulting neurologist to the
                     Sheffield Area Health Authority, Teaching.

(                 Q. Dr. Gumpert, although you are a Sheffield man
                     professionally, I dragged you back from Cambridge
                     today? - A. Yes, sir.
                  0. Where I tracked you down!   I very much appreciate the
                     fact you dropped all your other arrangements in order
                     to be here.   Thank you very much.   Dr. Gumpert, you,
                     of course, had nothing whatever to do with this case.
              D      I think you dealt with quite a lot of the injured
                     following Hillsborough and indeed you may well know one
                     or two people I will be referring to later, but this
                     particular case was not one you came across.   You have
                     heard the evidence which has been put regarding this
                     young man.   What I would like you to do now is to give
                     us a short explanation, as you see death, in the first
                     instance and then we will try and relate it to this
                     young man and particularly Mr. Bruder's evidence
                     relating to him. - A. In about 1979 or 1980 when it
                     became possible to carry out renal transplantations or
                     kidney transplantations, it became very important that
                     the supply of kidneys of people who had died acutely,
                     usually in accidents, could be increased because the
                     life of a patient who has had a kidney transplant is
                     completely different to the life of a patient who has
                     to have dialysis three times a week.   They can go back
                     to normal life.
                     A hypothesis of brain death was then discussed, agreed
                     and published.    This consisted of certain examinations
                     of the back part of the brain, the part we call the
                     brain stem.    If you imagine the brain as being like a
                     walnut, and it is., it is like having a carrot stuck
                     underneath the walnut, and it is the carrot that
                     matters.    This is where blood pressure, pulse,
                     respiration and a whole variety of other functions are
                     controlled.    Once this part of the brain is dead, and
                     this death occurs, as you heard from Dr. Slater, in
                     between four and six minutes after deprivation of
                     oxygen, then the person is going to die.    They can be
              H                            - 15-
                                                                                103’
J l H«rph»m Ltd
 kept alive by artificial means and some of you may
 remember the case in America which was kept alive for
 thirteen and a half years.
 Some of us were concerned that the guidelines that were
 drawn up were not strict enough and that there was no
 call for them to be repeated after a passage of time.
 Perhaps unwisely we said this and this resulted in a
 BBC "Panorama" programme one n.ight at ten o clock when
 the medical profession for once actually debated it,
 eieht of us.    As a result of that debate the
 regulations were hardened.    They had to be carried out
 by senior people who were used to doing it and they had
 to be repeated.    A satisfactory outcome from my
 personal point of view, although I don't know whether
 the anguish was worth it really.
  As a consequence of that I suppose in the next three
  years I had to go through this rather unpleasant
  procedure many times.   It was part of my professional
  duty but still to this day I cannot certify someone
  dead without being disturbed by it still.
  From this I suppose I have gained a great deal of
  experience of brain death and brain damage.   It seems.
  clear to me, sir, in this case that poor Kevin was
  probably dead before he was got out of the area in
  which he was standing.   I would agree with Dr. Slater.
  I would think consciousness was lost probably within
  ten seconds.   I would say loss of pain would be almost
  instantaneous - not quite, but almost.
  I cannot explain the Liverpool Police Constable's term
  "convulsion because to me a convulsion is a major
  epileptic attack and he has quite clearly said he does
  not mean that, so I don*t know what he does mean.   I
  think it would be wrong for me to try and guess what he
  means.   I think we could accept that he does not mean
  any significant aoveaent.
  Unfortunately, after people are brain stem dead, they
  can twitch and very unnerving it is too.   This is
  really due to a spinal reflex. What we think happens
  in anoxia - lack of oxygen - is that the brain stem
  dies first.   Tne cortex, that is the thinking part of
  the brain, your walnut, probably goes on quite a bit
  longer and the-peripheral nervous system probably quite
  a bit long still and I think that is the explanation of
  what has been described by the Liverpool officer.

0. I know the Liverpool officer in his supplemental
   statement when he was discussing the question of a
   pulse says he may have been mistaken, but let us
   hypothesise that in fact he wasn’t and he had felt a

                         16
                                                            1038
pulse when he approached this young man on the pitch,
would that fit in with your understanding...   Is that
a possibility? - A. It is a possibility, sir.   I would
like just to observe that feeling the carotid pulse is
quite difficult in somebody who has got a low blood
pressure, as would have been here.   In fact it can be
so difficult it is impossible and you have to put an
electrocardiogram on to know whether the heart has
stopped or not.
I would also like to say something about resuscitation.
I was very fortunate when I qualified that I became
house surgeon of a famous heart surgeon called Lord
Brock at Guy's Hospital.   That was in the days when we
did open cardiac massage.   In other words, if somebody
died you opened their chest and you massaged their
heart between your hands.   A terrifying experience.
It was while I was working for him that one day three
of us were doing it one morning, that he stopped it,
and that was the start of external cardiac massage.
Even to somebody like me who has been doing it for
twenty-five years, it is still very difficult.    The
last time I tried to do it I failed completely.    Even
to a trained person it is difficult.   Indeed, when
junior doctors are examined for this now, as they are,
a significant number fail rather than pass.    It is
quite difficult and for the lay person it must be
incredibly difficult.

You heard Or. Slater's account of death, shall we say.
Would you go along with that? - A. I thought it was
eloquent.   I felt quite nervous!

You mentioned this point about unconsciousness and the
loss of pain and I think you distinguish slightly
there. Can you give me any idea that if a person
becomes unconscious, can he feel pain, and for how long
can he feel pain, in your judgment? - A. Again, Dr.
Slater put it very clearly.     You all read in the
newspapers about patients - particularly when they have
had caesarean sections, the ladies as usual - being
able to tell what the doctors were talking about during
the operation.     Again I have experienced this at first
hand when I was doing heart surgery because then it was
often very important not to depress the state of
consciousness too far because things were pretty tricky
anyhow.   When- w.e used to resuscitate the patients we
used to give them an electric shock.     Lord Brock used
to always shout, "Give it two fast ones."     The patient
would then ask you the following morning two fast ones
were.   Then you would ask, "Did you hear anything
else?" and they didn't, so it is all very much a
question of degree.


                       17
                                                            1039
  I think slipping from slight unconsciousness to deep
  unconsciousness in this circumstance, one, because of
  the compression and two because of the asphyxia and
  three because as Ur. Slater again explained everything
  is shoved up into the head and so there is nothing
  moving around, it would have been very quick, almost as
  quick as a rabbit punch I would have thought.

        THE CORONERS     Mr. Fraser?

        MR. FRASER:     No questions, sir.

               Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB:

Q. Dr. Guinpert you have spoken in terms of passing in a
   very quick space of time from slight unconsciousness to
   deep unconsciousness.    Following deep unconsciousness,
   do the eyelids remain open or are they closed? - A.
   Either may occur. There is no particular rule.     The
   thing we all see on the cinema of the person going to
   close the dead person's eyes.    I don't think I have
   had to dp that more than two or three times in my life.
   Most of the people I have seen die have died with their
   eyes shut.

Q. Deep unconsciousness is associated with no longer
   feeling any pain or discomfort.   Is then the face of
   the person who is profoundly unconscious capable of
   grimaces or expressions which might be taken as showing-
   pain or discomfort? - A. Not in my view, sir.

Q. Is it in fact capable of any facial expression? - A.
   Not in my view.

0. Following profound unconsciousness, is it right that
   the face will become discoloured towards the next stage
   of the sequence of events, namely, brain damage and
   thereafter brain death?

        THE CORONER:     Could you repeat that question?

        MR. LIMB:    I am referring back to the process, or
   the sequences of events as outlined by Dr. Slater, sir.
   Firstly, unconsciousness, thereafter brain damage and
   thereafter again brain death.    The nature of my
   inquiry was as to whether following profound
   unconsciousness ^ although there may be no outward
   expressions there*is this change that the face becomes
   discoloured?

        THE CORONER:     The greyness you are driving at?

        MR. LIMB:      Sir, that is right.


                            18
                                                              1040
                                      THE WITNESS:   Are you asking me to say when I
                                 think the greyness came on or just the way it changed?I
                                 cannot tell you when it came on.   I think probably it
                                 came on during the unconscious stage and I don t think
                                 the face would change when the moment of death came,
                                 total somatic death, I don’t think there would be any
                                 change.
                    B       o.        MR. LIMB:   Doctor, I am asking whether it happens
                                 following the entry into unconsciousness towards the
                                 next stage in the sequence, namely, brain damage? - A.
                                 I don't think there is a change of facial expression at
                                 tne time of brain damage necessarily.   This change of
                                 expression will be a gradually evolving process from
                                 the minute the crush started.

                                      MR. LIMB:        Thank you, sir.
                                      THE WITNESS:   Sir, you cannot tell by looking at
                                 a person that they are dead or unconscious, at least I
                                 can't.   You can by feeling them but you can t by
                                 looking at them.
                                                     Further by THE CORONER:
                    D
                            Q. If a person has been, shall we say, somatically dead
                               for long enough, would you accept or would you agree
                               that sometimes the face goes paler? - A. Oh, it goes
                               paler, and becomes rigid and takes on a stare.   Yes,
                               that is quite different.
                                         THE CORONER:     Anything else you wanted to ask on
                                 that?
                                         MR. LIMB:      No, thank you, sir.

                                         MR. CATCHPOLE:      No questions, sir.

                                      THE CORONER:   Is there anything else we want to
                                 ask Dr. Slater?   (No)
                                      Ladies and gentlemen, I will give you a chance.
                                 It is emotive but it is also very interesting.   Is
                                 there anything else while we have two experts here?
                                 You have understood it as far as one is able to
                                 understand it?
                                         THE FOREMAN:'     Yes.
                                      THE CORONER:   Dr. Gumpert and Dr. Slater, may I
                                 say to both of you, you have done remarkably well in
                                 explaining what is clearly a very (a) emotive and (b)
                                 difficult subject, succinctly and clearly to all of us
                                 and I very much appreciate your help.   Dr. Slater has
                        H                                   - 19 -
                                                                                               1041
H a r p 1- * " - L td
                               had to come as well, but not quite so far, and I am
                               very grateful to you for taking the trouble and the
                               time to come and I am sure it will be of benefit not
                               just to Kevin's family, but to other people who of
                               course are involved in this tragedy as well.   Thank
                               you very much indeed.
j
                                    MR. FRASER:    Sir, I will certainly make sure that
                           B   Kevin's family have the opportunity to see* the,,
                               transcript of what the doctors have said and I am sure
                               they will feel some benefit from that when they feel
                               able to look at it.    Thank you, sir.




                           D




                           £




                           F




                           G




                           H                          20
                                                                                          1042
    .   L H arp h am Ltd
         HE R M A J E S T Y ’S C O R O N E R FOR S O U T H Y O R K S H I R E
                              (WES T D I S T R I C T )           ~



                 I N Q UESTS I N T O T H E D E A T H S O F THE

            VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                            STADIUM DISASTER

                       O N THE 1 5TH APRIL,            1 989



                      INQUEST INTO T H E D E A T H OF


                         PAUL W I L L I A M C A R L I L E




                                    Before

    DR    S.L.    POPPER, LL.B,          B.MED.Sci,         BM, BS, M R C G P

                        (Her M a j e s t y ’s C o r o n e r )




                                        At
m
                      Th e M e d i c o - L e g a l Centre,
                             W a t e r y Stre e t ,
                                 Sheffield.

                                        On

                              3 r d May,     1990.




                      TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




            From the Notes of J .L . H a r p h a m , L t d .,
                 O f f i c i a l S h o r t h a n d Writers,
             55, Q u e e n Street, S h e f f i e l d SI 2DX
                                                                                m i
                                      r,vn.\mTt!Z S I . T g A ? ^ 3VANS Called

                                 Tin- TTTF, C C P .0 N E 3

                         pot   T f!" TNSP^HTOT? TTTCTTAT^ LAYTON C a l l e d

                                 '■w th7-
                                        : ccvtQNcn




                D




                 E


J T

                     F




                 G




                 H

                                                                                 1112
J L H arp h am Ltd
             A ?rcl           1990

                      t v -.ttjSs t ii-
                                      tto t p ?-       o f p a u t , ^/t l i -
                                                                             i a ?-; c a s l i ?.^

                       TTl! COi1.Gin>rl:       (Toocl morning.       Please sit down.

                        T.m F^A-GSR*   sir, the evidence you are going to
              B   licrr no': rolatos to Paul Uilliam CarlilQ. Sir, Paul's
                           within the precincts of the buildihg but^ would -
                  rather not hear the pathological evidence so will come
                  in, as it were, halfway through the hearing. -a^l s
                  stepfather and two sisters and aunt are present in
                  Court, sir. Sir, the practice that represents tuern
                  is a tiicnber of my Group and I , t h e r e f o r e , appear in the
                  usual guise this n o m i n j as their agent throug-i
                  Steering Conmiittee .

                       TIE COnOrTEP.:          You, sir, are the stepfather, is
                  that right?
                        GT^PFATIISit:         Yes.
                       THU COllOIIER: Just so I know 'who I am looking at,
                  Which are the two sisters? Right*
                        Can I just c?n>lain to you, before ve begin, so to
                  s-ncak. the procedure so that you know what is coning.
                  You have probably already been told, in the circumstances,
                  lmt very very briefly I am going to read the evidence
                  which I took right at the beginning last year in April,
                  in fact, the 1 9 th, and thon, when I have done that, I
                  an going to toll you what the blood alcohol levels
                  were and thon we will listen to Prof. Usher who will
                  toll us about the pathology. I think I will pause taen,
                  Mr. Fraser, so that w e can allow Paxil*s mum to come bade
                  if she wishes. '..Tien we aro all settled again, 0 0 to speak,
                  the presenting Officers of the Vest Midlands 1 olico will
                  present the evidence which they have summarised for me
                  ana Inspector Layton will deal with the visual side of
                  the evidence, lie will describe it, first of all. “Hiere
                  is not, I think, in fact, very much visual evidence,
                  is there, in this particular instanco?

                       IMSPSCTOn LAYTOIT:             Thore is, sir.              Some of it is
                  not confirmed.
                         THE CORONER:   Anyway, he will describe it. You may
                   find that bit a little bit confusing. Do not bo too
                   worried about that because, in a motnont, after he has
                   described it, ho comes round here and, as far as ho is
                   able, he shows us on these big plans what he has boen
                   talking about and then it falls into place somewhat
                   hotter.
              H

_ L Harpham Ltd
                                                                                                     1113
       'T’j'is then is a rcsuueti. Tnqnost which was o^onoa on
the 1rtli A-ril,          Miii, 0:1 that occasion, "oil Anthony
 xirlci:', Acting Coroner*s Cfficcr, sr*±c<:
          "The body vhich is the subject of this
          Inouest has been identified to DC 3155
          ''allace of the South Yorkshire Police
          as that of laul ’.ailiam Carlile by George
          rerJce, his uncle. He was 19 years of age
          haying been b o m on the Gth August, 19^9
          r.t Liverpool. He v^.s a single nan and he
          lived at
          Liverpool. He was a plasterer by occupation.
          77e died at Hillsborough Football Ground
          following an incident there on Saturday,
          1 5 th April, 1989. I'C 1212 Goulding caused
          the body to be ronovod to the IJedico Legal
          Centre and there ho identified it to
          Detective Constable Sinon I’  Jeigold who
           subsequently identified the same body to
          Prof. Usher. It is the family wish that
          the body should be cremated."

      t then adjourned the Inquest and what I did was, I
vrote~to you and, in fact, I think you, Kr. Stringer
signed the form, James Stringer, which I sent to yoxi on
the 2 7 th A-oril, I9 C9 and asked you to check names and
addresses and, although tlio pronunciation of          thesurname
was    correct, in fact wo had raispelt it and it      shouldbe
sr>elt *Carlile*. And wo had also mispeltJ            because
ve had left the *!c* out. It is spelt              btit I
have boor, told that it is pronounced           □        *•
am learning. Apart from that, I think, all the other
inf o m r.tion wa s, in fact, correct?

        in.   J.   STTillTCSH:   Yos.

     T?r* CORCirSI's I.Tien I oponed this Inquest Dr.
Forrest cane alone ^      told us all about the blood
alcohol levels for everybody and, in the case of Paul,
the level which ho measured was 61 rag/100 ml.

        Ilow wo are goin g to turn to Prof. Usher.
                        PI10F. ALAI! USIT5H Called:

                            By Tin; CORONER:

 !it Prof. Usher, you are a Home Office Pathologist and
     1'rof. of Forensic 1'odicino hero in Shoffield, is
     that right? — A. Yos.
      l*rof. Usher, you are going to toll me about a tuan by
      the name of Paul Uilliain Carlile and what number did
      we .... - A. 73, sir.
 m   . That is right, yes.       Can you tell nie then, ploase? -
                                           n cr.


A. The body 7. examined was that of a hcavily-1ju5.lt,
dark-haired young, white male, 1 7 1 cr.is in height and
weighing GO kgs. The typical signs of traxir.atic
asphyxia ’..ere present both externally and internally.
There was sotr.c swelling of the brain which is, again,
not xincor.iir.on in traxinatic asphyxia, and occasional ^
petechial haemorrhages on the lungs. The heart weighed
about 400 grams and that is slightly enlarged out X
am c;xtite certain that heart disease played no part
in bringing about this man's death.

V.e will cone back to the heart in a moment. - A. In
fact, I give his cause of death as traumatic asphyxia.
I rcr.lly°bclieve that he had an average expectation of
life for his age.
You do, because I think you said there was slight
particular h y p e r t r o p h y , which is thickening, and you
also nention, I notice, that the valve seemed a little
bit dilated? - A. Yes, it did. I do not know this
man•s occupation so ....
A plasterer. - A. Veil, that is fairly heavy muscular
work and it may well be that this slight enlargement
of his heart was, in fact, due to work hypertrophy of
his heart.
So what you are saying is nothing to worry about,
certainly nothing for the family to worry about - this
is not a genetic matter which they need to be concerned
about for themselves? - A. No, not at all.

Tiv.it is really what I wanted to be quite certain about
in ny mind. - A. Yes.

      ?Jr. Praser?
                     nv MR. PRASER;
Prof. Usher, can you offer some roassxirance to the
family about the timescale for this type of injury
in terms of the time that you think it may have taken
for 1'aul to lose consciousness once the crushing that
we have hoard about actually started to take place? -
A. Yos, the reason for Paul's death was that his
chest was held so tightly that he coxild not breathe
in or out and, .once that had happened, then he would
have been xinconscious in a matter of seconds, between
10-20 seconds. lie would have died within a few
m i n u t e s but at the time, of course, subsequent to
his unconsciousness, he would not have been aware of
any pain.
     TIIE C0R0IJ75R: Can you check that the family got
that because it is so important that people shoiiL d
appreciate it.

      KR. FRASER:      Yes, thank you.
                                                   C. 5 . !=ftrAKS



        TITt) CC:'OiniR:     Any questions?       (>!o nuostj.ons frore
   tbs Jury)
o. Prof, Usher, I ari most obliged to you and tho sane
   armr.joinont ns before} tlianU you, — A, Yos} indeed,

         TIT'S COROITlill: Prof, Usher is in the building so
   he -0 0 s back to his office, ?-Tow, shall we wait for
   nun to come bade? (?HIS, CATtLILTS CAT-.-^ INTO COTJT?T)
   Puul’s mum is now vith us.
        Hello, Mrs. Stringer, Tie vill call the 'vest
   Midlands Pol5.ce Officer, I think,
          r M C ^   OiSTiALDIKB ELIZABETH 5VA?7S Called:

                           llv TP7S CORON jS'R:

Q. TJhcn you are ready vill you introduce yourself and
   take ine through the summary, please? - A. I am
   Geraldine Elizabeth !5vans, an Officer of the TIest
   Midlands Police.
o. Yes, tell me what you have summarised in this ease,
   please? - A. At about 0 9 3 0 hours on Saturday, 1 5 th
   April ••••
Q, I m i sorry, not what you have summarised, what has
   been summarised would bo more accurate, I tliiiic ? —
   A. At 0930 hours on Saturday, 1 5 th April, 1939, Mr.
   Paul Vi H i am Carlile, together vith a Mr. Paul Darren
   Murray and Mr. Ian Joseph Ford, left Liverpool and
   travelled by train to Sheffield in ordor to vatch
   the FA Cup Semi Final football match which was due ~
   to be held at tho Hillsborough Stadium that day.

   Upon their arrival in Sheffield they boarded a bus
   which took them to tho Leppings Lane end of the
   Stadium, arriving at about 1230 hours. They met up
   with other friends and sat on a wall outside the
   ground whilst they had refreshments.

   Shortly afterwards Paul went off on his own stating
   that ho was going to a nearby public house in order
   to try to swop his terrace ticket for a soat ticket.

   At about 13^0 .hours a Mr. Paul Patrick William Nagle
   was outside the istadium in Leppings Lane when he
   saw Paul who was in the company of Mr. Carl David
   Lev/is. Mr. Nagle arranged to soe the other two men
   lator inside the ground. In fact, this is the last
   time Mr. Nagle saw cither man again.

Q. That was at 13^0, was it not, I think you said? -
   A. Yes. Shortly after 1515 hours and following the


                                                                          111
                                 -4-
severe crushing in tho West.. Stand terracing, DC
Colliding and DC Tont entered the Stadium via Gate
C and saw a r>un who they nov: lenow to be Paul
Cf’rlile bcinc' carried from the General direction of
tho tunnel on the West Stand concourse.^ojether
with an ar.ibulancerr.an, who has not boon identified,
the officers attempted to revive laul but without
success. The persons carrying Paul have not been
identified.
v richaol Thomas Tiollinghurst, an off duty nurse,
w.; ? spectator at the match and was in Pen 4 at the
T e U i n f s l l n o end of the ground when he became aware
o f t'~c increasing pressure being exerteo on lain by
It                   *fter boin- subjected to this pressure
for r.^pro::imato ly 15 minutes, Mr. Kollln^irst became
awrre* of. a space be in- created around him, ~na on
loolcin- down to the floor of the terracing he saw a
nan hc°now lenows to be Paul William Carlile. Mr.
Tiollinghurst saw that Paul was blue m - t h e
on n o t detecting a pulse, he tried to resuscitate him
by heart massage and mouth to mouth rc^scxtatxon.
T-rx.ll failed to respond to the emergency treatment and
2jr. Ilollinghurst then moved on to treat anot.ier
 casualty.
Can I just stop you? This is very late information,
is it not? - A. That is correct.
And I think, strictly chronologically, this should
have come before the paragraph about Detective
Constables Goulding and Pont because that is still
within the terraces? - A. Yes.

That is right, is it not? - A. Yes.
Just so that wo get the order right. - A. At 1635
hours Dr. David Monaghan examined Paul at the rear
of tho West Stand and pronounced life extinct.

 Shortly theroafter DC Goulding accompanied the body
 of Paul to the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary
 had been set up.
 This Officer later escorted the body of Paul to the
 Medico Legal Centre whore he confirmod the
 identification _to DC Veigold.

 At ap-nrorcimatoly 0300 hours on Sunday, 16th April,
 infjo T!r. George 1'ealtc identified the body of his
 nephew to Detective Constable Wallace at tho Medico
 l.ogril Centre.
 On Monday, 17th April, 1p3$>, following an identification
 by Detcctive Constable Weigold, Prof. Alan Usher
 carried out an autopsy and submitted a report giving
 caunc of death.
 Dviuonce is included regarding tho analysis of the
’toloor* s£ir.;'ic from iv.ul where the presence of ethanol
 v/as detected. The v.ritnosscs proving the continuity
 of the blood sample are Hr. Philip Harvey liich,
 Uetective Sci'geants Fletcher and Turner anc' Dr. ^
 Ale::.v.ndor Robert Forrest carried out the analysis.

Foiun.'. in the personal effects of Faul was a full
match ticket. lie is shown on visual evidence, sir,
           +.lio outer -oerineter sate at 1/:-54-
                                                1 hours.

      That concludes the summary, sir.

      T il:    c c -’c ^         v~     Fraser, anything you want to


      1. 1.    !'.l -i.-'l:        i;ucatioMti.


      : n.     L IIP l:       I'o, than.’: 3'ou, sir.
               C'/.OCIirCL?,:      ro, thank you, sir.

              7-CLT0 3 IITSr.SCTCP. inCTIAST. 3AYTOK Callec.:

                                      t :~; cop .oi?3P;

Yes, Inspector? - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
Inspector, Vest Midlands Police. Sir, if I can say
thorn arc a number of small additions to the evidence
that you £>.rc to hear so if you could bear with me.
3ir, an examination lias been made of video film and
photographic evidence and Paul lias been ioentified
alive outside the stadium.

Donna Carlile, Faul*s sister, and in fact the same
applies to Michelle, his other sister, who is^ also in
Court, have identified Faul on a photograph which. has
beer, ^"iven the reference number l-r.7LlO/33A. This
photograph, sir, is timed at 1^5*1 and shows Faul
alive outside the ground near to the outer perimeter
gate. In fact yesterday, sir, on a secoud photograph,
    1 0 / 3 Which is tined at 1^55, Paxil again has been
identified by Donna and Iiichelle as being near to the
outer perimeter gates.

Carl Lewis, as you liave heard, also one of those who
died at Hillsborough, is not on the photograph and
there is no eviQenco as such that they were together
after being seen at 13^0 by l!r. Nagle.

 Gir, on the 2?th March, 1?pO, Donna and Michelle were
 agaiu seen and perhaps I uhould point out that, in
 totul, the two girls have viewed visual evidence for
 something like 15 hours together vith their social
 worker and, in fact, they r.:ade further identifications
 of 'aul both on photogrr^iic and video.


                                                                       1118
                                                i.r r r r "


  The position is, sir, that, whilst the girls to the
  'uc.-.t of their bolder foci that those photo ;,r;r:hs and
  vi<‘.occ shov        they   cannot 'oo100 per cent certain
  duo to t-:c detail that is shown.

  r;ir, 0:1 a photograph             there arc a nunbcr of
  photographs, in fact, bnt or: a photograph referenced
  .X ' l 7--/'-/l9 c- person vl\o they believe is Paul is shown
  clii.-.bin/; fron ^closure no. 3 into 72nclosurc no. b .
  That photograph; sir, is not tinicd.-

  There arc, in fact, then, sir, a number of other
  photographs and I do not lino'./ whether you wish me
  to read all the reference numbers out but I have
  referred to one of then on the plan which X will
  indicate later.

1. Pie’: that one because they sire all, 1 take it, fairly
   clooo together? - A. Yes, they are, sir, and in fact
   they are in iJnclosurc no. *: npart fron tho first one
   J have just mentioned.

  Sir, the photograph I have referred to on the plan is
  T   T   and if you could just bear v/ith me a second, sir,
          L   2 / 2


  I -./ill c o n f i m the time. Sir, that photograph is
  timed r.t 1505. Again, on a 1311C video, referenced
  MAT C and timed at 1503:50:18 and also 1503:52 s°3t
  again the person that the girls believe is Paul is
  shown on that video. All those identifications
  actually are in Enclosure no. U apart from the first
  OJtC*

1, Tf I can just stop you there because at this point I
   socm to remember because every effort had been made
   but this vas still just the start and this was one
   of the cases v:here we thought it vas Enclosure 4 but
   vo could not really be certain? - A, That is right,
   sir. In fact, one of the points I vas going to inalce
   was that the subsequent evidence you i/ill hoar will,
   in fact, slightly alter the figures which I gave to
   you on the first day and perhaps I will mention it
   in a moment.

  Sir, in respect of the last identifications I have
  prepared a plan which has boon given the reference
  no, ?r.\TL 1 2 8 . There is another addendum, sir. In
  respect of J!r, Ilollinghurst, whose evidence you have
  already hoard about, ho has viewed photographs and
  confirms that Paul is one of tho persons that he
  tried to revive and he has signed a plan of the
  terracing indicating tho position at which ho treated
  Jaul. That plan, sir, is referenced JTTT./1. I think,
  sir, that probably covers the additional visual
  evidence.



                                                                  1119
                                                                              i,:-.



                                    Til respect or tlu figures I gftvo you on the first day,
                           A        sir, I tliirJc 7. said to you at that stc.jc that we
                                    Ijoliev.ed that seven of tho people that died v;ere in
                                    .Tnclocuro 110. b and that possibly tvo, r.t that stage,
                                    nvry liave been in linclosuro no. U. As a result of
                                    tho evidence of Mr. Kollinghurst, in' fact, it is now
                                    eight people that we believe were in no. 4 and one
                                    that nay have been.
                           B
                                    Hir, caii I refer you then to a plan which has been
                                    (jivon the reference no. L.>JL 170 and that relates to
                                    the identifications outside the ground, sir.

                               Q. That '..'ill be C221. - A. I have already referred to it,
                                  sir, but ir.ML 128, which is a plan of the terraces ....

    <    «                 C   n. That is C222. This is tho one where the two young
                                  ladies, if I can refer to them, spent so much effort? -
                                  A. That is right. Finally, sir, MIE/l, which is llr.
                                  I-Iollinghurst *s plan.

                               q. That will be C223. - A. Sir, if X can deal, first of
                                  all, with the identification outside and that is
                                  IliJJL 170. The point at which we believe Paul ——
                           D      well, we know Paul is shown is at this point here,
                                  the outer perimeter gates near to here. These are
                                  the outer perimeter gates and it is in this position
                                  boro.

                                         TIES COTtOKER*    Ladies and gentlemen of tho Jury,
                                    can you see that?     Not Gate C ••••

                                         TUTS «T:TNESS:   It is the actual outer gate, sir.

                               q.         TIIE CORCITOl* Yes. - A. Sir* in rospect of the
                                    terrace plan, this is Enclosure no. 3 and this is
                                    lipclosure no. h and, in respect of. the identification
                                    where it appear* that Paul is, as it were, going from
                                    3 to 4 at the dividing fence, the position that X
                                    believe that is shown is at this point here. In
                                    respect of tho photographic and video identifications
                                    actually din Enclosure no. h , as X say, on the plan
                                    I havo referred to just one, PRT/2, but tho position
                                    shown is here. X think it is fair to say, sir, on
                                    those photographs and the video, X am satisfied that
                                    Paul is probably still alive at that stage but X
                                    cannot say at. what stage of the medical process that
                           G        you have already heard about Paul has actually reached.

                               q . Yos, on the assumption it is Paul, the person you are
                                   looking at? - A. That is right, sir, yes.
j
                                    Then in respect of tho photograph KTIl/l, llr.
                                    Ilollinghurct •s . ...

                       H       q . Mot photograph - plan, X think? - A. Yes. fie has
                                   indicated a position again in no. k Enclosure and in
                                   this position here, in Enclosure no. h .
    .   L H arp h am Ltd
                                                             —S—                               il20
                                          -   1.




                       Ilollin ghurst1s nvidenco       s quite
                        iJnclosuro U, vas it not       - A. That




         LTI'Tt:   ?:o, thr.nl: you.

         CATCTTCLE:      Ko, thank you

                       Sir, just before you conclude, will




understand, is an Officer who assisted Inspector
] avton, sjr, for their help throughout the Inquiry*
Tbev- v.ant to thank the two Officers, Goulding and
Pont, for the assistance which they cave to Paul on
the dav, together with the ambulanceman whose name has
not been traced.    Sir, they want to thank K a u r e e n Vroe
and Peter Hyde from Moseley Social Services ana they
have been, in the family*s words, sir, a "lifeline for
us throughout tho last year." Sir, they want to -thank
Ilichnel Hollinghurst for trying to save Paul. They
sav, ""Words will never express how we feel but lcnowxng
that he was with Paul, we are all grateful." Finally,
 sir, they want to thank you for being, again their
words, "so thorough and a gentleman" as you have
been throughout those Inquests and, in particular,
 the Inquest into their loved one.
     THE COItOliEP.:       That is very kind of you.    Thank
you over so much.      1.»rhich is Donna?

      I think I have told you, ladies and gentlemen,
that there are very few families that I have the
opportunity of speaking to but I have spoken to you,
in fact, and I have probably spoken to Michelle as
well but I did not know who you were at thet ime.
So vou are one of tho few families whom I have liad an
opportunity to speak to and it is very good of you to
say nice things about me. I appreciate it very much.
I rppreciate it even more that you have said nice
things about the Officers, in fact, I think they sire
both in Court, and, of c.ourse, all the other people
who you have mentioned and who we have heard about.
I must say that 7 was very pleased that we managed
 to get the evidence from Mr. Iiollinghurst because
not"*only does it help with the technical problems as
 to where he was, it is the fact that he was a nurse ■*“
 okay, ho did not succeed in reviving Paul but at least
 you have the comfort that fairly immediately after
 tho incident there was somebody who vas actually near
                       P.-Ail cloir.z his best and that is some cncourajoncnt and
                       all credit to him and all credit to you for acknowledging
                       it. Tlr'uoJ: you vory nucli indeed.

                             7     - in asense I an just ochoinj what 3*ou have
                       said — very very        conscious in all Inquests hut the
                       onlv ottc ~L ctn1 thinking about at tho moment is this one,
                       thinking* about laul. I am very very conscious how
                       greatly loved people are who we hoar about and today,
                   B   at the nonient, we ftave licarci alroat Tffitil and I would like
                       you to know how m u c h we feel for you and          for you,Mrs.
                       Stringer, a very        hard time for you and I am sorrythat,
                       if you like, we have added upset to you this morning
                       "but you arc here, you have got your family, and they
                       will support you, I am quite sure.


 •                 C
                            Tho last point is I am exceedingly sorry that you
                       had tho delay becnuse, of course, th^.t would have added
                       to your stress today. It was not anybody's fault but
                       there is nothing I can do about. I am very sorry that
                       it happened to you today. Anyway we waited because we
                       did net want you not to be here. Thank you for coming*
                       God bless you.
                   D




                   E




                   F




                   G




               H
                                                                                           1122
L H arp h am Ltd                                   - 10 -
HER MAJESTY 1S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
              (WEST DISTRICT)



     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL. 1989



        INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


              RICHARD JONES




                  Before

 S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          fHgr Majesty’s Coroner)




                    At

         The Medico-Legal Centre,
              Watery Street,
                Sheffield.

                    On

              3rd May, 1990.




         TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




   From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
        Official Shorthand Writers,
    55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                     3'OLTC' Trr,p:;CTO'>. TTICTV'.iCT, 7 A YT O r Called

                           ■^v TIT-' COTOKET*




             D




             E



#


                 F




             G




             H

                                                                            1145
L H arpham Ltd
    Vp v .


              T:'T^Tri''',!' T"TO T’"r? 7')~^.*.TTT Op ~lTCTl*.riD JC-? .‘.Z

      771. FP-^o-v” ;   3ir, tho evidence tlicit y ou will nov;
 hear relates to Richard Jones. Richard’s parents axe
 in Court vith social workers and rnombsrs of the family.
 The parents arc represented by a practice which is a
’member o f Dy Gx*otip' and !Fr appear on their behalf as. agent
 through the usual Steering Committee arrangement.

       TT’v CCTJOITITR: Kowf I think, i-ir. Jones, you •.•fcre here
on the first da-'1-, were you not, so you lmow th? general
fora so 1 am not going to go over that ground now and
-,re will start straightaway.

          This is a resumed Inquest which %/as openeti on tne
18th April, IS’S?. On that occasion Neil Anthony Farl’in,
A c t i n g * Coroner’s Officer, said:


             "The body which is the subject of this
             Inquest has been identified to FC 2220
             Dromley of* the South Yorkshire Police as
             that of Richard Jonos by Leslie Jones,
             his father. He was 25 years of age having
             been born on the 5th October, 19^3 &t
             Liverpool. lie was a single man and ho
             lived at[
             lie vac an office worker by occupation,
             lie died at Hillsborough Football Ground
             following an incident there on Saturday,
             15th April, 1909, PC Bromley caused the
             body to bo removed to the Medico Legal
             Centre and there he identified .it to
             Detective oonstable Simon Weigold who
              subsequently identified the same body to
             Prof. Usher* It is the family wish that
             the body should bo buried#”

     Anc\ I thon adjourned the Inquest and, as was my
normal practice, I wrote and chocked whether the information
was corroct and, in fact, l!r# Leslie Jones — •»«— that is
you, I think, is it n o t     you signed the form and
you confirmed that, in fact, the names, addresses, date
and place of birth were correct and I think you have now
told*me that, in fact, your son had a BSc which I am
happy to acknowledge but it is not one of tho registration
criteria which ve need for the purposes of the Inquest,

           Zllood alcohols were estimated in this case as %/ell
 as, in fact, :ill the others and Dr. Forrest gave the
 r e s u l t s for those on tho first day, in fact, I think you
 were here the first day so you heard hin, and the result
 in the case of Richard was less than 10 mg/100 ml.


                                                                               1146
                                                                                 ."
                                                                                  ,*v
                                                                                    **
                                                                                     wT
                                                                                      '?% *
                                                                                          »>.T
                                                                                             vT**



                                                  PT7QF. a?jt: u~rr?. c-oicr';



                                q. Aleut Usher, is it not? - A. Yes, it is.
                                0. Trof. of Forensic Ilodiciiie at Sheffield and I;or.:e Office
                                   Pr_t]'o1 ogi st ? - A . Yes,
                         B      0   , And ,rou are going to tell rr.o about a lad \{'i\o \rc.s
!
                                      identified to you as I?jLchard Jones and you also had
                                      ail identification nuriber 63, 1 believe? - A. Yes, that
                                      is right.
                                q.    C-u: vou tell me then what the pathological findings^


         •
                                     are relating to this nianV - A. Yes, sir, the body that
                                     I examined ’..'as that of a heavily-built, brovn-lir.irod
                         C           yo-.:ng white nan, 1 7 9 eras in height, weighing 37 kgs.
                                     There were obvious signs of tra u m a t i c asphyxia both
                                     externally and internally. T here vas very s l i g h t
                                     dilatation of the heart and some enlargement. I
                                     thin!: tli&t is probably physiological becausc he was
                                     not at an ago when h y p e r t e n s i o n ±s likely to have
                                     caused that. X n toy view he h a d an average e::pcctation
                         D           of life ar.d was normally developed. I give the cause
                                     of death as t r a u m a t i c asphyxia.

                                n . And this was smother young man who had. a tricostate
                                    valve dilated? - A. Yes, I think that cay be terminal
                                    really in heart failure right at the end*

                                q. in fact, both the valves wore marginally dilated but
                            £      3»-ou would say the sane for both - that you tliinlc it
                                   is likely to have been terminal? - A. Yes.

                                Q. Nov, we have already heard this but loss of
    ' •                            consciousness. IThat would you say vith regard to
                                   that? - A. Tbis young man died essentially because
                                   he could not move his chest in or out and that meant,
                            F      of course, he could not breathe and that meant oxygen
                                   vas cut off to his vital organs and, oncc that chest
                                   was fir:ed, he would have been unconscious ^Ln a matter
                                   of seconds, probably between 10 and 20 seconds, and
                                   ho would be completely unknowing of anything that
                                   happened subsequent to that, though he would take a
                                   natter of minutes, perhaps betweon h end 6 minutes,
                                   to die*
                         G
                                Q. But once ho was unconscious he would not know anything
                                   more about it? - A. That is aright.
                     '
                                                      7)v irn. FRA

                                q. Trof. Usher, can you help a little about the alcohol
                                      content. Xt is recorded in this young mar?, as ’’less
                         H            than 10 mg", is that because the level is so small
                                      that it is difficult to measure it accurately? -
                                      A. Yes, it is.
    .   L H » rp b *m Ltd
                                                                                                    114"
                                                               rT * " !? rrr>




           '’•oun^ r.ir.n may hc.vo l~:.d no alcohol rvt r.ll 0 1 .-,
              t' 1 o ci''vp.rr.ti’.s tlT't they <*0 v.s^ - I r*-°t r-
    Voc^c«-!i3 t - it it r-uitc customary to ezzrrcsz it
    i;" t:,rt ,rr,y. ”J,c.«=s thr.r* 10" nay mean r.ryt’iinc up
    to 1 0 but it nay moan none at all#
    y;ut i<* it were none at r.ll, presumably it would show
    rs r distinct negative? -That I have in nind is tho
    evidence that we hoard on the first day about some tines
    t t e s m c ^ # ' l o a c & tbeir .life there is alaoct a
    sT-ortcJ'oouR production of alcohol within the body
    opO"could tho operation of that produce a reading of
    - "vcrv snail alcohol level within fio body? - £.. Yes,
    I suppose it could but only a very snail level.

Q. .'aid that could bo less than 10? - A. Ch, yes.
-   Thanl: von, I'rof. - A. There is no evidence at all to
    show that this boy had in Him any amount of alcohol
    that would have affected his judgment or balance or
    a n y tiling lilco that at all .

0. It certainly played no part in his death so far as you
   are aware? - A. Absolutely right.
                    T ^rthei^b^^T T T I^C O llO K *^:

    Vrof. Usher, I do Trent to just clear this up because
    Dr. Forroct dealt with the question of yeast
    -roduction of alcohol and in his opinion, ny recollection
    is, because the high alcohol levels were not present
    ho said that ho was satisfied that indigenous produc­
    tion of alcohol had not occurred because he could not
    find any of the higher alcohols? - A. Yos.

n. Uov, I want to bo quite sure - do you disagree with
   ;Jr. Forrost? — A. ITo#
o Or not, with regard to the possibility •••• — A. No,
 * I do not disagree with him. He knows about the higher
   alcohols. I did not lcnow that. I have only been
   giver. tho figures with regaard to ethyl alcohol but I
   would accept that argument from him.
     "ould it be right that what you are really saying is
     that it is true that indigenous production of
     alcohol can occur in tho body? - A. Yes, I agree with
     ti^r.t.
Q. You arc not saying that, in this particular instance,
   it did occur? — A. lio, I could not say that.
n. ’./hut you arc saying io that measuring less than 1 0
   night mean anything fron the minutest amount up to
    inW,,K-.sically? - A. Or to no tiling.



                                                                                1148
                                  TT": C.C.IcrrT';:                   A-r'tV.irj rise     out of that'

                                  I-'..                          "o, than": you, sir.

                                   'TT. CCrX'TEIi:  Than!; you, r-Tor. Vsher. '.'c '.-.'ill
                         1*0   rt: yoi; ajr.ii at about Z o ’clcc!*-. -    ["!iar2 : yet’., sir.
                                          »-V
                                            '- " r
                                                J
                                                     Tfl    '
                                                       1 ■ -V
                                                                            r/~*r*        f»c-
                  B
                                                                ’Tv        OPTlCT-rfP.:

                      r'. To a 7 - A. Tolice Serjeant John                 sir- of the
                                 I:ic.lr.r.r s Polj.cc• 1 hi'vo previously  taken the oath.

                         Cr:i you t.-jee no through the surar.ja.ry, plor.se?
                         . . .;t 1-MO hours on Saturday, 1 5 th April, 1009,
                         Tiichard Jones loft his hone in Sheffield vith his
                         sister, I'dos Stephanie Linda Jonos together vith
                         Tracey :;iiyaboth Cor;, The Court has already heard,
                         Llr, that Tracey also lost hor life at Ilillr.borou^li.
                         Tt vras their intention to attend tlio Semi Final football
                         i-.ii.tch vkich vcs to bo played at the Hillsborough
                         Stadiui.i that day. All three persons had tickets for
                         the tcrraccs at tlE *:.rost Stand.
                  D
                         Cn arrival at the stadium they joined a largo crowd
                         outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles• After some
                         ninutes they entered the stadium via Gate C and vallced
                         together d o n g tho timnel beneath the Hest Stand and
                         or.to the terraces. Stephanie is unable to say vhicb
                         enclosure they entered but it has now been establish ed
                         as Jnclosuro IJo. 3. Stephanie vas vith her brother
                         and Trr.ccy r.s they entered the torracos and, after a
                         fev seconds, Tracey vac subjected to a surge of
                         pressure vhich forced ter tovards the front of the
                         tcrmcirg. In the crush thnt follovod sho vus separated
                         from botli her brother and Tracey.
                         Follovir.~ the severe crushing in the "..Test S+and
                         terracing, Police Constable Paul Bromley vent onto
                         tho pitch and assisted a number of injured persons.
                         The officer sav that a number of supporters vcre
                         carrying a nan, no*..' laiovn to be Richard, across the
                         pitch, on a hoarding vhich vas being used as a temporary
                         stretcher. The officer assisted to carry Ziichard to
                         the roar of the Ilorth Stand where he attempted
                         resuscitatd-on-but without success. Hie officer vas
                         assisted to carry Ilichard into the gynmasiun where
                         a temporary mortuary had been set up.

                         At 1600 hours Dr. Nicholas Andrev Seivcnvright ••••

                      ?. I think it is actually Seivewright.   I think it is a
                         typir.g error, The *n* should not be there. - A. Sorry,
                         sir.
                  H

J   L   Harpham Ltd
                                                                                                         1149
       erraninod Hichard in tho temporary mortuary and
 ccrtifr.o-.’
            . lifa._c"tiiict.

 .'.t 0 2 h 5 hours ori ouiv.'r", 1uth Ai'*rilf . 19~£ --r. Leslie
 jo^cG identified t?ia body of his son to * olico
 Cor.i'tablo I2 ronley at the temporr-ry ^ortv.ary.

 rr-i- officer later oscorted Tichard»s body to the
 :'Gf'.ico Lc'-r.l Centre and c o a f i m o d that identify cation
 +-0 ■)2 'j;nctivc Const ah 1 & r-1oi ~ol d .■**
  r„           ;i .   1009.
                         following the identification •lay
                        Voi-old, Prof. .•AcnOsher enrriod
  oiit M r=utopsy r.nd srfjnittCi! a report      c r u s o of
  death.
  Miircfl is included, sir, recarding the analysis of
  5 S blood sample tclcen from Richard where the presence
  of c f ’n o l was detected. The witnesses proving
  continuity of thn.t sample are Detective Constable Green,
  Dotectivo Sergeant T u m o r and Detective Sergeant
  Fletcher. The analysis was carried out by Dr.
  Alexander Robert Forrest.
  vound in the personal effects of Richard were three
  full match ticlcets.  This supports the e^ d^ OB*
  sir, that he entered the stadium via Gate C together
  with Stephanie and Tracey,
       That concludes my evidence, sir.             There is visual
  evidenco.
        TH2 "CCRO!T33R:       No questions from me.     TIr. Fraser?

        !£>. m\SER:         T!o, thanlc you, sir.

        1*R. I.IMU;       No, tharilc you, sir.

        X-TTw. CATCIIPOLK:      Ho, thanlc you, sir.
              POIJCE T*TSP3CT0R MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                               j)y THE CCmONBR:

0 Yes? - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
 '* Vest Midlands Police. Sir, an examination has been
    made of video film and photographic evidence and
    Tiichard has been identified alive outside the sround
    knd also in Enclosure V.o. 3» and then subsequently
    later lyinc on the pitch.
   Sir. a pliotocranh referenced Min.lO/3**A, Richard is
   shown, together with his sister, Stephanie, and Tracey
   Cox about~to enter the ground via Gate C and that
   photograph is timed at 1^55*
   On a BBC video tape, referenced MAP 1, timed at
   1 ^5 6 :3 1 sOU, Richard is shown alive in Enclosure No.
   3 and, at this point, ho is, in fact, together with
                                                            1   yT r> '-




     Txv.ccy Co::.
     Sir      there arc three photographs, i n c l u d i n g a
     Vnoto'T.unh rcfcrcnced D21/C-, vhicli sliov Tiic.'.rvrd
     l y i n ^ o n ' the pitch being tended to b y supporters.

     IT. and " 1-3 . Jones have, in fact, vieved visual
     evidence, sir, and they have been able to assist us
     in confirmin'- that evidence.

     PC Bromlev has          signed a plan of the pitch muicating
     where he first          saw Hi chard and th&t plan is referenced
     r .■)/1.
     Sir, if I can,          first of nil, refer you to a plan which .
     h,„s been given         the reference number K jJL 1C7.

o, That vill be C228. - A. And then a further plan,
   ]“.\JL 113, which is a plan of the terraces.

Q. That vill be C22$>. - A. And,            sir, P H / ’*                  is rc
   Brotiley’s plan.

Q. That vill be C230. - A. Sir, first of all, in respect
   of the plr-n K*.:JL 167, regarding tho identification
   outside tho ground, referring to t£iis plan, the
   at vhich that photograph is shovn is in this location
   horn, which, as you l»ave already heard, is, in fact,
   very close to Gcvte C. In respect of the video
   identification inside the ground I refer to plan
   f?'.\T3< 113* This is Enclosure No. 3 *u*d the video
   identification on BBC tape MAP 1, we believe, is in
   this position here. As I have said, at that time,
   Tiichard is still alive and with Tracey.
q. Bid i/e use the same plan in Tracey*s case, do you lcnov?
      A. *Jc did not use the same plan, sir ••••

n.    I am sorry, I meant the same video? - A. They are
      actv.ally together, yes. Sir, PC Bromley* s plan,
      p;-j/ 1 » the pi tin of the pitch, the location shovn is
      in this position here, at the Leppings Lane end but
      further down the pitch.

Q. And remind me,            that is a recollection, is it not? —
   A. It is, sir,            yes. Sir, unfortunately, in respect of
   the photograph            where Richard is shown actually being
   treated on the            pitch, it is not possible to say from
   tho photograph            where it is on the pitch. There is
   not sufficient            detail to identify it.

Q. Yos, there is a photograph showing him but you cannot
   locate it because there are no landmarks? — A. No.

              17.1. FTtAS:2Il{     No questions for the Officer, thank
      you .

              121.   LIMB:       Mo, thanlc you, sir.
                                                                                   1151
                         j”-'. j'TiASE^: Sir, vill you just cive me a mirutc
              A     boforo you'conclude this particular Inquest?

                              t ::::   ccno::::?,:   Yos.

                              t'~>4ST'rI• Sir, there are tv.’O natters vnich
                  coneei'ii* the' family vh i c h do not diroctly arise from the
                 l^unnr.kos vhich have been presented but which they would
              'BI like, if r.t sill possible, you to deal wit,:        »..txsf>
                    1thorn.

                              'T'TT"> CC’IC-’'*":    ’’fit the first one then.

                                 -r-1\z'Z':: Sir, it is clc~r fron- the yery
                    r\etai?.Rc’. ro-ort of Lor d Justice Taylor that his findings
                    *;rrc tv . t alcohol rlayed r-° significant part in tiie ^ ^
                    disaster on tho 15th April.        That report has been wic.oly
                    Published and this family w o u l d like perhaps to
                    understand a little nore w h y such emphasis seems to
                    have been placed on the alcohol analysis.         Certhinly on
                    the openin'? cloy of these ...•

                               CCTlC'TZZli Can I interrupt you? I think I did
                    isay ri."ht at the beginning that we were not going to
                     deal with the question of hot; and I think it is o^ily fa-ir
                     to say that ve have not introduced Lord Justice Taylor s
                     report into this Inquiry and whilst, of course, that      _
                     report is public property, so to speak, I would r.ot want
                     it to be put to tho Jury that that is the conclusion of
                     Lord Justice Taylor's report. It may be or it may not
                     be. T.’hcn the time comes, if it is relevant, we will
                     deal vith it no I cannot accept as a submission that
                     that is correct. You nay put it forward as a vie* u
                     I an not accepting it as a proposition or as evidence
                     of that fact, that he concluded this or that about
                    |alcohol. I an sorry but I have cot to s a y that.
                          Your second point, I thin!: I have understood your
                     second point. If I have not, of course, you will correct
                  r Ime. The second point is they say why are we dealing
                    Iwith the question of alcohol levels. Wiat is right, is
                     it not?
                           IHI. F7A3T3R: Perhaps nore why such emphasis appears
                     jto have been placed upon it.
                            THTI CCHOjIZH:  The decision as to what evidence to
                      Cgi]_I of course, is 'nine. I do not think we hc-ve placed
                     Iany undue enphasis on alcohol, on the contrary, I think
                      at this str jre wo have not bocause all I am doing is
                      recording the fact, not drawing any conclusions, because
                     Ithat would impinge on the issues of how or vhy vhich I,
                      as you know, specifically excludod. Ferhaps I ought to
                      just say, iir. Fraser - and forgive me if I say that -
                      that the issue of alcohol has been a matter of great
                  H i moment to a lot of the families. They wanted tho figures.
                      They wanted to know it. If I had suppressed the
                      information I think I would have beer, open to very serious
                      criticise and so I do not actually accept the proposition       1152
j   l Harpham Ltd
                 that vo arc                    it iui''ur es-.phatsis 'out I do v.ccrpt
                 tJ:rkt, witMi: c-.ch sind :vcry c.-.«v, vc jivo the
                 jocr-.r:>c           is part or the cviuouc:.               .I.ut rclcv<u:ce,
                if tvr.■, it             vo vill deal w ith vise.: wo ccr.e                ^
                         ^     c i.f1o ^ j,j. "*c jc tc        — ui*i/*-Ci* j10w—      f .._*v.t
                Kirt::-.-r ^iclo*icc- to call and I will thou call viii-.tevcr
                «t* i U i J o c we licoc*. to iior.l witii tiiat c^iic;stiwn»          jcna
                 that           ’-'o u si* your clients?
            B          VI. Y’CJ.ZS\i        I hope so, sir, yes..
                                sec one. point zrsalxy relates to tiic conc-ntioii
                of r.any of tho fans -./ho appear to have died. 0 :- the
                       t'Wc.'Z'o v.v.’iC no r.rutilated — if X can use ti!*’t word —
                •jodieii'r.-v.'. vo have hoard evidence that the majority of
                ft'.iis ’u.d sons bluo di sco1 ourati on but there was no
                apparent accurate diagnosis made at the ground and
                ''Senr.-rx'«s fi.’ily would like to know why perhaps their
                son vc.s not tuken to hospital and just assumed that lie
                was do ad and resuscitation attempts made at tho
                hospital,
                      T.T.Z OC'IC'T^Zli  Vx, Fraser, I understand their
                concoi'i behind the question but I think that each and
                ever'/ fail, as you know, every one of the people who
                died, was certifiod dead either at the hospital or at
                the "-round by a properly qualified medical man. Tliat
                is tlie first point. That has to be appreciated. It
                is net r; rp.-.ostion of poodle jtist saying "lie's dead",
                jvery single one •.ras looked at medically. Secondly,
                one has to third; bad: to tho situation. In an ideal
                world it          ho that everybody should finish up in
                hospital ’nit, fron a practical point of vie’.: - I do
                not*r:.*’.t to dssl vith tills any further because I do
                not think we can - but fron: a practical point of view
                it is, with all due roopoct to your clients, as
                unrculictic o:;pectation in the situation in which
                everybody f oir’d thonaelves o:i that day and it is no
                ur.n i.'.inciv.£ words end saying anything different. I
                think that that is the truth of the matter.

                      Thirdly, 7 cannot say vhat people's judgments
                were at the tine. If that is a relevant point, and it
                rai^ht 0 5 when vo como to deal vith the ^uesticn of how,
                then rijixin ve vill deal vith it at that sta^e but it
                is not appropriate to deal vith it now. I ar.i concerned,
                in a seiioe, about the question because I think it shows,
                vith the greatest* «>f-rcspoct, a misconception as to
                the practicalities of tl*o situation and also the truth
                of the matter. Ue have heard fron Frof. Usher and vhat
                ho said about loss of consciousness, duration, length
                of tine that it ni^'ut take for somebody to die - oven
                if they had {jono to hospital half-an-liour or az\ hour
                later it would not have made any difference. I think
                we have not to face it. That is tho truth. I an not
            H   vorj' helpful but I think that that is tho best I can do.
                Anyway we will have to deal vith that, if ve deal vith
                it, as part and r=jccl of tho how.
                                                                                                   1153
l Hcrpham LU)
                                     Jones. I knoi; you '.rare hero v/hcn vo ciealt v.'3-tn
                        ITv- cc^’g c'cot’- and I appreciated your prosoncc i-non.
                         tV\*o« ronsribor I said tLizt and, in fact, that             true,
                         I~a3.so !:::cw tlic t you would bo cominj a j a m occause «e
                        » c.,     -,:cro r-cl.zi” to have rJ.chare's cr.se a _.i~<.lc 1-^t
                        lln.t^-' T cv-itn, (;uitc understand --•hat a dreac’fux n_ow
                         this u'Aint b e         veil, I l:ee? on saying I quite _
                      u-.K^rst-'^i'i        I correct r.tyaolf - how can I no.>o^ol„
                   n L,.,f;“-sta-'.d vl'at. a dreadful blow this wuct be to you.
                      Tho > sf T ' c :0               imagine, it,.ucre~ one cf ay sons
                            T r~, t’— i -M-’ .asir.e vhat I would feel lake, so I
                      u n d c L t ^ t ^       certain e::tont, the pain and tho
                      concern which you are feeling.

                        I       t have tried to answer the        points    you
                        La          rri-1-- rirr.'.ly really, I thinl;, necause I £*ink
                        whet 7 was s^yin- has to be said. I C!0 n° ^ ® ® e tl^ r
(       •                is v r ' r -.o-.nt in doina ar.ythuir else. A t 1— st t.i-t i
                        h r fecnt.           Subject to that, I feel for you anc- for
                        Itiio rr-st of your family in the loss thrt you h..vc
                        |:suffer
                             Ladies ar.d ^entlcncn, vc are coinr^to rise. I
                      thir-’-*vo nust have a reasonable time.   Shall vc say
                   D teii-past-two? *./ould t?mt be all ritfit? Thai* you
                     |vei'2‘ i.:ucli.
                                               (Luncheon Adjournment)




                    H
                                                                                              1154
                                                        _C_
    j   i Harpham Ltd                                     y
HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)



     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



        INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

            IAN THOMAS GLOVER




                 Before

. S.L. POPPER. LL.B. B-MED.Sci. BM. BS. MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                    At

         The Medico-Legal Centre.
              Watery Street.
                Sheffield.

                    On

               kth. May 1990




         TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




   From the Notes of J.L. Harpham. Ltd.,
        Official Shorthand Writers.
    55. Queen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX

                                                1209
                                          INDEX
                                                     Page


        OPENING BY THE CORONER                         1.

        PROFESSOR ALAN USHER Called
             B    Jy THE CORONER                       2.
                                                       A.
                  iross-Examined by MR* FRASER

        OFF ICIER GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called

                  Jy THE CORONER                       A.

        DETCflTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                   Jy THE CORONER                      6   .
                  ,2ross-Examined by MR. LIMB          7.
                  {Further by THE CORONER              7.

        PROFHSSOR ALAN USHER Recalled

             D    By THE CORONER                       8   .




              H


J L Harpham Ltd
                                                               1210
                     riday. 4th May, 1990

                                   THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                                            IAN THOMAS GLOVER
               B
                            mr         FRASER*   Sir, the evidence now relates to Ian
                       Thomas      Glover.     Sir' Ian’s father and a Hr. Pedder are
                       in court           Two members of Ian's family simply
                       i-hat although they have come over from Liverpool to
                       a t t e n d t h e inquests they really cannot come into court.
                       I am sure you understand that, sir.
( •                         THE CORONER:       Yes, indeed.
                            MR FRASER:    Sir. they are with us via the
                       facility of the video link and in the circumstances I
                       introduce them as well.
                             THE CORONER:    Thank you.       They are welcome and
                        it is quite understandable.
                             MR. FRASER:    Sir, Ian's family is represented by
                        a practice which isa member of my group and I
                        therefore appear on their behalf as agent in the usual
                        way through the steering committee.
                             THE CORONER:   Let me explain to you what we are
                        «oing to do so you can follow the sequence because it
                        is easier for you to understand the procedure.
                             I am going to read to you the evidence which we
* •
                        took on the opening when I dealt with the             ^
                        the body.   That was on the 18th of April, 1989.        When
                        I have read that to you I am going t o j u s t confirm that
                        the details are correct.   Then I will tell you
                        the blood alcohol level was and when we have completed
                        that Professor Usher is going to give us the
                        pathological evidence.
                              When that has been done a West Midlands Police
                         Officer will present a summary of the evidence and will
                         tell me and particularly the Jury, the facts and then
                         Inspector Layton will deal with the visual evidence.
                         He will describe it and then come over here on these
                         big plans and show us what he is talking about.




                 H                                - 1 -
                                                                                        121
 j l   Harpham Ltd
       If I tell you what happened on the 18th of April,
 1989.    Neil Anthony Parkin the acting Coroner's
 Officer said:
      "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
      been identified to PC 465 Glave of the South
      Yorkshire Police as that of Ian Thomas Glover by
      Joseph Glover his brother.
      He was 20 years of age having been born on the
      10th of January, 1969 at Liverpool.

      He was a single man and lived at|----------
              Liverpool.   He was a street paver by
      occupation.    He died at Hillsborough football
      ground following an incident there on Saturday,
      15th April, 1989.   PC 465 Glave caused the body
      to be moved to the Medico Legal Centre and there
      he identified it to Detective Constable Simon
      Weigold who subsequently identified the same body
      to Professor Usher.
       It is the family wish that the body should be
       buried.*'
  As I did with everybody I wrote to the families and I
  sent out a form to double check the evidence and John
  Glover signed it.   That must be you?                You
  signed it on the 28th of April and you confirmed the
            • « A_  f
                    I Athink
                       .t. i __ la       M
  name was right.                  we said
  Liverpool, but is that the               ^ district?
       JOHN GLOVER:     We live on the borderline

  Across tne roaa is walton.
 _____ THE CORONER:      So the correct address ought to be


       All the rest of the information was in fact
  correct.   Now Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol levels
  and he told us all about these on the first day and in
  the case of Ian the result was negative.
                PROFESSOR ALAN USHER Called

                      • Bv THE CORONER:

Q. Alan Usher, Professor of Forensic Medicine and Home
   Office Pathologist? - A. Yes.
Q. Professor Usher this is about a lad who was identified
   to you as Ian Glover? ~ A. Yes.

                          - 2 -
                                                              1212
  What number did you have? - A. Number 37.

  Can you tell me what your findings were. - A. Yes, sir.
  The body I examined was that of a slim but: muSoularly
  built young white male with light brown ^ir, 172
  heieht, weighing 65 kg.   He body presented both
  externally fnd internally the typical appearances of
  traumatic, asphyxia.  There were a few grazes and
  scratches, only minor any of them, and there was some
  swelling of the brain which is fairly typical of this
  condition.
     ADart from this he was normally developed and healthy
     and he had an average expectation of live in my view.

     I    give the cause of death as traumatic asphyxia.    That
     meins   he died because his chest wall was compressed so
     it could not move in and out.     When that happens yo
     a r e not able to breathe properly and you
     that way.     Mercifully, anyone caught in that position
     orice the chest becomes fixed they become unconscious
     verv verv early, between ten and twenty seconds.
     Once*this boy was unconscious then he would have no
     knowledge or any sensation subsequent to that.      He
     would take between four and six minutes to actually
     die.     It would only be the first ten to twenty seconds
     he would be aware of.
0. Professor Usher, there is one point I want to check.
   Can you look at your PM report where you have got
   “Skeleton"? - A. Yes.
     Can you tell me whether there is any indication in your
     findings whether there were any broken bones of any
     sort? - A. No, sir.
0    I take it if you say, "No bony disease or injury ,
Q * It SoSld includeinparticular the neck?      If there had
    been a broken neck you would have recorded it? - A. on,
    yes.
Q.    The reason why Iask this is because at one point there
      was some concern that this lad might have had a broken
      neck, but there is no question... - A. It is a       .
      common mistake, made by people who see the head lolling
      on a dead body.    We often get stories when we examine
      - even routine PM* - that the neck is broken.   It very
      rarely is and it was not on this occasion.

Q, You can assure the family about that? - A. Yes.
                                 Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER:

                  |0. Perhaps if we could pursue the problem about the neck a
                      little further.   I hear what you say, Professor Usher.
                      When Ian came home, when the family saw him, he had  in
                      fact got a collar on his neck and thepeople wholooked
                      after Ian and brought him home actually told the family
                      that they thought the neck war .broken.   Just to
                      reinforce the point, Professor Usher, can you assure
                      the family beyond any doubt that Ian did not have a
                      broken neck? - A. It was not broken.    The collar is a
                      device sometimes used by undertakers to put beneath the
                      chin to stop the mouth from falling open before rigor
                      sets in.
                           MR. FRASER:      Thank you.
                           THE CORONER:       Any questions?

                           MR. LIMB:      No, thank you, sir.

                           MR. CATCHPOLE:      No, thank you, sir.

                            OFFICER GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called

                                           By THE CORONER:
                           THE WITNESS:   Geraldine Elizabeth Evans, Officer
                      of the West Midlands Police.
                      Yes, Officer? - A. At about 1100 hours on Saturday,
              E Q*    15th April, 1989, Ian Thomas Glover and his brother
                      Joseph Glover left the family home to travel to
                      Sheffield with the intention of watching the semi-final
                      football match which was to be played at the
                      Hillsborough Stadium that day.   Both were in
                      possession of tickets for the Leppings Lane terraced
                      area of the ground*
                      At about 1430 hours the brothers arrived at the stadium
                      and entered through a turnstile before going through
                      the tunnel and into enclosure 3.    They took up a
                      position in the centre of the enclosure which at that
                      time was packed with spectators*    Joseph states that
                      following a surge in the crowd he and his brother were
                      pushed forward, in the enclosure and that he managed to
                      get out on to the' pitch via a gate in the front
                      perimeter fence*    He then saw his brother Ian in a
                      distressed condition standing in the crowd about four
                       feet from the front of the enclosure.
                       About twenty minutes later Joseph saw his brother being
                       pulled from the enclosure and on to the pitch by two
                       police officers who have not been identified.
              H
                                               - 4 -
                                                                                 1214
l   Harpham Ltd
                        Joseph attempted to resuscitate his brother who was
                        then placed on a temporary stretcher and carried across
                        the pitch by a number of persons into the gymnasium
                        where a temporary mortuary had been set up.
                        Sir, I have to include here that I have spoken with
                        Joseph this morning and he wishes to state that in the
                   B    gymnasium a doctor was present and when he examined Ian
                        he did in fdct find* a pulse an#^ attempted to*-
                        resuscitate him for about fifteen minutes but was
                        unsuccessful.
                        At about 1540 hours PC Glave assumed responsibility for
                        the body of Ian and shortly afterwards the officer was
                        present when Dr. Alan Paul Redgrave examined the body
                        in the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

                        Later that day Mr. John Glover identified the body of
                        his son, Ian Thomas Glover, to Police Constable Glave,
                        and the officer later escorted the body of Ian to the
                        Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
                        DC Weigold.
                   D    At 1100 hours on Sunday, 16th of April, 1989, following
                        identification by DC Weigold, Professor Alan Usher
                        carried out an autopsy and submitted a report giving
                        cause of death.
                        This concludes the summary, sir.
                        I think it is only fair tc say that Joe, when he made
                        his first statement, referred to the doctor? - A. Yes,
                        sir.
                        But he never mentioned anything about the pulse being
                        found? - A. No, sir, that is something he has brought
                        to my attention this morning.
                             MR. FRASER:      I have no questions, sir.

                             MR. LIMB:     I have no questions, sir.

                             MR. CATCHPOLE:      I have no questions, sir.
                              THE CORONER:    Perhaps before we listen to
                         Inspector Laytpn, you know we are resuming an inquest
                         this afternoon and we will be dealing with some of
                         these points about pulses and so on then.^ I mention
                         that now so that you know we will be dealing with this
                         matter in relation to that other inquest, but of course
                         it will apply generally to all situations.




                                                - 5 -

L   H trp h a m L n )
                                                                                   1215
        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                     Bv THE CORONER:

        THE WITNESS:   Sir, I am Michael Layton, Detective
   Inspector of the West Midlands Police*
Q. Yes, Inspector? - A.K Sir., an examination has been made
   of video film and photographic evidence and Ian has
   been identified alive in enclosure number 3 on a BBC
   video tape referenced MAP.l and timed, sir, at
   1456.32.02.   Joseph has been identified on a number of
   photographs, sir, but specifically referring to a
   photograph PR.1/10A, which is timed at 1503, Joseph is
   shown on that photograph, sir, on the pitch, basically
   in the circumstances described in the summary.

Q. 1503? - A. 1503, sir.   Sir, in the summary you will
   see reference to circumstances described by PC Fojut of
   the South Yorkshire Police.   He initially made an
   identification from clothing and felt that he at one
   stage had assisted to carry Ian across the pitch.

Q. When you say "in the summary", that is in the printed
   version but not in the version we have presented to the
   court, that is right? - A. That is right, sir.   The
   printed version where copies have been supplied.

Q. That's right. - A. Sir, it is now apparent again from
   having spoken to Joe this morning, his recollection is
   that no uniformed police officers were present when Ian
   was carried across the pitch.
Q. The evidence of PC Fojut was based on identification of
   clothing, as opposed to... - A. That is right, sir.
 . That is, of course, is relatively weak identification?
   - A. That is right, sir.
Q. If a brother says there was not a police officer there
   we are probably inclined to believe the brother? - A.
   That is right.
Q. Which is why we have not dealt with it in the evidence?
   - A. That is right, sir.   Sir, can I then refer you to
   a plan which has been given the reference number
   MWJL.59 and that"is a plan of the terraces?

Q. C.244. - A. Sir, that plan, MWJL.59 refers to the
   identification made on video by Mr. Glover.   In fact
   this is enclosure number 3 and the position we believe
   that Ian is shown at that time is in this location
   approximately here.   The dotted line indicates the


                         - 6 -

                                                              1216
                       barrier that subsequently broke so we are looking, sir,
                       in enclosure number 3.
                            MR. FRASER:     No questions for the officer, sir.

                                    Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB:

               El#*                            concerning Joseph Glover.   You
                       mentioned when referring to photograph referenced
                       PR.1/10A that that was one of a number of photograpns/
                       - A. That is right, sir, yes.
                    |q . Can I ask this:   is that photograph the first of a
                    1 sequence of photographs showing Joseph on the pitch      or
                          are there previous ones?
f


                            THE CORONER:    In other words, you art trying to
                       find out whether 1503 hours is the earliest?

                             MR. LIMB:     Sir, exactly.
                             THE WITNESS:   Sir, the earliest photograph
                        showing Joe on the pitch is PR.1/8A, but in fact   it is
                        still at the same time, 1503.
                                         Further by THE CORONER:

                      , That is a photograph of Ian? - A. No, sir, of Joe,
                        actually on the pitch.   It was referred to in the
                        visual evidence, sir.
                     Q. That is right.    This is an important point.   #J°e» of
                    '    course, is a surviving brother? - A. That is right.

                     Q. What about photographs of Ian?   Have you got any of
                    1   him? - A. No, sir, the only visual evidence we have is
                        the video evidence that we have referred to which is
                        timed at 1456.
                    Iq . So 1456 is Ian on the terraces and enclosure.     1503
                         Joe out on the pitch? - A. That is right.
                      . Then in what Joe said, according to the summary, he
                        said that about twenty minutes later he saw his brother
                        being pulled from the enclosure.    What time did he go
                        out on to the pitch according to his statement?    I see
                        what you are driving at. - A. I think he makes
                        reference, sir, in the summary to seeing Ian some four
                        feet from the...   I think that was my recollection,
                        sir.
                     Q. That is right. - A. It is apparent from those
                        photographs that Joe is actually - as you lookfrom        the

                H
                                                - 7 -

    L Harpham Ltd
                                                                                        121'.
pitch to the terraces that Joe is to the left of gate 3
in the first section of fencing, looking inwards.
Yes    What he says - I will read you the relevant bit
from his statement.   He is talking about the gate on
to the pitch ~ not gate C, not the perimeter gate -
just show us which gate he is talking about. - A. we
are talking about this gate here.

He says:
     "I managed to get out on to the pitch because the
     police had opened the small gate.        was ^
     second time the gate had been opened.

Then he talks about it being opened the first time and
then he eot ou*. at the second opening of gate 3.  Then
later on he says he saw his brother and he says:
     "About twenty minutes later two police officers
     pulled Ian out.."
and attempted resuscitation, or words to that effect.

     THE CORONER:       Does that assist you?

     MR. LIMB:      It does, thank you, sir.
     THE CORONER:   1 have got that right, Inspector
Layton? - A. That is right.
            PROFESSOR ALAN USHER Recalled

                     Bv THE CORONER:

Professor Usher, thank you for coming back.    This was
a point which arose after you left and I just want to
clarify it first.    You will recollect that you
explained to us that this youngster had had his chest
compressed, lost consciousness and would have died, I
 think you said, between four and six minutes.   In this
particular instance he was in company with his brother,
probably at twenty past three, probably later than
 that, and the brother has told us through the officers
 that when he got into the temporary mortuary a doctor
 saw him and the brother says the doctor detected a
 pulse and tried'for ten or fifteen minutes to revive
.him but in the end had to give up because he thought it
 was hopeless.   Assuming for a moment that that is
 correct and he did feel a pulse, can you help us about
 timings and how you relate that to the period which you
 have mentioned? - A. I think the only way that could
 have happened would be if this lad had sustained severe
brain damage but not quite got to the point where the
respiratory and pulse centres faded out.

He did not say there was any respiratory ef
said there was a faint pulse. - A. The two
close together.   If that was the case then if he had
been revived he would have been severely brain damaged.

Is it a possibility that if you, get, to that..,p.Q.int in
f a c t further damage to the cerebral centres can occur,
at least to the brain stem centres, can occur, which
w o u l dlead to death? - A. Oh, yes, that is very likely.

The other possibility is, of course, there may have
been a mistake about the pulse? - A. Yes.
Because it is not easy to feel a pulse if it is very
Because it          riRht, or if it is very slow.    It
is often the case that in cases of cerebral oedemat so
it really means that either the doctor was mistaken in
thinking he could feel a pulse or that this lad was
severely brain damaged and then went on to die.
Would it make any difference to your opinion as to his
state of consciousness? - A. He would have been
unconscious all through that period.
'No question of his suffering pain? - A. No, he would
 have been unconscious.
            THE CORONERS      Hr. Fraser?
      MR. FRASER:   No, sir.           Thank you for coming
 back, Professor Usher.
            MR. LIMB:      No, thank you, sir.
            MR. CATCHPOLE:      No, thank you, sir.
       MR. FRASER:   Sir, just before you conclude taking
  the evidence, I rise again at the specific instruction
  of Ian's family.   They are very conscious of the
  efforts that were made to save Ian on the day and they
  are very appreciative of everybody at the ground who
  did everything they possibly could and thereafter.
        Sir, they'are particularly impressed by the way
   the people of Sheffield, with whom they had dealings on
   the day and since, responded to this tragedy to their
   family and they very much appreciate that.
        Finally, sir, this family is a member of a group
   formed to support families following the loss of their
   loved ones.   You will have heard of it, sir, The
                     Hillsborough Family Support Group.   They say that
                     without the support of that Group the distress and the
                     grief they have suffered would have been much greater.
                     They are pleased to have been able to have the support
                     of people in a similar position to them.   It has
                     helped them enormously and they wish to thank that
                     Group through you, sir.
                 B
                          THE CORONER:    Thank you very much indeed.   Mf.
                     Glover, and I know the rest of the family whom I cannot
                     see but who may be able to see me, thank you very much
                     for saying those very kind words about the people of
                     Sheffield.   Also for saying what you have said about
                     the support group because as far as I remember you are
                     the first family which has actually mentioned that
                     particular support group in this way, but it is rather
                     nice for the other families to know that they have been
                     of help to you and to your family at this very, very
                     tragic time.
                          It must be obvious to you that we are all very
                     sorry that you have lost Ian.   I think obviously your
                     son, who was there, it must have been an awful
                 D   situation for him and we feel for them in this terrible
                     loss; not only the loss but also the trauma which he
                     experienced, particularly your son when he saw his
                     brother and he could not get at him.   That must have
                     been a very, very difficult thing for him to sustain
                     and we feel for you as far as we are able in the
                     circums tances.
                          Thank you for coming.   I hope you have understood
                     the point about this breathing and so on.   It is a
                     difficult problen, but I wanted Professor Usher to say
( •                  because otherwise you would go away and when you
                     thought about it later you would not be able to work it
                     out.   It is better to hear it now so that you know
                     there is some rational explanation to these things.
                        (The inquest into the death of IAN THOMAS GLOVER
                              was adjourned to a date to be fixectl




                 G




                 H
                                           - 10-
                                                                               1220
 i. H arp h am Ltd
SECTION 4
                                                       “   FRASER T0 DISCUSS THE                     "OTMIL


  ™oughtSi t voulJ                                Mt. Jr e*       1 have b" " discussing i t , and „e

  x&szzrx                        r     ~
  way. intereStS> but Wh0 at th ls s t ^ge. haven't yet had occasion to write in a substantial




 f e S = « « s if3r.-i5s.ri-a.
 this might be a way forward so ^ ^ ^ 0 ^ ° ! ! ^           ^ Wr° te t0 ^ DPP and thouSht that
 with f a i r l y tig h t ules    t w   W             ^ 3 reSUmed IncIuest on a limited basis
 present i j                   V . y no g ^ e y™ Z f Z '                   “ ? h°" « » ° “ld
 long way down the road. What we wo^Id be d e J l i ^ „ T           I™ I™ ! tUt “ W° Uld 8° 3
 died and where he died and we would s t r i c t l v     h ^ ^ Wh° . the decea*ed was. when he
why. That of course could Dreiudire the             ■  . be dealin8 with the question of how or
V n o t to. Certainly^ i f you look at i t f r ' ^ h e E ' " ' V T        h8S * P « i “ '* U y asked
against their in terests a « u » in     h!         w      bereaved >s point of view i t would be

i n ^ o u ^ i n t e r e s t ^ b u t ^ c e r t a i n l y t the                                u'may not be
an extent that any criminal p r o s e c u t i o n H L J i n g th^t S J e “    J°                  gro^
Oo you f e e l that i t would be helpful i f we arranoH       k
-he purpose of takine evidence in i-h * i • • I anSed to h a v e ..................the Inquests for
the end of th a t“ » t ! c u u f ""dence ^ d       n          ^     ^      ^                     at
on resumption because that w i l l depend on the DPP^o a ^ e . qUeStl0n of what w iU haPPen
  ^ ^ f clear?                         p     on tne DPP t0 a certain extent. Have I made

Mr Metcalf - Speaking from the point of view of the      SY Pnliro t          j
being able to say whether i t would be useful or nnt w              I &m 006     7. 3Way from
for Mr J u stice Stain at which what ie •          ■   because we have a hearing tomorrow
proceedings should co^ti^ue I ^ tJer L r JouM 5                  *■“ P « * « ‘ ■ « ]
oroceedines stari-*>H       n             they should cease to be restarted or new
the conclusion tomorrow is t h a r ^ h " p r e s e i t dprocehd-InqUhStS ^ 1,660 COmpleted- Now i f
heard in October or later th*n t ! PreS6nt Pr° ceedings have to go ahead, whether they be
Inquests could proceed, that must be^rue 0 ^ a n hd e f e n d ^ t r Ul?fbeheXtre,n6ly H6lPfUl “
discontinued, then i t really ceases to be c,-on- f efendents- I f the proceedings are
except with any information the sooner „e h ™               J « t « ? P° int ° f Vi~ ° £ ** P° UCe


-n their minds. i r h w ' d i d ’ V h u i b l n d " ^ ^ d l ^ ' m y ' c a n ^ Thave th%”a j ° r qu" tions ls
- o u t hlm, ! think anything that can he done to g e / t h a ? L ^ r T i o T t T t i " t ^ t "


         iniaaf
■i-adverserial way, would be warmly welcomed by them. The proceedings of which Mr^
a l f speaks, don’t d ir e c t ly involve the bereaved because they are, correct me i f I ’m
a i t ’s the contribution proceedings between the various defendants, the insurers of
o l i c e have agreed that subject to proof, they w ill deal with a l l the c i v i l claims and
e are issues arising from that. Certainly in terms' of the bereaved, those
eedings are not a factor and I am sure they would a l l welcome as .much information as
o s s ib le to get.
.e tc a lf - I think t h e re’s a further point which again I don’t suppose affects us
 c t l y , which I perhaps ought to make on that, nobody i s being kept waiting for
 ensations INAUDIBLE so t h a t ’s not a liv e issue, the question of the amount of
■ensation is in issue and one of the particular aspects i s something known as pre
 h terror/pre impact terror which we used to describe as pain and suffering before
 h. If i t be the case that there is evidence of people having survived for a long
- or recovered consciousness s u f f ic i e n t l y to recognise what s t a t e they were in or
rered pain, then the bereaved rela tiv es are li k e ly to be e n t i t l e d to higher
sensation on those grounds. That may be a factor which is preventing cases being
 led at the moment.
-‘raser - Certainly t h a t ’ s a major factor but I don’t think t h a t ’ s adverseriai in the
      : between ourselves, t h a t ’s really a matter for finding out information, t h a t ’s
          been bombarded with a l l these l e t t e r s from people.

 - Looking from the bereaved point of view, my f eelin g i s that they would welcome a
.ted Inquest, provided that the lim its are explained to them an that they understand
 reason for i t .
"raser -There w i l l be one or two people who you w i l l be faced with i f you do proceed
 find those r e s t r ic t io n s d i f f i c u l t to accept and you w i l l have to be as firm as I have
 doubt you can be with them, even though they have i t explained in advance, i t s an
remely emotional situ a tio n particularly for those who were there with people who died,
 perhaps so much for people who are at arms length. I t may be seen as an opportunity
 those who were there, to get i t off their chest and that could be a problem I think.

 - We have thought about t h i s , i t i s d i f f i c u l t and I also recognise that i t is
o s s ib le for me to s a t i s f y 95 fam ilies. I have thought about how we should present the
dence and I f e e l we should not ask any SY Police O fficers to give oral evidence at
s hearing.
*   a lf e - I can’t think that any of them could give any information about th is , they
i j^^re general information about body positions and so on.

 - There are a lo t who participated in the rescue and r e s u s c it a tio n and by not ca llin g
m, i t ’s only f a ir to say that we are harming those that did w e ll and tried very hard.
 we decided i t was impractical to s e l e c t . I t becomes very much harder to control a l l
 questioning and for that matter the answers. The principal way we want to present
 evidence is that there w i l l be be team of Officers from W Midlands, they w i l l prepare
ummary of the evidence and w i l l present that summary of how the deceased arrived at
 ground and the events which took place at Hillsborough, b a s i c a l l y statements. As
n as the summaries are available, they w i l l be circulated to the s o l i c i t o r s of the
ering Committee. I f you f e l t that that was acceptable as i t stands, then I would



       INIAAF
/
                                                     -   I       -




^         „ « to „ii » r «>>«                    .           t* ... « i «                                               as
                              ~ ? j ~ - m .i«                                 *• —      ■ o£ the Mitnesses but ,ou
n ’t see the witnesses in person.                                                                                               ^
                                                                                                                             _  b
    uant to use anna-cappas.                 -                                                                               ^Us)ju4
.£
 .i'".ptr           r   ^                                                   J
                                                                            *. —            s .



r Jones - Running pa ra llel to this i s the visual * ^ d* ^ eh^                            CJ isual evidence and you

~i:: E                                                                              -       « * • * —             the
imes
MC - Me intend to have this for every deceased plus the summary.

r Fraser - Plus any video or s t i l l photographs that are available as «117

...      We don" t want to use the videos at this s t g , because i t                              t0T
  * e > have already seen the videos and s t i l l s be        d   if ic a t i o n s have been confirmed
  f l n t i n g the summaries «i 1 be f                          ^     ^        „ e sta b lish the
 n nearly every case. There are a r           f ...       : ust didn’t want to look. What 1 have
.-hereabouts and there are a few where the fa             J        were seen a l i v e . We w ill


                                                                                        -*
                                                                         nprhaos i t ’s because 1
•ir Fraser - The only comment 1 have about t h e . sumn*pkodv’ s approach to the problem. 1
nave a Liverpool background, but any su™”'*ry^           i t is possible or even practicable to
wonder whether in addition being given t h e e x t r a c t e d so that when the
be given the evidence from which the summary has b                               him Qr his c lie n t
s o l i c i t o r has read the summary. *                      U u l d n ’t expect the body of the
evidence ^ b ^ n f t ^             ^    U        *                   S fK    ,ou , but an, s ^ - a r y i s bound to be
su b jectiv e.
BMC - We've thought about this at considerable                                                                     contain
",      ic u l a r l y with regard to the evidence of the Police Ot;t i ^ ^ ^                         sta c e n iM S , Quite
 ^ r statements, there really i s a t a c t l c a l p r o b l                      in£ormation. We have thought about
 ^ I t from that, statements may '™ tain                                            ta s k , and scoring out a l l the bits
going through the statements, whic w                                    worse than doing what we are doing. That
5ut on balance, we thought that would **                                ™ ” *nf a^ . ve heard what you’ve said but
 doesn’ t of course preclude at the Inquest ^ ° * hat.ywe8; ould want to hear i t in more
 i : t f i ei . Inr c So u irm ea k r a b: o t e Sr dt^aJ a n / s u b j e c t to resumption. I would consider i t as a
    p o ssib lility .
    It may be when I read through the ^                      .       there « y be some v          i t n   e   - . e   s ^

            r. SiXi ro\::^;itinrr^.r                                                »i... -a. —

               INIAAF
                                           - 4 -

Hr Fraser - There w i l l be some families who want th e ir , someone said, their 15 minutes of
fame. I suppose to some extent they are going to have to be given that opportunity
aren’ t they. I think the vast majority w i l l go through very smoothly but I think that
there are going to be one or two who are going problems.

HMC - We recognise that, but we want the Inquests to be meaningful.

Mr Fraser - Yes, i t ’ s serving the two points p a rticu la r ly , getting information and also
dealing with our problems on the c i v i l front.

 Mr Jones - The summary is not only one of my Police O f f i c e r s ’s summary but    that is
 reviewed by me and my people, i t ’s actually going to go to Dr Popper so he          gets actually
 the f u l l f i l e with a l l the statements and including matters which could be    considered
p r e j u d i c i a l . He can actually read those matters which relate to the death   and look at
 that in terms of how i t compares with the summary. The summaries come out            from the
 Coroner as opposed to come out from me.
     Fraser - No disrespect to V Midlands’ O fficers, I think that i f that point is made,
 ^ ^ c l e a r l y made, I think some of the    "oh i t ’s another policemanand another         policeman’s
 ^ R em e n t" sort of comment, then i f a statement comes from your o f f ic e , i t ’s going to be
 much ea sier to swallow.
 HMC - Would you want to see the summaries Mr Kennedy? I would prefer not to send the
 summaries to dozens of p arties.
 Mr Fraser - One of the points at issue i s that at the moment a broad swipe has been taken
 at t h i s pre-death payment and suffering, those summaries are almost bound to contain
 information which w i l l b en efit us and   I certa in ly would have noobjection to    the oterh
 side seeing them, I don’t know whether they would want to.

 Mr Metcalf - I think the d istin ctio n that can be drawn between us and the other
 defendents is that we are doing the paying out, so we have a legitimate in te r e s t .
7HMC -   I ’m quite happy i s you say i t would be helpful to see them before we begin.

 Mr Jones - There’ s no problem.      The f i r s t thing was to clear with Mr Fraser in terms of
   i t side of things.
 .^P^Fraser - We have to work together, i f the document became available and the p l a i n t i f f
 r e lie d upon i t , I would have to d isclo se i t any way, so you might as well see i t at the
 beginning rather than.       I t w i l l be a matter of public record after the hearing because t i
 w i l l be part of the deposition.
 Mr Metcalf - Returning to the beginning of t h i s , there i s I think a lin e to be drawn in
 making clear what these preliminary hearings are intended to deal with between saying,
 w ell look we’re doing th is to prevent any p ossible risk of prosecution, but not actually
 giving the idea that a prosecution i s certa in ly going to follow.

  Mr Fraser - That has occurred to me and w i l l occur to others.

  HMC - We thought about doing this a while ago but I turned i t down because I thought that



           INIAAF
                                               - 5 -

 i f I held a limited Inquest as t h is stage, everybody would assume that I knew what the
 DPP was going to do. The reason why I f e e l we can do i t now i s because of Miss S t e e l ’s
 l e t t e r . She requested the information, what we are doing i s trying to comply with her
 wish. It would be made clear, i f necessary 95 times, that under no circumstances can i t
 be construed as a preliminary. Do we say that because somebody won’t believe i t , we
 don’t do anything at all?
 Mr Fraser - t h a t ’ s right, there w i l l be one or two hotheads who w i l l look for the
 u l t e r io r motive behind th is . The vast majority w i l l accept i t in the s p i r i t which i t ’s
 done. The press w i l l do the same.
 HMC      - I k m q u i t e s a t i s f i e d in my- own* min#; that w   not'doing it for that- reason.
  There are three scenarios which are worth mentioning. One, that the DPP decies to
p r o s e c u t e somebody or several people for manslaughter. I f that were to happen, then
  Section 16 of the Coroner’s Act would apply and I would adjourn the Inquests on
  provisions of that Section. Whether I resume or not, I w i l l decide at the end of the
  prosecution, but i t i s my normal practice not to resume when prosecutions for murder,
  ■ ^ s l a u g h t e r or ................... take place. Secondly, that he decides not to prosecute for
        slaughter or a charge that f a l l s within that Section. In that case, I w i l l have to

 •      ide on a resumption then I w i l l make up my mind how much further evidence I w i l l need
        to c a l l . Thirdly, he decides not to prosecute but that somebody brings a private
  prosecution. Again, I ’m not saying i t w i l l happen but i t i s a p o s s i b i l i t y , Mr Hytner I
  think hinted at that p o s s i b i l i t y .

 Mr Metcalf - I would take his remarks very carefully, he at no stage gave the idea that
 he or his colleague, King, thought that there was anything in which they were putting
 forward. What they were saying was, "some of my c l i e n t s b elieve". He was very careful
 in h is wording.
 HMC - I wasn’ t suggesting that he thought that one should be brought, I was just saying
 that he recognised that there were some people who might wish to do so. Assuming that
 someone brought a private prosection, then you’ re back in the Section 16 situ atio n .

  Those are the three scenarios. I f the D P P were to prosecute, then if I hadn’ t done the
  resu mpt ions at t h i s stage, I would have had to resume on a limi ted basis to at least take
  the medical evidence. Bearing mind even i f the D P P does prosecute, he may not actually
    “OS'ecute 95, he may s e l e c t . It night be that it w o u l d be u nf air not to at least take
       sort of evidence we have been talking about for the other x number who aren’t

 •     tioned on the charge sheet, but i t would be covered under Section 16. So I might be
  faced with having to do a l l thi* anyway after the D P P has decided. Assuming that we do
  i t now, that work w i l l have been done i f the D P P decides to prosecute, I w i l l resume the
  Inquests for the purposes *of adjourning under Section 16 and then I w i l l make up my mind
  when i t i s over.

  Mr Fraser - I t ’ s going to take a lot of heat out of the s it u a t i o n . There i s a need to
  know, I think so far as i t ’s possible to give that information, I think i t ’ san excellent
  id e a .

  Mr Jones - Humanely, i f you look at it in terms of not doing anything at this stage, i t
  could be quite a while, and the psychologists t e l l us that the grieving process needs
  th is in order to work through. The vast majority of f a m ilie s want to s e t t l e down and



            INIAAF
                                            - 6 -

sta rt rebuilding their l i v e s but they can’t do i t .
HMC - I don’t know what the DPP i s going to do anymore than you do.            When Imention    it,
t h a t ’ s got to be put as part of the scenario.
Mr Jones - To help you on that, i f this goes ahead at the time we are talking            about, the
fin a l submission to the DPP won’t have been made w h ilst t h i s is going on.

Mr Fraser - What sort of dates are we talking about?
HMC What we want to do as soon as you are happy, we want co have the pre-inquests, w i t h .
HMC - What                t t „ive everybody a chance to hear and know what s going
you next week because «               Ap*n ,yand s t a r t a c t u a lly taking evidence on
i n d i v i d u a l leases on the 19th. When we f i r s t set i t , i t was said, h o w can you do i t
i n d i v i d u a l cases on            r ertainlv a point. The people w i l l obviously very
  em otionally^nvolved on 111 15th anyway. a£d i t ,nay possib ly be better to take then, while
     ey are already upset, quite naturally, instead of l e t t i n g them go down and then l i f t


 Mr Fraser - How long do you anticipate this is going to take?

 HMC - I ’d be interested to hear what you think?

 Mr Metcalf - A week or two weeks came into mind straightaway.
 HMC - I think the minimum i s two weeks.         What we want to do i s eight a-day i f we can and
 that, would take us 12 days. The f i r s t     day we don’t want to take eight.

 Mr Fraser - Timetabling i s a problem.    Eight a day i s eight fam ilies in     out’U can
 be done i f the Social Services support and everybody gets t h e ir act together.

 Mr Jones - What I intended to do with Summary O fficers, that each one would            ™
 ter day, so h e ’d actually chaperone them in and out, so they wouldn t have this idea ot a
 sausage machine.
  •r Fraser - I know that the Social Services in S h e ffie ld are keen to help i f t h a t ’s a
 ^ ^ sib ility .
 HMC - The Zeebrugge Disaster managed 18 a day but I think th e ir problem was d i f f
 Although they d e f i t with where the people were found, i t                                       the
 shin wasn’t l i f t e d u n til s ix weeks or whatever a f te r the in cid en t. Nobody knew where the
 people had been because the water had gone into the bow.             We have the prob em of trying
 to find 95 people in thousands, out of thousands of photographs. So i t w i ll probably take
 a b i t longer to present the evidence. I don’ t want t h is r u s h e d I want each family to
 f e e l that they have been treated with courtesy, i t ’ s been d ig n i f i e d .

  Mr Metcalf - I can’t see us and the others rea lly having any questions to raise, I can’t
  see us being more than present hearing the evidence.
  Mr Fraser - Would you attach to the summary the PM report or would you include i t in it?




            INIAAF
                                              - 7 -

 HMC - The PM report would be separate.         I might c a l l the Pa,thologist to every Inquest and
 I'd value your comments.
 Mr Jones - I t ’ s a question what the family want to some extent. I know there are one or
 two PM reports which talk of fractures and what the family want to know is whether that
 fracture caused any d i s t r e s s . In the majority of cases, they are very sympathetic
 reports. I can’t see very many fam ilies wanting to put questions to the Pathologist.
 One or two certa in ly .
  HMC - There are one or two where there were queries. I want the families to be able to
  hear w h a t was what, i t ’ s better if i t ’ s dealt with in Court. What I had in mind, and I
  haven’t yet spoken to Prof Usher, i s on the             opening day, to take evidence from Dr Forrest
  who did the alcohols, otherwise h e ’ s got to           s i t here for 12days, about half didn’t have
g k ny alcohol at a l l , another large batch only had r e l a t i v e l y low l e v e l s , there may be a
  few where the alcohol level is a b it high. I thought that we could c a l l Prof Usher or
  some other suitable Pathologist, so that he could give us a general d isserta tio n on
  traumatic asphyxia death. The fam ilies wouldn’t have heard i t but the s o l i c i t o r s would,
 ^ m a y be that i f we do that, we could then take as documentary at lea st a proportion of
       PMs. But i f you say this family won’t be happy unless they hear from the
   Pathologist, then I w i l l consider that.
  The Jury, i n i t i a l l y I was going to do without but I have changed my mind. There w i l l be
  a Jury even at this preliminary stage, though the Jury w i l l have nothing to do because
  there w i l l be no verdict as such at t h i s stage. Bearing in mind that one of the
  scenarios i s that a prosecution may take place and that I may adjourn under Section 16,
  and at the end of the day, may not resume, i f we do th is without a Jury then none of i t s
  been heard with a Jury and I think technically i t ’ s better i f the Inquests were heard
  with a Jury.
  Mr Metcalf - I can’t fa ult your lo g ic but i t would be n ice for them i f there was a way
  round i t but I can’t think of any.
^tMC - I n i t i a l l y I was going to do without, but assuming I did resume in s ix months time,
 we’d have to repeat a f a ir b it of i t anyway, even i f I can get the same Jury ro we’d have
  to sta rt with a new one, and do the whole job again. I f e l t i t would be unwise to
  proceed without them from a leg a l point of view.
     Metcalf - I t ’s case where you would automatically have had a Jury had their been no
  possib le element of prosecution.

  HMC - That’s the problem. The Act says that i f , a Coroner sh all proceed ................... I
  think i t s w iser. The Jury i s going to cause a b it of a problem because I know from some
  of the, at l e a s t one, a bereaved representative that they are worried about how you can
  get an impartial Jury. Bearing in mind that this i s an Inquest not a t r i a l , I ’m not
  r e a lly worried about s e le c tin g .
  Mr Jones - For th is purpose, as they are not going to come to a verd ict, i t doesn t
  re a lly matter.
  HMC - We w i l l probably exclude anybody who is related to any of the deceased, I think
  that is something which we should discuss and decide whether we want to have any c r it e r i a



            INIAAF
for exclusions on the Jury. We don’t want to pick and choose but we don’t want to have
people who by d e f i n i t io n are involved in some way. I have to think about th is .

We are inclined to hold i t here and I w i l l show you around the building later. As we are
going to be dealing with 95 Inquests and provided we can get the summonsing right, we
shouldn’t have too many people in the building at any one time. Except on Day One when
the press w i l l be here, then I think they w i l l go away. We want to try and arrange for -
coffee and the WRVS, and we want to inform the Hillsborough Support Group. I don’t want
to get involved in the running of that side because i t ’s more for Mr Fraser. What Ihave
in mind, is when we warn the family of attendance, we would at the same time warn the
Support Group.     We w i l l then expect you to co-ordinate them, the Social Services etc.

 Mr    Metcalf - Are they a l l represented, a l l 95?

 Mr Fraser - There’s about two or three that aren’t, this i s something that your Officers
 and I can check. Representation has changed.

 ”MC - Can you l e t me have you updated l i s t ?

       Fraser - Yes, I can l e t you have that by the end of the week. Our d i f f i c u l t y i s one
 that I have no wish to embarrass my friend about, but we as a Steering Committee, may not
 be here because we have a problem with the Insurers about being here.                               Our origin al, i f
 I ’m treading on d i f f i c u l t territory, please say so. Ouro rig in a l approach to your
 Inquest was this; we have already sent out a questionnaire to a l l s o l i c i t o r s who
 represent the bereaved and with very few exceptions, they have a l l returned them saying
 they want block representation. This means you would have one individual or a team of
 two or three working on a rota basis appearing before you. I t had o rig in a lly been our
 intention to match representation with our protagonists, but in view of what you have
 said today, my view, subject to the view of my Committee, would be, that i t would be at
 s o l i c i t o r le v e l only and probably me because I have 22 personal bereaved families and as
 I lead the team for the Inquests, I would probably be before you. That was on the basis
^•£hat the Insurers would fund that en bloc. They have declined our inv ita tion to pay for
 Vepresentation for the bereaved at the Inquests at a l l . Not e i t h e r en bloc or as
 s o l i c i t o r s or for each individual family. So the present p o sitio n i s that we eith er have
 to persuade them to see the error of their ways and there i s a meeting on Wednesday of
 t h is week at which an attempt w i ll be made, or, we have to t e l l the families they cannot
 ' e represented unless they pay for individual s o l i c i t o r s themselves and the prospect
^fcerefore i s that you have a different s o l i c i t o r for each bereaved, or in some cases, no
^ w l i c i t o r at a l l . The third p o s s i b il it y i s that there i s funding available from another
 source. I can t e l l you that as I speak there i s no other source av ailab le. I t has been,
 suggested that we approach the Legal Aid Board, i t i s not p o s s ib l e . I t ’s been suggested
 that we approach the D isaster Fund, and they have declined, so there are only two
 p o s s i b i l i t i e s , either we can persuade the Insurers. In fa irn ess to the Insurers, their
 stance was taken before t h i s information came available to us, but either we can persuade
 them to change their minds and agree to fund block representation or fund individual
 s o l i c i t o r s representing th e ir c lie n t s and those s o l i c i t o r s in str u c tin g us as agents. Or,
 secondly, you have a team of different s o l i c i t o r s , you have a d i ff e r e n t s o l i c i t o r for
 each bereaved in front of you with my exception. Some have blocks of three, four and
 f iv e s o l i c i t o r s , but there are quite a lo t with one. The present situ a tion is that you
 could end up with up to 40 s o l i c i t o r s in front of you and that i s a problem for which I
 TAPE ENDS



           INIAAF
                                              - 9 -

 That’s the sit u a tio n as we talk at 3.30 today.

  Mr Metcalf - I think the particular problem is that for two reasons my c l i e n t s , and i t
  i s n ’t just the MMI in this instance, don’t wish to go beyond that which they are legally
  li a b le for and the two reasons are, f i r s t l y , we are pursuing the others, the Club,
  Eastwoods, the City Council, and i f we pay out for something for which we are not liab le
  l e g a l l y , then we won't get any of i t back. Secondly, without giving' any d e t a i l s of cover
  involved, i t has been a matter of comment and i t i s partly correct, that i f the amount to
  be paid out goes over a certain lim it, i t w i l l be the ratepayers of S Yorkshire, whatever
  Treasury, support they.may g e t , who w i l l be paying out compensation. In those
  circumstances, nobody wants to take a decision which could lead them to being surcharged
  at a la ter date for having w i l l f u l l y given away what turns out later to be public money.
  They present quite serious ob stacles, whether there i s anything that can be done I ’m not
|(^ure. There i s a meeting on Wednesday where this w i l l be discussed again. Mr Fraser is
  quite correct in saying i t ’s not me that takes decision s.

^^C - From my point of view i t would be better i f we didn’t have, we do have many cases
^Aere people are not represented and there i s no objection, but given the emotivenes of
 t h is case and the lim ita tio n s , legal representation might be helpful and desirable for me
 and the. In a sense I ’m in your hands, assuming for a moment that I were making a claim,
 then I would include in my claim, the expenses and that would include l e g a l , then I would
 have to argue whether i t was legitimate expense.

  Mr Metcalf - The d i f f i c u l t y i s that i t comes back to the question of c i v i l action, the
  moving on.at speed. In general terms, an Inquest takes place before a c i v i l action and
  i t ’ s always legitim ate expense to go and be represented at the Inquest because something
  might come out that w i l l be relevant to the c i v i l action.

  HMC - In a sense we are doing that, we         have brought the Inquest forward.

  Mr Metcalf - Except that we are talking about representation here, the trouble i s the
  agreement has been made to pay out so there’s nothing for them to gain in that sense.

 Mr Fraser - Our argument i s one of the issues that you are going to c l a r i f y i s the extent
 of suffering before death and therefore we are here to get that information, and
^^jerefore we think that we should be paid. If we get the papers in advance, we don’t
Wmve to come. I t is my wish that the Steering Committee i s here and w i l l represent as
 many as p o ss ib le , I w i l l be here in any event and i t i s my view that as many as possible
 should be done, because although lik e you I have no wish to do i t any more quickly that
 i s necessary, i f we have done the f i r s t day’s worth at eigh t, then we should              be able to,
 i f we can e s t a b l is h a pattern, without i t being too obvious, then i t w i l l be easier for
 everybody.

  Mr ........... - Can I ju s t c la r i f y here INAUDIBLE If a decision was that i t wasn’ t going to
  be forthcoming, the c o s ts , where would that leave us in terms of communication, talking
  to whom, the fam ilies d ir e c tly and for them to decide as to whether they employ at their
  own cost?

  Mr Fraser - No what the Insurers say i s that they w i l l pay the generic c o s ts of our
  preparation for the Inquests e . g . I ’m here today as one of the Committee as part of the
  generic costs of that Committee. But the moment the Inquests st a r t , then no we would not



           INIAAF
                                              - 10-

 be here. Up to the 18th April we would be in, but once you switch on the microphone on
 the 18th, then we’ re not here.

  HMC - You would accept communications and presumablyn o tify in g your clients?

 Mr Fraser - Yes t h a t ’ s right.

  Mr ......... - But i t does change how we got here, the question of Social Services support is
  that i t i s n ’t something that we could actually lay o f f     to you.

   Mr Fraser - No, I wouldn’t have raised the question of money had that not beenan obvious
   lin k . Our present view i s that i f funding         i s granted, we w i l l be here in  termsof an
   advocate and at l e a s t one leg a l runner whoknows h is way around the papers and can a s s i s t
^ ) o u r O fficers.

  Mr Metcalf -I would have thought we would have been looking at one representative here,
  s o l i c i t o r or a clerk a f te r things got going.

      - L e t’ s assume the fin a n cia l side got sorted out and that you w i l l be here. I f we
 ^Ke going to do eigh t a day, I reckon we w i l l have to move at a f a ir ly brisk pace and
  what I have in mind i s to warn the family to come at x time, deal with the case, take
  them out of Court, bring the next family in. That w i l l mean that i f you want to see the
  family who we have j u s t dealt with, then you have got to have somebody here to see them
  because we w i l l be sta rtin g the next Inquest.

  Mr Fraser - or they may want to see me, but I would have somebody from my o f f i c e here or
  from the Committee to deal with any problems then, sim ilar to the Public Inquiry. Who do
  you an ticip ate w i l l be before you?

 HMC - I have drafted a l e t t e r to a l l s o l i c i t o r s I am aware o f, not ju st the Committee.
 There are quite a l o t of firms who were represented at the Inquiry who have not
^contacted me at a l l but I intend to t e l l them about the pre-inquest review so that they
 Ian attend i f they wish. I suspect that not everybody w i l l come and that at the Inquest,
 i t w i l l be yourself and possibly you.

  Mr Metcalf - I would have thought the Club and Council would have someone at the
   ,iquests.

     Fraser - I think to some extent that the p u b lic ity that comes from your o f f i c e about
  what the Inquest i s for may reduce the numbers. I f i t i s known that i t i s non l i a b i l i t y ,
  non adverseriai.

  HMC - I think they w i l l be here the f i r s t two or three days, then they may decide th e r e ’ s
  not much.

  Mr Jones - Can I j u s t add that there w i l l be tran scrip ts as w e l l.

  HMC - We are wired for sound and we usually transcribe from tapes, but at the moment that
  even i f we have i t here, I w i l l get preferably the same firm that did the Inquiry to do
  shorthand tran scrip ts and we w i l l probably record as w e l l . We w i l l l e t anyone who wants
  copies of the tr a n sc r ip ts, have them at the usual rate. I w i l l try and get individual



           INIAAF
  Inquests done separately so that we won’t get a whole day's proceedings.            You can ask foi'
  individual copies rather than a l l those for that day.

 Mr Metcalf - I t w i l l reduce the need to go through the evidence at the end. I can’t
 think at the moment of circumstances where we would have questions to ask, i f we don’t
 the lik elih ood i s that we would want a low level representation and a transcript.

  Mr Fraser - I think from a p o l i t i c a l point of view, the Ch Constable might want somebod'-
  in.
  Mr Metcalf - Yes' and nrov i f i t isn,, t' necessary, but I wouid-'haive thottgfetv I ' H have- to ■
  think about i t .
^*MC - I want to c a l l the cases in Pathologist order because i f I do need to c a l l a
 ‘Pathologist, I want to c a l l him for half a dozen. But of course where there are two
  people in. the same family have been k i l l e d , then t h a t ’ s an over-riding consideration.
  Those Inquests should be done on the same day. There are other factors which come into
 ^ ^ a s w e ll. They w i l l appear random. The disadvantage i s that they won’t be in
 ^ R i c i t o r order. If the Committee doesn’t represent, i t ' s not a problem.

  Mr Fraser - How much notice would you give the families or would you t e l l the
  s o l ic it o r s ?
  HMC - What I have in mind, i s that we would notify the s o l i c i t o r s of the time and also
  the family d i r e c t l y . An Officer would t e l l them, and of course any witnesses we may want
  to c a l l , the Officers would n o tif y . And of course the Hillsborough Support Group so i t
  may well be that in certain circumstances, we’d turn up at the              door as w e ll. We’d have
  to say that the Inquest i s going to be held on x day but beprepared for change. Mr
  Fraser, you could explain those aspects.

 Mr Fraser - I t would help me i f you could also t e l l me with my Committee hat           on, the
^oroposed dates as w ell.

  HMC - Yes. I f I know that the Committee w i l l be representing en bloc, I wouldn’ t notify
  the individual s o l i c i t o r s , I would j u s t notify you of the dates.

      Fraser - I think i t would be better i f you told the s o l i c i t o r s as w e ll. To a large

 •  tent, we are anonymous in the sense that we have d elib era tely not id e n tif ie d ourselvei*
    as individuals and i f I have the information, then by the time I get to his s o l i c i t o r ai'^
  he gets i t out, or he gets the information get back to me, I think i f i t ’ s p ossib le, t*?li­
  the family, t e l l the s o l i c i t o r and a lso t e l l me.

  Mr Metcalf - I t only matters in terms of preparation, reading up etc.

  HMC - That       i s a l l I really need to say today.

  Mr ......... -   This question, your objectives as i t were, in asense      you are united in term*'
  of finding       out the information in order to s e t t l e on

  Mr Metcalf       - We each have the idea that this thing i s better se ttled    quicker.




             INIAAF
                                                - 12 -

 Mr .......... - In p articu lar, the pain and suffering l e v e l s , immediately before and a fter
 death, there may well also be needs amongst the fa m ilies to actually question, which they
 would normally do in an Inquest, question the people who were actually there, to say what
 did you do to help my c l i e n t . One thing that you w i l l have to be sure of is that this
 ’d e v ic e ’ w i l l actually bring out that to your s a t i s f a c t i o n . A l o t of i t w ill centre of
 what the summaries say, but the a b i li t y to cross examine w i l l not be there at that point,
 e ith e r for you or for the fam ilies. If we ca lled the p o lic e a fter we had just completed,
 and in many instances they would be in a position to give that evidence under cross
 examination, there could also be considerable problems there where i t could become
 adverseriai in terms of complaints against p o lic e .                     >

 Mr Fraser - The majority of the families won’ t be looking for that problem, there w i l l be
  some. I think the advance p ublicity can make i t as clear as possib le,   on bothsides of
^^he Pennines, that t h is i s an exercise to give information and not one to

  HMC - This i s the draft l e t t e r .

      Fraser - Would i t be your intention to talk to the press before next week’s meeting?

 HMC - I ’m inclined to say I should t e l l the press about the meeting and I have drafted
 another press.

 Mr Fraser - Somebody must copy i t to the press agency.

 Mr Metcalf - The only thing I would mention from your point of view i s that some people
 might phone that number on the second page and be surprised when someone says *W Midlands
 Police *.

 HMC - It i s going to s o l i c i t o r s apart from those few who are not represented.           I am going
 to do a covering l e t t e r to those.

^JJlr Fraser - So this i s to a l l thoce * o lic it o r s who have n o t i f i e d you they   represent the
  .eceased to a l l organisations who were represented

 MrMetcalf - Other bodies who were given representation                at the Inquiry.

       - Do you think you could send nethe addresses?

 Mr    Fraser - When would you expect to release this?

 HMC - Tonight i f we f i n i s h early, we need the addresses so tomorrow. I don’t intend to
 send one to each deceased, j u s t one to each firm. I do intend at some point to have a
 meeting with the press and re-explain a) what we are doing, b) try and point out that I
 don’ t want any more bad press in my Court. I a lso want to talk with the Social Services.

 Mr Metcalf - I suspect you w i l l get quite a big turn out next week from people, I don’ t
 know i f t h e r e ’s scope for extra benches.

 HMC - We won’ t have a l l the famili#*, i t w i l l a l l be s o l i c i t o r s . I don’t think we’ l l
 have enough space next week but I agree with you, I suspect there w i l l be quite a few
 r e p r e s e n ta t iv e s .



            INIAAF
                                              - 13

 M
 Mrr             Can I ju ' s t confidentially b rief you both in terms of the progress of the
 in v e s t ig a t io n . That i s continuing, I saw Mr M e t c a l f s eyes raise when I said the final
 submission to the DPP won’t have gone by the time th is starts on the 18th. It won t be
 lone a fte r , I intend to finish i t in the Spring and await the DPP s response. But in
 fa ir n e ss , i t w i l l not be completed, every t crossed and every i dotted u n til the end o
 t h i s particular process. Not that th is process i s anything to do with i t , i t ’ s just
 simply that other things are going on and that includes interviews which I w i l l be
 talking to you about. I have had your l e t t e r , we didn’t deliberately respond other than
 to acknowledge because we wanted to talk about t h i s , bearing in mind your l e t t e r came
 about the same time as Miss S t e e l ’s asking very sim ilar questionsv

 HMC - Are you content that we should proceed in the way that I have outlined?

     Metcalf - I see no reason why not.
   r Fraser - I agree en tirely . There w i l l       be one or two problems with th is but on balance
 ^ t h i n k i t ’ s an ex cellen t idea, primarily   from the point of view of the r e l a t iv e s to get
 B e information that they have wanted for            nearly a year, and also from the lawyers point
 of view, there i s          an added bonus that      information w i l l come out, and those fewproblems
 w i l l be the price       we w i ll have to pay     for a much larger b en efit.
 Mr . . . . . . - Without naming any individuals, do you think there would be scope and would
 i t be appropriate      to take those cases  which perhaps could cause greater d i f f i c u l t y
 towards the middle or towards the end, rather than on the f i r s t day when a l l the press
 w i l l be queued up?
  Mr Fraser - It depends on the nature of the problem r e a lly .

  Mr Metcalf - I think i t would be usual in most Courts to take shorter cases before longer
  ones and i f the anticipation i s that in some cases there w i l l be a lo t of questions, t e
  usual thing would be to l i s t them at the end.
      ........... What you might get i s a lo t of the other fam ilies hyped up.

  Mr Jones - I think i t should be started as a low key thing and hopefully i t               w i l l run that
m L y . Whereas i f you have the world’s press here on the f i r s t few days, the             disadvantage
^ i s that i f they get hold of the timetable, I think they’ l l do that anyway.              But I agree,
   the s t u f f which can be got out of the way without any d i f f i c u l t y should be,   so as not to
   upset them as individuals.

  Mr ......... - Minimise the trauma r ea lly .
  Mr Metcalf - Again, i f any cases which are going to cause any particular problems are
  l a s t on the l i s t on any given day, then no other family i s going to be kept waiting.

  HMC - Structure them within the days as w e ll.
  Mr Fraser - I would say that there i s one particular case I can think of that should be
  heard in    the morning.

   HMC -   If    you have any views MrFraser you must t e l l me.



            INIAAF
                                                 - 14 -

 Mr Fraser - I have to be very careful.

 HMC - I ’m not asking you to t e l l me now.

 Mr Fraser - There i s one family who would      swell the co ffer s of the local hostelry before
 they arrived, so i f they were a 9.00am st a r t . One other thing, what time w ill you sta rt
 in terms of travelling?

 HMC - Any thoughts?

 Mr .......... - 9.30am at the l a t e s t I would have thought.

^HMC - Can you do it?

 Mr Metcalf - There’s no problem from our point of view, I am just thinking about.

     Fraser - An hour and three quarters to             drive but I don’t want to do that 15 days.

  HMC - No but from the fa m ilie s , i f i t takes two hours for the journery from Liverpool

  Mr Fraser -     A third of them are not from Liverpool.

  Mr ........... - INAUDIBLE    see in fact in the order of the day whether wecan              actually get
  the geography.

  Mr Metcalf - I would have been inclined to suggest a s t a r t at 10.00am and be prepared to
  s i t la te r rather than sta rtin g at 9.30am.

  HMC - Iagree. Without a Jury you can s i t as long as you lik e but with a Jury you have
  to stop for refreshments, e t c . We’l l have to do the best we can.

^►The witnesses w i l l be paid in the usual way. There won’t be many witnesses but none
  W itnesses, that includes family, w i ll not be.

  Mr . . . . - Do you want to mention the p o s s i b i l i t y not the probability, the p o s s i b i l i t y of
 ^ ^ o t h e r week being se t aside for.

  HMC - We’ve chosen the dates because they suited us from a practical point of view but we
  recognise i s that there may be INAUDIBLE we want to f i n i s h i t i f at a l l possible before
  the 4th May. We have t e n ta t iv e ly reserved another week, beginning 21st May I think to
  ............. the stragglers or those on holiday.




             INIAAF
                                HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER - 15TH APRIL 1989


Informal Meeting of HM Coroner, Legal Representatives and the Bereaved, Held on Tuesday,
6th March 1990_____________________________________________ ——----------------------------------------


Legal Representatives;-


Mr Fraser - member of the Steering Committee which was formed by the firms of so lic it o r s
        in Liverpool who were instructed by families shortly after the d isaster .          My
        Committee represents approximately 150 practises within that Group, about 50
^       p ractises have received instructions from bereaved fam ilies.         Those 50 practises, I
*       understand, represent 92 of the deceased, there being three bereaved families who
    have eith er not contacted us as a group or contacted s o l i c i t o r s themselves.   We have had
        general contact and i t would be our intentions subject to your approval, to be
        present to a s s i s t the bereaved and the Court throughout any hearing you may
        reconvene.


    Mr Gregory - represents Sheffield City Council.


    Mr Peter Doyle - Davies Arnold Cooper S o l ic it o r s , fo r S h effield Wednesday Football Club.


    Mr Andrew Callaghan - Dibb Lupton Broomhead, represents Trent Regional Health Authority
        and S heffield Metropolitan Ambulance Service.


    Ms Katherine Thorpe - Reynolds Porter Chamberlain, represent Eastwood & Partners.


    Ms N o rcliffe -   Hammond Suddards, represents SY P o lic e .


    I want to introduce Mr Mervyn Jones, Assistant Chief Constable, West Midlands Police and
    he is acting as my Coroner’s Officer for the purposes of this meeting and also for the
    purposes of the Inquests.
                                                    - 2 -


  The purpose of this meeting is to try and t e l l you some of the thinking which 1 have been
  engaged in. the proposals which I have with regard to resuming the Inquests and to obtain
  from the legal representatives, confirmation that what I am proposing would appear to be
  an acceptable way forward.       1 ought to make i t c le a r , that I have had a preliminary
  d iscu ssion with Mr Fraser and Mr     K e n n e d y    last   weefc, with a'view to ‘exploring the w r y
  subject which we are discussing today.                 These are the 2 s o l i c i t o r s 1 have had most
  correspondence with.                          .

  The second thing 1 want to say, the fact that we are meeting today and 1 am thinking of
^^esuming the Inquests rather sooner that 1 had o r ig in a lly intended, does not mean that
  the Director of Public Prosecutions has either informed me of any decisions or taken any
  d ecisio n s with regard to this matter.


  My Coroner’ s Officer who i s also heading up the Team which is preparing the paper work
  for the DPP informs me that the Director at the moment i s not able to take a decision
  because a l l the paper work has not been delivered to him.


  As you w i l l note from the l e t t e r I sent to you, i t i s my intention subject to this
  meeting to try and resume shortly after Easter.                   The timing for that has got nothing
  whatever to do with any action or inaction by the DPP.


^^The present time schedule for submission of papers to the DPP i s such that i f we do
-^^esume these Inquests shortly a fter Easter, the papers w i l l not yet have been submitted
   to the DPP in f u l l .   The position w i ll be exactly as i t is today. I t may be that whilst
  we are proceeding with the Inquests, the papers w i l l go to the DPP and indeed the
   submission may well be completed.          We had considered something of th is sort some time
   ago and we rejected i t because we were concerned that people might f e e l that there is
   something going on which I ’m not l e t t i n g on about.            That i s not the case.


   The reason why I revised my opinion as to the p o s s i b i l i t y of resuming these Inquests, was
   because we received a l e t t e r from Miss S te el, who i s a member of the Hillsborough
   Steering Committee, in which she had enclosed a l e t t e r which she actually wrote to the
   DPP, and by chance we also had a l e t t e r from Hammond Suddards, who didn t actually make
   the same point but i t was also raising points r e la tin g to timing and disclosure.                       I
   r e a lis e d that what Miss Steel was saying was sim ilar to my o rigin al thoughts and f e l t i t
   was appropriate to reconsider my e a r lie r decision which was to do nothing u n til after the
   DPP has answered.
                                            - 3 -


  I want to indicate three possible scenarios before the Inquests.          Please l i s t e n to these
  bearing in mind what 1 have said as to my knowledge as to what the DPP i s going to do.
  The f i r s t one i s , having considered a l l the paper work and the evidence, he decides to
  bring a prosecution against somebody or bodies, corporate or otherwise, but he decides to
  bring a prosecution for a major offence which f a l l s within Section 16, and the only one
  which i s lik e ly to apply is manslaughter.      If he were to bring such a charge, then the
  procedure under Section 16 of the Coroner’ s Act is that 1 would adjourn the Inquest.              At
  the end of the Town Hall proceedings, i t would be my option whether I resumed the
  Inquests or not.     I t ' s only fair to say that I ’ve been Coroner now for about 4% years and
0 ^ 1 'v e never yet resumed an Inquest which was adjourned under Section 16.


  Scenario     two i s the DPP says no prosecution but that one or more or some other person
  decides that they wish to bring a private prosecution against somebody corporate or
  otherwise.     If that were to occur and i f a charge were laid , then Section 16 would apply
  again with exactly the same consequences.


  The third scenario is that the DPP says no prosecution, and nobody e ls e wants to proceed.
  In those cases, we would in a normal run of events, resume the Inquests and complete i t
  within the ........... that I consider appropriate to the circumstances.


  I don’t know which of these scenarios w i l l apply but i f we were to resume before the DPP
^^jakes a decision, and i f a Section 16 situ a tio n were then to a r is e , I would immediately
    ter resume the Inquests purely and simply for the purposes of adjourning under the
  provisions of Section 16 in order to comply with the Act.         That would be a formality but
  wouldn’t take very long but in a sense, getting the information now, would have the
  advantage that we would be able to deal with i t fa irly quickly.        One of the reasons you
  adjourn under Section 16 is that families can get their death c e r t i f i c a t e s which they
  can’t normally do u n til the Inquest is complete.
                                                -   4   -




  Following receipt of Hiss S t e e l ’s l e tte r and my reconsideration, I got in touch with the
  DPP or one of his representatives, to see whether he                 would agree that I should resume the
  Inquests   on a      limited b asis.   What               I proposed to himwas that wewouldresume for the
  purposes of taking the medical evidence, and we would deal with the alcohol levels of the
  individuals at that time.      We would endeavour to put before my Cotirt o f where the
  deceased were within the Stadium and i f possible, evidence of where they were seen either
  a liv e or dead      at various points within the Stadium and probably, someevidence as to how
  they got to the Stadium.       We wouldnot deal with how or why they died or who is to blame.
  The reason for this is:


  a) the DPP would not agree to me resuming the Inquests i f we were to deal with
  controversial matters.       He would not agree i f we dealt with            matters which wouldimpair
   his in vestiga tio n s or the scope for action which he might wish to take.               It is in the
   i n te r e s t s of j u s t ic e that nothing I do should muddy the waters and perhaps hinder other
   proceedings which make take place in a different Court.


   I f I resume these Inquests, they w ill be of a limited nature.                They w i l l be designed to
   be non adverserial, to present the factual evidence.                 The way I want the evidence
   presented to meet the legitimate requirements of everyone involved i s as follows.


   We w i l l deal with post mortems.    Some Inquests w i l l require the Pathologist to be present
^ yjthers w i l l only require documentary evidence.              We w i l l discuss this with the
■^ H illsb o ro u gh Steering Committee and other relevant parties to determine whether the
   Pathologist i s required.


   We w i l l deal with the alcohol lev els of the deceased.             They were a l l done apart from one,
   and we w i l l t e l l you at the Inque«t« what the individual l e v e ls were. Dr Forrest w il l
   attend some of the Inquests to formally prove his evidence and i f there i s any individual
   case where the alcohol le v e l might be controversial, we w i l l ask Dr Forrest to attend.
   My intention is to hold a short Inquest for eachindividual                   deceased and complete the
   evidence as far as we are going.
                                            - 5 -


  W Midlands Police are preparing the remainder of the evidence following Lord Justice
  Taylor’s report and the publication of the interim report and submission to the DPP.             The
  Inquest cannot be held u n til the DPP has completed his work, so I said get the paper work
  done for the DPP, my documents can come later.       A f i l e of each individual deceased w ill
  be presented to me containing copy statements together with a summary by one of the w-
  Midlands’ Police Officers which w i l l summarise, fa ctu ally and non ad verseria lly, the
  evidence of the w itnesses.    We intend to present that summary to Court.

                                              "S'
  In order to help the legal representatives and the bereaved families, we intend to
^ ^ i r c u l a t e the summaries before the particular Inquest to enable comments regarding
  inaccuracies or unclear statements, to be made to me via legal representatives.              If i t
  i s possib le, we w i l l either get the Summary Officer, who w i l l be here and w i l l be giving
  evidence, to elaborate on the particular point, or I might decide i t is possible to get a
  witness to deal with that point, or we w i l l read a w i t n e s s ’ statement by way of
  documentary evidence on that point.      Under no circumstances are we going to c a l l any S
  Yorkshire Police Officer to the hearing.
                                                  -7   -




   Mr Fraser - how far in terms of time do you anticipate the summaries w i l l go, to the
   point of id e n tif ic a t io n or beyond, or not as far as that?


   I would expect that they would go at le a s t up to the temporary mortuary and possibly up
   to the point of id e n tific a tio n .    The i d e n tif ic a t io n in a Sense w ill be dealt with at the
   opening so we may well stop at that point.              The objective is to trace each individual
   from the moment he l e f t home to the point in time when he was in the temporary mortuary.
   We may not succeed but that is the intention.              We f e e l that is what you want to know.


4)We w i l l probably have available but I don’t think we w i l l circulate, documents called
   anna-cappas. these are rather nice summary charts which have clocks on them and i t is
   ea sier from that to see where certain events occurred.              There w i l l be a copy in Court on
   the relevant day.

   I t would be unreasonable for people lik e Dr Forrest who did the blood alcohols, to s i t
   here for every Inquest, so what I intend to do is to ask Dr Forrest to come along on Day
   1 and to prove formally to the Court, h is evidence and to explain as far as i s necessary,
   the method used for the t e s t .        We also want to have Inspector Leighton and may be one or
   two others, who w i l l explain the anna-cappas, the codings, etc.              I am a lso considering
   asking probably Professor Usher to give an overview of the pathology of the type of
   injury which occurred.

“^^We are aiming to hold eight Inquests per day.              We want to have enough time so that each
    individual family can f e e l that their particular loved one has been given f u l l
   consideration.      This means the duration i s li k e l y to be 2% to 3 weeks of s i t t i n g s .
   Clearly for each Inquest, i t ’s a r e la t i v e l y short period of time but for me and the legal
    representatives and for the Jury, i t ’s weeks of stress and i t ’s not fair to them to make
    t h is longer than i t has to be.        But I don’t intend to rush i t , they have to be as
    thorough and sympathetic within the lim its I have indicated to you.                 I want people to be
    able to leave at the end of the day and be able to say, well we know we haven’t heard all
    the answers, but we know more than we did when we started.
  The Inquests w ill not be held in numerical or alphabetical order.               Thel i s t i n g of the
  cases is a very d i f f i c u l t problem and I don’t think we have solved       i t . I had made up my
  mind that we were going to do them in Pathologist order, in a sense that is s t i l l the
  order.   But in a few cases, more than one person died in a family,              andbecause of the way
  their id e n tif ic a t io n s were done and the way the post mortem was done, i t wasn’t always
  the same Pathologist who dealt with family units.           For that reason alone, we w ill have to
  break the general order because I don’t want to deal with the same family on different
  days.    There are other factors that come into play.


    appreciate that it may be important to you, but the decision as to which order we are
  going to take the cases is going to be mine and my O fficers.            We w i l l certainly not want
  to inconvenience anybody delib erately, I think i t w i l l be an impossible task to try and
  take individual preferences into account, or i f we do take them into account, they would
  come at the bottom of the l i s t .    We are conscious of where people l i v e and that they have
  to come a long way in many cases.


  My i n i t i a l intention was to hold the limited Inquests, assuming that we proceed, without
  a Jury being present.      I have reflected on th is and despite the fact that the Jury at
  th is stage w i l l not have very much to do other than to l i s t e n , I f e e l that we w i l l have
  to have a Jury present for each Inquest.         I think you should assume that we w il l be
  dealing with a Jury.      Even i f this were an Inquest      from start to f in is h , an Inquest is
^^pot an adverserial procedure.         The job of the Jury is to reach a verdict on theevidence
  which they hear in the Court.


  I intend, assuming that we proceed, holding the Inquests here at the Medico-Legal Centre.
  I intend to arrange for the proceedings to be transcribed so that transcripts w ill be
  available in a reasonable time.         I don’t think there i s any need for them to be available
  on a next-day b asis.     Of course, they w i ll have to be paid for.


  Do any of the lawyers think t h i s i s a non-starter?


  Mr Fraser - in view of your opening remarks, we have had an opportunity to discuss these
  proposals at some length and there is a general           ........... towards the idea and you are to
  be commended for putting forward the suggestions you have.
                                                      -




    Are there any other legal representatives who have any other comments as to whether we
    should proceed on this basis?

    I am well aware that there is a Hillsborough Support Group and I want you to feel that I
    wouldn’t do anything to harm or hinder your endeavours.             On the other hand, I think we
    have got to have correct lin es of communication.           Probably the right way of looking at
    t h is i s to say the support groups are really family orientated.            I know that you have
    thought of other groups, for example the Jury, who may need some support at some point in
    f.he future, but I am talking about the families now.           What I intend to do i s , we w ill be
     is t in g hopefully when we anticipate the Inquests w i ll be held and what we w i ll probably
    do i s give you a provisional date and try and confirm as soon as possible.                 If somebody
    could be nominated from the Hillsborough Support Group, I or my Officers would endeavour
    to inform you of the dates when a particular family w i l l be involved.               Once we have done
    that, we would expect the s o l i c i t o r s to l i a i s e with the Support Group.    The lines of
    communication should be through the s o l i c i t o r rather than through the Coroner to relieve
    me of a certain amount of work.         It may well be i f time allows that we w i l l arrange for
    an informal meeting with the Hillsborough Support            Group and myself and maybe the
    O fficers.     I f a family is informed of the Inquest       and they do not arrive, we w i ll proceed
    with the Inquest.


    We w i l l try to have refreshments available in the building.


^ ^ “he press w i l l be e n t i t l e d to be present at these Inquests. It is public Court and they
    are e n t itle d .




1
HER M A J E STY*S CORONER F O R . SOUTH Y O R K S H I R E
   ---------     (WEST d i s t r i c t ;


      INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

   VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                  STADIUM DISASTER

             ON THE 15th APRIL, 1989




                  BUSINESS MEETING




                          Before

S. L. POPPER, LL.B., SB.MED.Sci., BM, BS,
              (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                             At

              The Medico-Legal Centre,
                   Watery Street,
                     Sheffield.

                              on

            Tuesday, 30th October, 1990




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS



      From the Notes of J. L. Harphatn Ltd.,
           Official Shorthand Writers,
        55 Oueen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                            APPEARANCES


Hr. T. King - counsel.   Instructed by the Hillsborough Group
of Solicitors, representing the bereaved and injured.

Hr. C. Russell - counsel.    Instructed by Barlow,      Lyde and
Gilbert representing Superi ntendent Greenwood.

Mr. S. Catchpole - counsel.   Instructed by Davies, Arnold,
Cooper, representing Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

Hr. V. Hale - solicitor.         Representing Superi ntendent Roger
Marshall.

Mr. R. Manning - solicitor.         Representing Superintendent
Murray.

Mr. P. Isaacs - counsel.    Instructed by Hepworth and Chadwick,
representing Chief Super intendent DucUenfield.

Mr. Gregory - solicitor.   Representing the Insurers        of
Sheffield City Council and Sheffield City Council.

Miss B. Norcliffe - solicitor.   Representing       the Chief
Constable of the South Yorkshire Police.

Mr. P. Jac k s on - solicitor.      Representing the Foot ball
Supporters' Association.

Mrs. J. McBrian.     Representing her family.

Hr. Holroyd.     Representing the Police Federation.
                          BUSINESS MEETING

                               Held on

                   TUESDAY,   30tn OCTOBER,    1990

      THE CORONER-:       Welcome.     Can I say first of all that
this- i s “ not a pa r t o'f CHe inquest's p r o p e r , because the
inquests proper are actually resuming, as you know, on the
19th of November.         The purpose of this meeting as I said in
tny letter to tine legal representatives, is for me to have an
op portunity to meet members of the legal profession and
representatives in order to sort out procedural matters so
tnat as far as possible we can run the inquests when we
actually get down to tnem, in as smooth and as efficient a
way as possible in the interests of everybody who has an
interest in the matter, including myself.

     In order to avoid any possible m i s un d e r st a n d in g we will
not - I repeat not - deal with any questions of evidence
this afternoon, or questions of fact.     We are dealing with
simple procedural matters,    I tried to make that clear in
the invitation, and I hope that was understood, but I just
want to repeat it so there c a n ’t be any doubt about it at
all.

      Secondly, this meeting is - it is difficult to know
what to call it because in Coroner's proceedings you don't
normally have opportunities for this sort of gathering, but
you could maybe, by way of analogy, treat it as if it were a
session before the Judge in chambers or an interlocutory
procedure.     The point about it is that although nothing
will be said whicn is likely to cause any problems because
we will be sticking to procedure, it should be treated as a
business meeting, as a private" gathering between myself and
tne lawyers.     t’erhaps I ought to say that I did make it
clear in the letter that I would not raise any objection to
interested parties coming.      I meant that because I didn't
want anybody to feel that I was meeting with lawyers, or
anybody else for that matter, where the people who had a
di rect interest were specifically excluded.     I recognise
one or two faces, but I-don't recog nise everybody, mainly
because I am so poor at recognition of faces, but that's my
problem.

     Would it be best if you just introduced yourselves, the
lawyers that is, and    the representatives, so I know who is
here and so  that    theshorthand w r iter can take a note. I
am taking a proper note of what is going on because I
thought it was wise that we knew preci sely what was said. '

     IiR. KING:   Sir, my name isT imothy King of Counsel.
I am in structed on behalf of a number of the deceased
through their personal represen ta.tives.       I cannot today
read out a definitive list o£ everyone who m I represent.
That is because there was initially a preliminary list of
about forty to forty-two.        At the moment it is about twenty-
six definite sets of instructions.         It is likely...that that
will be added to and if it is of help, sir, withi n a week I
am told I can provide you, sir, with a de fi n i t iv e list of
those who will be represented through myself.          I am
instructed through... Mr,*- Fraser,, solicitor, who is, one         •
solicitors who form the Hillsborough group of solicitors who
were known as tne Steering Committee at the time of the
Taylor Inquiry, acting on behalf of the bereaved and injured
and they in turn have been instructed by a group which have
 formed themselves through the families called The
IIi 1 Lsborougn Family Support Croup.

     However, we don't claim to represent each and every set
of personal representatives of each deceased, only those
wnich I have' indicated number now twenty-six and is likely
to go up possibly to forty to forty-two.

    .THE COUONEK:   T h a nk you. Well, when Mr. Fraser or his
instructing solicitors are in a position to let me have a
definitive list it would be helpful because then I will know
who you aren't representing.      That is what.I am really
interested in.    It is the ones who are outside your...

     HR. ICIUG:  Sir, I ought to say there may well be
individuals here today who represent personal
representatives of, deceased who haven't given ins tructions
to ourselves wno would want to be heard today as being
representatives.

     THE COUOflEU:  Indeed.   Perhaps it is only fair to say
this invitation wasn't extended to every single
representative.    It was a limited invitation to pe ople who
I thought had most to gain from the meeting.

     MK. RUSSELL:     Sir, I am next in line.   My name is
Christopher Russell and I am a barrister.     I am instructed
by liariow, Lyrie and Gilbert, solicitors in London, to whom
you extended sucn an invitation, to represent the interests,
of Superintendent Greenwood.

      MR. CATCHPOLL:   fly name is Stuart Catchpole.         I am a
barrister instructed by Messrs. Davies, Arnold, Cooper,
i/ith me today is Mr. Doyle from that firm of s o l i c i t or s and
we appear on beiialf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

      T HE COROi'iER: Yes,   I do remember you    from the interim
 hearings, Mr. Catchpole.

      MR. ilALE:  I am Vincent Hale.    I r e pr e s e n t
 Superintendent Roger Marshall.   I am a solicitor.
 '   h r . HANKING: My name is                      «.0»i»|.            I -    *
solicitor and I represent S u p e r i n t e n d e n t      y-
                              _ _            oiT*    C ounsel•       With me xs
      ill!. ISAACS:      Fa“ ‘ Isiacs’          ' i t»“    5 ep » o r t h and
C ^ d w & ? " d Se r e p r e s e n ^ C h i e f S u pe r i ntendent Duckenfield.

                             Yes*

       MK. CRF.CJOtlV:       My name Jl^^cfty'louncil^nd^the
                     T           f S g »     a solicitor from the
City Council.         He is with me today.

       THE coKOtlEKt         I unf * " t “ t t n h r g r U t S t * S £ ° r « p t e t ,
 press, is that rignt.     -                     • not part of the
 I would like you to   eave.                     b U o c c a s ion and ! would           '
 be°grateful* i£ v o u ^ o u U 1 « « because I think that xs the
 b a s i s , upon which I called this meeting.

      4s I explained to y o u , . ^ ^ ^ " s L r e t* that*Nobody can
 anything being said here wlixc           in mind the matter is
 hear it, but I don t         ” ‘ iu r y . x think it is only
  Sjll? t h a ^ w e 6 remember a ^ e        j u i H e a l with the procedure.
                                                                                             a
       MISS llOiiCUft-E: Sir, I am jiel    ^l^oPthe                            South
  solicitor and I represent the Chief ujnsta
  Yorkshire Police.
                              Yes, 1 remember you too from the
         THE CORONER:
  previous sessions.
        HR. JACKSON:   Sir, I am Peter J a c k s o ^  I a» a
   partner in Hill, Dickenson, Davies,                    sir, I
   represent the football            sta„ e t h a t we are here in
   feel I ought to pom*, out at tn        ? cli ents      thank you:
   resoonse to vour invitation, tor wnicn y             .
   r i; - i^ f t ^ ^ e dUw?irbrebir tolp;L7be^r-you                                      .
   tiirougnout tne inquiry.

          m e   COROilEti:      ^“ ' " ^ N ^ i r b i t n ' i ^ w C c h ^ t h T i U       “
   tne rest of the lawyers.             orooerlv pointed out to
   D ickenson in         “ ptesentin^ anybody in particular, but
   me tnat they weren t represent   »   * about the preparation
   it occurred to me wnen I uas thinking            oi?htK„eu
   for these inquests that             Jjt f n th. evidence.  I
    feature to a .SJ“ “ r                attention of llillThat
                                                             '
    thought it right to draw that to tne a          ^
    Dickenson in case they wished       '                         matter entirely
    is wnv you are here and obviously it is a                     matter ent     y               ^
for you to decide what,        if anything,   you do.   I appreciate
your .difficulty.

     HR. JACKSON:   Sir, ray clients do take the view that
there would be a void before you in representation if the
supporters weren't here, but we are in difficulties.           I
will speak to the solicitors for the other parties.          It may
be that if I can obtain undertakings about the extent and
scope of criticism of Liverpool Football Club s u p p o r t e r s ,
that a lot of the need for representation before you will
go.   That will obviously depend on what sort of
undertakings I can obtain.

     THE CORONER:   Have I got all the lawyers now?   I did
write to Mrs. McBrian - yes, there you are - because I knew
she was not represented specifically and I thought it was
rignt that you come along as well.
               (

     MRS. HcBRIAN:       I am Mrs. Joan McBrian and I represent
our family in this.

     THE CORONER:       Yes,    that is all you can represent,   just
yourself.

      While I am on names, I appreciate that some of you may
not want to be present tnroughout the inquests when we
resume.    Some of you will be here all the time, some of you
inay change.   It would be helpful to me if once you know who
is &oin& to be coming on a more or less regular basis, if
you could let us know because we are going to be going to
 try and make name plates for you so that I can r ecognise you
wnen we sit in court.     It makes it a lot easier for me to
address you correctly by name, so if you would let me know
we will get that done.   That is an aid for me.   . Of course,
you are free to cnange, if somebody is new or doe sn't want
 to be there, or something like* that.

      HR.KING:    Sir, in the case of the deceased, I am h e r e
3 s juniorcounsel.    At the time of the Inquiry leading
counsel was also instructed.    It is the intention, I know,
of those wno instruct me, that on occasion they may wish to
have leading counsel here, leading myself, and possibly
leading counsel only on his own.    I assume, sir, you would
have no objec tion to that course?

      THE COROdnR:       No objection at all.

      MR.    KlrJG:   I am obliged.

      THE CORONER:   Provided somebody has got locus s t a n d i ,
 in the sense that they represent an interested party, I am
 quite prepared to be as reasonable and as a c c o mm o d a ti n g as I
 can be.   All I am asking you is that you h elp me by keeping
 me informed.
     Can I go through one or two things which I think you
might want to know and then I will either pause from time to
time to give you a chance to chip in, or at the end if there
is anything I have not dealt with which you feel I ought to
be thinking about then I will give' you an opportunity to
draw it to cny attention.

     The venue of the resumed inquests is going to be t h e _
Council Chamber.   For those'of you who were at«Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry, it is exactly the same location.  Whether
we will stay there the whole time will depend upon the
numbers of people who are present.

     Sir?

      MR. U O L R O Y D : Good afternoon.     I    am Mr. Holroyd
repr esenting the Police Federation,        sir.      My apologies   for
being late. ,                                          •     •             .

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.    Whether we translocate at
some point or not I don't know.    It will depend upon the
number of people who attend.    It is obvious, looking around
this afternoon, that we would have the dickens of a job
getting in nere assu ming we have this sort of turn-out .and
that was the reason why we chose that venue.

     We are doing ouc best to make it as convenient for
legal representatives and others as possible, but, of
course, I am limited with what is provided for me.
                     <*
     I have been asked whether there will be space to store
papers and we believe there is a room.   They call it a
safe, but it is actually quite a largish room w h i ch we would
be able to make available for anybody who wanted to put
things in.   You would have to be responsible for your own
security.   I could not possibly take any re s p o nsibility for
security.   They key to the room is in the custody of tne
City Council and we would make arrangements for it to be
opened and shut at convenient hours, say, between nine and
ten and five and six, or something like that in the
afternoon, so that you can have access, (a) to put things in
and (b) to get things out.  Whether you use it or not is of
course a matter entirely for you.

      The times cf the sittings:   at the moment I have it in
 mind to sit from 10.00 until'about 12.45 or thereabouts.
 Obviously the hours have got to be flexible because^of
 evidence.   Then maybe from quarter to two or two o'clock
 until around four.    You may feel that that is not very long
 and that Lord Justice Taylor sat for a lot longer.    I know
 he dia, but then tie did not sit with a jury.   It is not
 fair, in my view, to expect ordinary people who are not used
 to legal proceedings, even albeit this is just coronal
p r o n e :-.l   ings,   to e x p e c t   then, t o   sit   f o r v e r y much l o n g e r       than
that.
         I t we f i n d t h a t we w a n t t o m a k e a f e w                               “
t h e s e t i n e s , we w i l l d o s o « w e ^ g ^ a l o n g . ^                               t0
probably in tne                      u                      and have       a cup of c o f f e e
      people to s t i . eten Laej-i. ■». 0
a llo w                                                           *,
and so o n .
           T have        to tell vou that the present position is that



 a r e s e r v i c e m i g h t n o t b e t o o h a p p y i f we a l l o w e d i t .
 T h e r e f o r e , f o r t h e tim e b e in g you have t o assum e i t i s                 no
  smoking.                                                                    ,•
       Is t h a t r e a s o n a b ly c l e a r w ith r e g a r d to venue and tim e?
  One final t h i n g .       I t l a y b e t h a t y o u may h a v e p o i n t , o f l a w
  t o p u t t o me                                          t h e r e a n d t h e n , t h e n we
  s o m e th in g t h a t has to be d e a l t w ith t n e r e a                      ’  if u
  w i l l do so and we w i l l send the jury out.                         However, i r i ^
  * - ^r e. tt s
  i“            - ht
                h          - c h iv“o u f e e l ry-o ui sw?
                   ° i n rvjhicih                         ant to

  weV trv°and K * i^ ‘0^ “     o°ur o“ loek m a r * so that°we use
  the time when tne jury have gone home.    Th a t * s i   Qn
                                                                    IS? « , j ^ e o n


   o c c u r s during t n e d a y          that you teei nas tu
   then, then so be it.

                 Mow the next ,thing I                              VecoUect        t'hft we'ha le


    w h o , wtien a n d w h e r e .  i n tact we u m                                  T would
    more extensively than in an average i n v e s t
    normally deal with.             For various reasons I                    felt it was




                                                               ft      J      ---
     I am not doing one inquest, we are aoxng                       doing ninety          -
     separate and individual inquests, w m c h is wny                                     .,      d
     e v id e n c e individually for ninety-five peo ple in Ap r i l and
     nav               However, because it would be a prac t ic a l                               '
     i-joss < h i l it y to recount the generality of tne evidence
                                                                                            ge ther
     n ii nn eett yy-- ff iIve
     n                      v e times
                                t i m e s over,      we will
                                           o v e r , we w i u take the evidence toget       of us
      in r.e s p___    e c..t o f a, 1l 1l o f fne-i.
                                                 tnea.     I ., in
                                                           T    i n common
                                                                    common with
                                                                           w i t h most
                                                                                   m o s t oorf u s ,
                                                                                                      I
     l i l l slip into tne fault of calling it tne inquest,                                  l/hen
do that you will forgive me and read it as meaning the
inquests.    We will by and large be dealing with all the
evidence for everybody today.

       I am, of course, aware that there are some differences.
Just to take a simple example, there were two enclosures -
enclosure 3 and enclosure 4 - but I don't think that affects
the validity of the principle of how I want to deal with the
evidence.         If evidence is specific to encl o s ur e 4, then of
ecrars-e    -v*i«l ts'ks. vcognisaoce of that*,, Lf„ evidence is
specific to something else we will take cognisance of that
as well, but we will' be dealing with the evidence in respect
of everybody together.

     I have to remind you that an inquest is not a public
inquiry.    In another case which I happened to have read
recently, Hr. Justice Woolf, as ne then was, described an
inquest as,    "An inquiry in public, but not a public
inquiry."      I thought that was a rather neat way of putting
 ■                i                     :■
It.

       I do not expect, particularly as there has already been
a public inquiry, to repeat everything that Lord Justice
T a ylor had done, but it is, I'm afraid, as I see it,
inevitable that we will be duplicating a certain amount of
the work he did.      This is because it falls within, as I
perceive it, the purview of my jurisdiction and also, of
course, because as I am sitting with a jury and as they have
 to reach a verdict on the evidence, it is no use relying
upon what was said fifteen, sixteen, eighteen months ago
before somebody else.      Regrettably, or maybe not, it
depends which point of view you take, there will have to be
 some replication of evidence of Lord J ustice T ay l o r s
 investigation.     Indeed, if you look at the Terms^of
 Reference and compare those with what the Coroner s Act
 says, you will see there is a quite remarkable similarity in
 places.

          I have to remind you that in contrast to a public
 inquiry, witnesses in a Coroner's Court have got certain
 p r i v i l e g e s , p a r ticulariy witnesses whose conduct is liable
_to be calledrrn,iiuestion., ..ajd .in.par tlculaj- ^tjney,,ha.ve„the
 r i g h t...not to answer...incrimiriatln^^£.st.ipins. _ I will be
 d ealing with tnis a^ain when I open with the jury and^
 explain tnis to tnem in detail, but I want to take this
 opportunity now because it is an important point to ^
 unders tand and if one doesn't grasp it then one tends, not
 just in tne Hill sborough Inquests but in all inquests, to
 walk away disappointed.

          Ther e f or e two things p r o ce d u r al l y : witnesses have got
     privileges whicn I will ensure that they are cognisant of (
     and if they wisn to exercise their rights then they are
     entitled to do sc.       Secondly, a coronal inquiry has got
limited objectives and again within    the best of my ability
we will try to stick to those.

     My present intention is, as far as possible, to take
the evidence we will hear viva v o c e .   In other words, I am
going to try and get the witnesses to come and gi've
evidence.  We know already that that is not going to be
possible in some cases.      At least one witness whom I had
thought about, though not necessarily decided on, has died.
Clearly we cannot take his evidence viva v o c e .   There may
be some others w n o , for medical or other reasons, are so
reluctant to come that I would think it only fair not to
call them.    liov.’ever, we have a huge pool, if I can use that
expression, of witnesses and I think it will be possible to
have tne bulk of the evidence viva v o c e .   I think that is
preferable tnough maybe a little bit more time consuming and
certainly more expensive, but at least people will have
heard it by word of mouth.

     Shall I pause for a moment here and ask w hether.I have
made myself clear, whether you have any queries on this
aspect?

     MR. KING:   Sir, I don't know w h e t h e r this is the time
to raise submissions as to the nature of the evidence you
are going to call or the ambit of the evidence.         If I may
make myself clear, on the nature of the evidence I have a
number of submissions to make to you as to the use of the
Taylor Report itself.

     THE CORONEK:  " I will come to that in amoment.  I
appreciate that you didn't know that, because I have not
dealt with it.

      Mix. KING:  As to the ambit of the evidence, it may be
tnis is not for today at all, that is to say, the starting
point of the events which you ‘intend to i n vestigate and, if
I   can put it this way, the cutting off point of events.

      THE COROHEil:  Yes, I am coming to that as well.
 Pernaps I had better carry on for a li ttle bit longer and
 then turn to you because it may be that I may cover some of
 the points which you have in mind or, indeed, other people
 have in mind.

      In fact -you bring me on to what I have called "Groups".
 I take the view that, if you like, the cut-off point for the
 evidence is - I have selected as a m a r k e r the arrival of the
 first ambulance on the pitch.    That does not m ean to say we
 will necessarily deal with every event up to that point, but
 it is a convenient marker beyond which wh a t e v e r happened has
 either been dealt with in April/May time, or is outside the
 scope of my inquiry.    So if you like that is the end point.
     Now the beginning is a little bit more difficult to
determine because one has to consider the events of the day
on the one hand, and to a certain extent one also has to
consider possibly the previous occurrences, b e c a us e they may
have a relevance in evaluating and assessing the evidence
which is put before the jury.

     However, generally in principle the. way I look at it is
we are going to start, as far as the day is concerned, from
tne outside and work our way inward.     The evidence will
become more detailed or, if you like, I will be calling more
witnesses as we get closer to the events.     To take an
example, I may just call very briefly somebody's evidence as
to traffic conditions, but I certainly wouldn't go into any
great detail.    It is really, as my colleague in east Kent
said when he was dealing with the Z e ebrugge inquests, it is
like a theatre.    You have got your staging, you have got
some subsidiary actors and you have got the main plot, but
it is difficult to understand the main plot if you have not
got the staging, so you need to have a cer tain amount of'
information .wnich isn't necessarily vital but w h i c h makes
the whole thing more readily understandable.

     As I say, I intend to move from the outside in and as
we get nearer to the ground we will be going into more
detail.

     I anticipate calling evidence from supporters, if I can
use that term.      That will include relatives, but with
regard to relatives I am going to be very - relatives who
qualify in rny v i e w as witnesses and whom I c o ns i d e r to be
appropriate to call.      Certainly even if I felt a relative
could give useful evidence, if he/ she really felt they could
not go through the trauma I would be .very sympathetic to
tnat point of view.

     So supporters include relatives, friends.       V7hat I have
just said for relatives applies to them as well, although to
a slightly lesser degree.      Other contacts wi t h the dece ased
and "Others" - people who were there who didn't necessarily
have something to do w i t h the deceased but who can tell us
something about what happened which I consider to be
relevant to the purpose of my inquiry.

       That   i s the first group..

       The second group will be local residents.

       The    third group will be people like s h opkeepers and so
 on.                   ~

      The fourth group will be what T call "Other
 Independents".   I don't meant suppor ters aren't
 independent, but I mean people who were either
professionally present or who may not even have been at the
scene.    I will give you an example, media people, for
instance.

     Then we are going 'to take evid ence from club employees.            .
People who were engaged with the club.     For example,
turnstile operators, stewards and people of that nature.

      The police, of course.  While I am on the subject ,of
the police, there are in the case of a few police .officers
and, indeed, at least one other person, statements which
were taken under PACE - that is under the Police and
Criminal Evidence Act. • It is my normal practice at the
moment if I was dealing, say, with a road traffic incident,
that if there was such a statement from, say, the driver,
tnat I would have that either read or played on the audio
tape.    I have decided that I am going to do that in this
case as well, so we will hear whatever is said in these
statements. ' I intend at the m o me n t to use the audio tape
rather than to have them read because then we have it as It
was recorded.

       I have decided that I will not c irculate the list of
 witnesses who I intend to call in advance.           T h er e are
 several reasons for this.          The first one - I don't hav e to
 give you all the reasons but I will give you a few just so
 you know it is not an entirely arbitrary decision.                The^
 first and maybe tne most important point is this:              this is
 an inquiry which I conduct.           It is an inqui sitorial
 procedure and not adversarial.           It is totally different, in
  fact, to every oth‘er legal proceeding in England anyway.
 There is in fact I think - certainly the books tend to
  indicate that it i s q u ite proper not to d i s c l o se _or.
 circulate n a m e s " a n d J never__doT  When' I say ’'never", that's
~a'”big~word.* "There may~~I5e the“o'dd exception when I have had
  to let somebody see a statement for very special reasons.
 However, in principle, I don't and I don't intend to do it
  in tnis C3se.

      Secondly, we haven't got the capacity, even if I wanted
 to do it, to deal with the circulation of statements.   We
 have got our work cut out in coping with my needs.    I am
 vecv lucky.   I have got what I suppose for a Coroner is
 quite a good sized team, but we have to remember that I am
 just a Coroner, an inferior court of record, let me remind
 you, and not anything else.   There are limits to what I can
 muster, so I cannot do it from a practical point of view.

       The third thing is that circulation of s t a t e m e n t s , we
 did do it with the summaries.   As you may remem b e r we did
 c irculate tne summaries because we thought that would be
 helpful.    In fact to a certain extent in some cases that ■
 bounced back on me.    People weren't entirely happy that the
 evidence wnich was given was not word for word what had been
           s e n t o u t i n t h e - s u m m a r y , w h i c h w a s t “ “ ” j * d 0 p | o r t u n L t y . t o . .L,'.' , ; £
; ^ : ^ V;.gu i d e . a n d - ttoo - gs i v e , U p l                 “ s t o ^m a k e ka nS y ' f u r t h e r - ; ^ ' - £ •
                      ntr a n d co me bac-<                       ^              t-hat and so I don t                     __...
■        - i nfv e cs t irg a ^t i osn sr. ^ \ C r t s i t u a t i o n - a g a i n .   and
            in te n d to -g et..in to                                                                                      ■*M  .
                                                     .. yoxi •'*:_tr
Ur-
...
    ^m        ^vji tn&sses
                     g ^
               «./w* w .   — - -— —      j %             t r-_..i?w.<.v"S
                                                             e a ^ 8 8 g s ^ a W                                   f e i i
                                      '.not, a m ■

                  Uhat I will do, if- I              witnesses for. the next^day or ' _ :-?r
           • on a notice board the Pr°P             davs        to g i v e you. s o m e idea of    • ■.
        .-   two days a n d - m a y b e even three, d a y s , o tbag di£ey cu]_t ^ ^      want. .- ;V.
                what is coming.      I a « 5 , L f o r all of us, but that
                to make life as easy           u m      a l m o s t certainly allow the
                includes me as w e l 1 - , • memory from, the- statements on the
                witnesses to refresh their memory                          lt ig e2_g h teen
                day-     Do y,ou follow w ha t L              £    approximately.       So m e
                months ago that this            •55SS.S taiements o r .written- down
                 of the witnesses m a y ha     .g’?'1.-An Daees long, o r even longer,
                 recollections wh ich are eig                what they said and, indeed,
                 They may not recollect in detail                         likely that we
                 they may not recol lect t e                  j th ei r statement, although
                 will allow them to have a                  °£ 1\      witness box.     Ue
                  I don't expect them to nave them m
                  would not normally do that.

                                U i t h regard to Lord Justice Taylorts                     ^ P ° ^ t j.hat Report
                   deal with that next.                       I do r v S m i u e s t s       The only way one
                   as part o £ the ev“ je"=e “                         ‘ad     'in toto, and I don't think


                                  secondly I perceive it is Boin| -                       -use^o.e^to^lems
                     than it is wortn if I aid that, so
                     that.                         .
                           Similarly, I do not inte”^ ?°rV|e Inquir“ nSC 0 £Pclurse,
                      the evidence at Lord J u s t i c e Taylor s inquiry ^
                      1 am fully aware                         ^             and I would not be at all
                      transcripts as m d e e a I   >                                    w i t h a view to seeing
                      surprised if you looked t r 8                              eXp ect y 0 u to do that, and
                      what pe ople have said-    I                             r m e s ti o n i ng is re l e v an t to
                       I     don't mind that Pr°vj £ * ^ /                   t permit is if, for instance,
                       the inquests.     What I would                          ? ht n 0 't to answer an
                       a witness w e r e to exercise llis                       2           t you to put: to
                           incriminating questions, *       transc.ripts so that in fact
                           that witness                          to answer that
                           he could then exercise his rignts n t ^ had said.      I am ■
                           question, but in fact you had p         ^ to mu2jle you.   I
                           going to use commonsense.                     I d             D r 0 ner-and legitimate
                           don't want.to P“ vent you askin| all.proper^ ^                                   ^      ^

                           possibleSyou S m ' f e e f y ^ have had a fair chance, so to                                    _

                                                                   -11 -
       s p e a k , b u t e q u a l l y I i n t e n d to b e f a i r to t h e w i t n e s s e s as
     ; f a r . a s I am a b l e . t o ^ b e . . s o . :^ S ^ : | : v : r
                                         •          ,
                                        •A---           .. -v -y/  :'-
                 A lth o u g h I d o n ' t i n t e n d to a l l o w L ord J u s t i c e . T a y l o r ' s
       R e p o r t . t o b e i n t r o d u c e d a s e v i d e n c e , . , i t ^ . i s g o i n g ^ . o . . b e . v e r y ..
       d i f f i c u l t n o t t o r e f e r , t o i t f r o m „ . t i me . t o t i me . . . . . ‘ C o m m o n s e n s e
       will., d i c t a t e where,.we.draw the .l i n                                    e t h i n k it_ i s i a l s o . ^ .
  :- r r i g h t t o ;s ay', t h e r e - ' f m a y ^ b e ’v th e '-^ o d 'd -iV o c c a s ion-'''where-' E * w i l l " h a v e / .
y^j. t o - b r e a c h w h a t L. h a v e : , j u s - t _ s a i c U : t h a t ^ w e l ^ w i l l . have- - t o -' use .
•«r?rsoine‘; o£:: t h e t r a n s c r i p t s ,T'.butv E ? t h ' i n k £ i t ‘ " w i l L ' b e a ' r a r i t y .

                 "Documents.."’           By t h a t ' I me a n b u n d l e s o f d o c u m e n t s , o r
      plans o r photographs o r anything o f th a t s o r t - e x h ib its i f
      you w i s h . .       B e a r i n g i n m i n d ( a ) we a r e d e a l i n g w i t h        *
      i n q u e s t s , ( b ) w i t h a j u r y a n d ( c ) t h a t we a r e g o i n g t o h a v e
      o u r work c u t o u t a s i t i s w i t h t h e n u m b e r o f w i t n e s s e s , I
      w ant, to r e s t r i c t a s f a r r a s I arrrable to th e number pf
      d o c u m e n t s w h i c h a r e p u t . ’i n a s e x h i b i t s T h e r e i s v e r y
      l i t t l e p o i n t ' i n h a v in g h u n d re d s and h u n d re d s, o f p a g es o f -
      d o c u m e n t s i f t h e ' j u r y c a n n o t , a b s o r b t hem' -'

             •       I am p r e p a r e d t o l i s t e n t o y o u o n t h i s p o i n t , b e c a u s e i t
      i s a d i f f i c u l t o n e , b u t what I have i n m ind, and I w i l l
      p a u s e a f t e r t h i s t o e n a b l e y o u t o c o me b a c k o n w h a t I h a v e
      s a i d , i s t h a t i f , f o r i n s t a n c e ^ wp wy>^                                 ntro^nce the
      G r e e n G u i d e , w nTc n . i ^ _ a ^ o c u m e n x J Sii.c.h_w.e-_won.l_ t.-b .e .^ a .b le ._ to .
      a v o i a c e f e r r i n ^ w . e ^ - c a n , . i n t r o d u.c e ^ jj:_ . a s a n e x h i b i t .
      iToTTever, I w o u l d n o t e x p e c t t h e j u r y t o r e a d t n e w H o i e t h i n g
      f r o m c o v e r t o c o v e r b e c a u s e a l o t o f i t we d o n ' t n e e d f o r
      the in q u e s t s .            II^ O H J lg J ^ J U e a jL U i^ U -la g , p o i n . t „ P , U - J - h
      y o u w i s h t o make_ t o a w i t n e s s , t J i e n I wo u l d . . , e x p e c t y o u n t o
      e 1 TWe'f “‘p i c k t h a t rp a r a g r a ph_ o.u                  nd r e a d _ i t , ^ o r ^ I JvyjX' r e a d
      T t , " o r" ~s o me b o d y ~w i 11 " r e a d I t , o r ” i f " w e “ h a v e “a 1 r e a d y* ''d e a l tT^
      wTt'?T“r f - t h e h j j / g l c a n l ^ . u s t " r . e f . e £ j : < £ ~ j t ' *" S 6 ” t h V t “ a"t t f i e end"
      w nat'"’ t n e ~ j u r y w i l l h a v e i n mi n d w i l l b e , s a y , t e n p a r a g r a p h s
      o u t of th e G reen Guide..                           A lso-w ith o t h e r docum ents. There
      may b e o t h e r d o c u m e n t s w h i c h we may n e e d t o r e f e r t o .
      T h e r e f o r e , a t t h e end o f t h e day t h e y w i l l h a v e o n l y to
       t h i n k a b o u t t h o s e b i t s of th e e x h i b i t s w hich a r e r e l e v a n t to
      us and n o t maybe f i f t y o r s i x t y p a g e s w h i c h a r e t h e r e b u t
      which a r e t o t a l l y u n n e c e s sa ry f o r o u r p u r p o s e s .

                I s t h a t r e a s o n a b l y c l e a r w h a t I am t r y i n g t o s a y ?      I
       t h i n k i t w i l l b e e a s i e r t o d o t h a n f o r me t o e x p l a i n i t .
       S h a ll I pause here?                 Mr. K i n g , h a v e I d e a l t w i t h s o m e o f
       t h e p o i n t s you h a d i n mind?

               u R . KING:         S i r , you h a v e , a n d i f I m i g h t d e a l w i t h one
       o r two.         S i r , i f I d e a l w i t h m a t t e r s w h ic h y o u f e e l , o u g h t
       t o b e r e s e r v e d f o r f o r m a l l e g a l a r g u m e n t , p l e a s e s t o p tn e.
       I am n o t i n a n y way t r y i n g t o t r e s p a s s o n t i m e s w h e n I                »
       s h o u ld n 't.                                                             -   .
      .'Can I deal first with matters arising out of what h a v e J. .,
been known as the-mini inquests, and you have already!                    -
r e ferred to the fact that on the individuals you have been *_V ' ;-
into certain questions already?                I h a v e an ever increasing
number, of. sets of instructions-as to-.individual-ques tions
and.matters-relating-- to those .individual'mini-'-Inquests,
specifically 2the H_£ac.tu aLi'ma t te r s-*■1 ai d o ut ^ i n the_ s umma ties ,*.
to^wh’ichr.'y o u 'haveFreferredfwnich^I"understood "were;:'laid'
he r 0’fctf&tttte j     u      £ ? w £ storKto?’?go-;in.toi;them inaww thi
afternoon, but what'T would wish to have liberty .to do is to-
c o mmunicate with you under the name of each i n d i v i d ua l
decea s e d - hopefully it will n o t b e as long as I am perhaps
indicating - but there are specific issues of fact where I                          ■ -■
know those who have lost their loved ones are very anxious
that either factual inaccuracies or omissions, if possible,
could be rectified.         Sir, if they could, be laid before you
in written form you may take the view,, and I would hope.that
you. might, tfyat in most of those cases you would b e prepared
 f o r those matters to be rectified perhaps straight; away at
 the beginning of the inquests proper- in November, or, if
 necessary, to hear a small amount of evidence relating to
 them.                                                      !'

     Obviously until you hear the questions you cannot make
your mind up, but I would wish to give notice, if I can put
it that way, that that is what I am instructed to lay before
you.

         T H E CORONEtt:       Can I tell you my view on that?    I was
aware you might well be raising this point.               I have already
ma d e it clear that I don't intend to re-open all the ninety-
five cases.              Indeed, I have had correspondence from the odd
person where they have raised matters.               If the matters .are
put to me and if when I have seen them, if your instructing
solicitors would communicate with me, if I feel that the
point w h i c h you make is — I will use the word justified,
that is not intended to be rude at all - justified and
legitimate, and proper to be dealt with, then of course I
will c o n s i d e r that sympathetically.         However, there may
w e l l be matters which may be raised which I feel h ave either
been adequately dealt with, in which case I will say so, or
a l t e r n a t iv e l y which I feel are out side the scope of the
inquiry, in which case I will also say so-

       I am not turning you down.   I am just reserving the
 position,, depending upon what you actually say.

      HR. KING:        Indeed.  Really, the purpose of my rising
 on that m a t t e r now was to give you forward n o tice of it and
 to emphasise, because I know there are those here hearing
 what I am saying, they are matters which inevitably are de a r
 to the hearts of many people-

        T H E CORONER:      I understand     that.
      HR. KING: ■• •Sir, might I now address you on the cut-off * :
 oint,.-as it. has been called, of the scope-. ..As I understand
£t you ha v e indicated, sir, you have in mind the arrival of
the first ambulance, which is probably going to be sometime
- I am g u essing now... '      .- ; -   :rv   - • •    ~   ....

    “THE.'‘CORONER: ^ p ^ A b o u t ^ f i f t e e n ^ i ^ p s ' t ^ t ^ r V o m ^ h ^ g ^ ^


   •?**MR?- KING    1‘:‘ha v e-?a:*‘
                                   submi'ssion" to =make to ydu.which •is
very heart felt held by those I represent, , and I would say ,
it is a matter that is very de a r to them,' that it should be
extended, that timing, to about four o'clock.               .1 explain
why.       A number of those who L represent are anxious that
there     be an inquest into thenature of the medical attention
which    was given to those who had been in the crushing, in
regard to the allegation which certa inly they wish to m a k e
and wish to investigate, that the a bsence o£ proper medi c a l
care facilities and attention and technique, led .to those,
certain of them in any event, dying perhaps when they might .
not have died at all or certainly dying sooner than might
have been the case, and specifically the diagnosis of when
somebody had actually died.
                                                       #
          Sir, I know in selecting your cut-off point - and I can
und e r st a n d from having read some c orrespondence on the
m a t t e r relating to it - that those are m a t t e r s _which your
immediate feeling was you weren't going to go into.
Certa inly my submission is they are relevant to the "how" in
respect of the deceased here because the time of death is
obviously of importance and how they died involves the
c o n s i d e r a t i o n of the attention paid to them when perhaps
they were still alive and that is a very relevant matter.

      T HE CORONER:     Can I stop you there because I think we
 are get ti n g into a legal submission.

         I have heard what you say.    I don't think it would be
 right for me to give a ruling on that because I would be.
 breaching, if you like, the procedural aspects of this
 meeting, except to say that obviously I have thought about .
 this point quite a bit and at the moment I am not persuaded
 yet that I would want to go down that road.            I have
 reasons for it, but I don t think I will deal w ith them.         I
 would not want to encourage you to think I will actually
 accede to that, but if you could just remind me before we
 end that you have ® a d e this point bec au s e it may.be that
 w h a t we should do is have another m e e ti n g possibly before
  the 19th, but a formal meeting of the inquests proper, so to
  speak, but without the jury, where legal points can be
 disc u s se d in a more conventional way*

       Can we move cn to your next point?
                   - -V M R   KING:..;;-; S ir",:.. F wo u 1d .w e 1com e .'tha t -becau se.’a s 'I' say ,3/.




■ '■'■''         fintitled. to make' it,., s i r •"■ Could I just be. heard to •comment
           ’     °n the decision not to circulate.-in advance the- names ,of
                 w i t n e s s e s I understand the logistical problem of             ."■
               : statements.        I fully understand'that- 'Thegreat advantage
                 of- those I represent of knowing in advance the names of
                 witnesses is this: I would hope, sir, you would be .willing
                 at the end of the day to hear representation as to your •• -
                 calling witnesses who haven't' been called- *

                      THE CORONER:. •.. May I interrupt..you,. Mr. icing?    I have •
                 in   fact forestalled you on that because I,have already
                written - I think it must be a month ago.         I wrote to every
                 single firm of solicitors that I was aware of.         If I have
                missed any I apologise, but I have written to every single
                 firm of solicitors that I was aware of specifically
                 requesting them to name people who they wished me to
                 consider as witnesses.      I made it clear that the final
                 decision would be mine, but I did invite them to draw ray
                 attention to anybody they wanted me to think about.          You
                 may be interested to know that I think I have had five
                •replies.    Three of them said they did not have any names
                 and theother two did put forward a few names.           There may
                 be   six, but anyway, a very small number.

                     If I can just come back to your point.   That
                opportunity has already been given and the mere fact I don't
                circulate names does not stop you from telling.me the. names
                of people who you want me to consider.

                     MR. KING:   Sir, I appreciate that, and ever so.gently,
                I am not wishing to occupy your time, put the counter •
                argument.   In the nature of this inquiry where there have
                been a vast number of witnesses — when I say witnesses, we
                know from the Inquiry investigation that a vast number of
                statements have been taken from many, many people and before
                the Taylor Inquiry began they were circulated and added to
                as it went on-   I know a technique which has been adopted,
                it may be the technique of convenience which will have to be
                unadopted, of many of those instructing solicitors who
                instruct myself, has been, "Eet us wait and see whom the
                Coroner intends to call to see whether we can see any
                obvious omissions, rather than doing it the other way round
                of sitting down and making up their own list, as LI they


                                                    -15 -
Vr*w*•



     were., the. Coroner-, lo f,;:ther-'conplete^who 1
     would-be:a\duplica tIoti'<bf!Te£f'orC^oixTiL’   iraaLjo                              scale^li

                       .alL I could-:,urges lipom you-.-in- ther..nature* of”airii
          nques t- o E: this-:.sort;^wouId^bes|thesrextreme^helpfu'l:hesss*o ££
         :i:s.trf^no t v a ^ l i s tr w i tfrVany^'sta te m e n ts ^ a tS a ;S.'Ir:V .eave-‘
                                                       sraa
                        ;CORON£H: _
                          I : w ilL - b e - a b le ^ 'to ifb b tig e y y o u ,T b u t! t ^ w i I I * c e r t a in ly -v ^ v
         r e c o n s id e r ...   • v -•                                                              * : • ; •
    •■•• .                            “          i        ---I::'--                                                  .
                                                                                                   . .   ..      .
      ... ' MR- KING;  I 'am- obliged►     Sir, againr I repeat ever
     so gently because I know I am trespassing on your
     jurisdiction and authority to make- whatever decisions you
     wish, as to the. use to be made of.. Lord. Justice Taylor's       •-
     Report, and really in support of- the submission that it,.-.
    ■ should be put before- the; jury,, n o t -in: its;entirety — and;
    :this again might be reserved, for an argument.before you when •
      the other matter is reserved — but of certain‘paragraphs
     which can be identified.      They are paragraphs which go to
      facts, not opinion, and they would curtail a lot .of argument
     as to certain events because they are there laid out very
      clearly and succinctly.                            ’             ’/•

              Sir, if I might draw an analogy.    I know this is an
         inquisition.   It is not a civil trial, it is not a criminal
         trial, but in the civil litigation which is now complete a
         very useful devise which everybody agreed to was that it was
         agreed that the cote facts, subject to anybody's right to
         say, "I dispute a particular fact," would be as set out in
         certain numbered paragraphs which were given and handed in.
         Everyone agreed it at the end of the day to approach it in
         that way and it proved to be a great boon as a setting,.a
         base, upon which everyone could operate from, because, of
         course, of the difficulty of not wishing to be a Public
         Inquiry.                                    :

              Sir, I can only urge again that perhaps some
         consideration, be given to that—

               THE CORONER:   One of the reasons why T am reluctant to
         use the Report is because it does not necessarily.follow
         that it is accepted, or that every paragraph is accepted, by
         every single party before me-    It would be improper to use
         it,, or if I did we would then have to argue out all the
         disputed aspects of it insofar as they were relevant-

                If it were, possible for ther parties to reach an
          agreement and say, "He accept the following paragraphs, X Y (
          and Z," then,, of courser :I would not. have any objection to'.;
          that because it would be an agreed statement and 1 would be
          quite, happy with that- What I don't want to do is to      •
                          troduce.-.sections ^maybe,..of,,theL:Report r, whiclxrrightly£pir£S^2gS5£
' ^ ^ P ^ w r o ngly somebody^may^’take; ob fectioiritb
           k&Ir^-jsrV*'4• " ' f,        .J' ‘ —V*’”-~T»v:’
                                                         v•■““.!!.■•...,">V»%-                               -;
                                                                                                              i'%'T:.w*~-r“r *r
              •-i^ : „ - ; - ^ r n ^ - i a N G r ; ^ Y e s ^ s i i r - ' "                        .......            ...
-'f.vSsrKf
                           _^r-THE-cCO RONER.r^.Tha't’ rs^wn^                  £want5?-1o ;'caLDr th efevixiehce^
                           ^you£likfej^£n&to to-^xn4'ocdt                                  jbigfait      fp^opl.e
                           :far3fas^EPani^ab Le-. “

                       MR.—r ICINCr I t; may-Tber that:between- now- ■f-"if’4ybu-’do fix-'
            ;TJ";£another pre-trial review, if I can call ^it. that,. that that ~ '
              :.-Vis a matter: which could be a matter of communication between
            •     tne parties - •             ; ■      /■'.;

                          THE CORONER:-            Yes. .
                                                        '               ' ’               * .      '
             •■ .'— /• MR- KING:. :"Sir,., if " I could just.clarify- the. transcript
                  - evidence, you would, have^no objection,, as I .understand, it,
              _        within the rules you have: laid.down.-.as.- to privilege,.;.to: a,'-
            "-•■•■ •■■'transcript being used in cross-examination of a witness-as
                       putting to 'him, if it be the case, a previous inconsistent
                       statement?

                           THE CORONER:            Yes, within certain limits.

                           HR. KING:          Yes, of course.

                        THE COROWER:   The difficulty is that the Public
                   Inquiry was done on, if you like, slightly different
                   premises from my powers, if you like, and also the way I
                   intend to run these inquests and my main objective is to try
                   and make sure we do things fairly, which I am sure you would
                   want also.

                        Mil. ICING: Of course, sir-   Sir, you will be pleased
                   to know I have no observations'on the documents because as -I
                   understand it we are going to feel our way through it, if I
                   can put it that way*   I commend that and one can make
                   observations, perhaps, as it arises.
                                    ' .     i              •   ..
                        Sir, might I just raise one piece of evidence which has
                   not been mentioned so far. I understand there, is a video
                   which is in your possession, sir, of the events*   E don't
                   know to what extent you were intending to use that.video to
                   the jury.

                        THE CORONER:   T am glad you have reminded me about
                   that-   In fact you have reminded me of two things!      It is
                   my intention — I will give everybody else a chance as well-
                   At the moment it looks as if Mr.. King has got. sole rights
                   here, but I will come back to everybody, but if L deal with,
                   him it may deal with, some of the points- which, are in your
                   minds-                              .        :-i*


                                                           -17    -
  ** -Z




          ^i^hour'- tape*-"™/'! t is'tny^ present:'in ten tion^'to.-ruse." tha t^Tto^'show^.;: r^>?




^ ^ a s ^ ^ ^vea.t^abbttt^th.^xdeog^tEr^^o^^^JiH^at^£n^andgrti3^i^;
>'v-.^«jVf-4^sb6w-rs£xty~sev,ett'hours,v"bir howeverr many-' hoursv- there-’ara^rbu
         “ :-there is :an awful lot.of |video. footage. ' It is of no 7 :— •'-':-'
             benefit to iny jury or to my inquiry and L donrt.'.intend to do
             it-- . . -    •      ■      .i         ; ^                 ’■

                     Secondly, I have no facilities for providing copies of
               this video.    Normally speaking,..of. coursen _if ..I.,.take,
              evidence T prepare a transcript, and' if you want one you can
              have onej as (indeed some, of you. have-done-'' •You-may say if;
            -• you. show the video that is exactly the .same, thing- " It. is •.
               an exhibit and therefore I must produce copies.           I have
              none, so I cannot - in fact I will not - produce copies for
               distribution to people on request*      If that is not
               acceptable then I would rather not use the video at all.         I
               think that would be unfortunate because I think it would
               help the jury and it would help everybody, indeed, if we saw
               it.    However, I do not have the capacity to set up a video
               duplicating organisation, so this would have to be
               understood by everybody.

                   Does that raise terrible problems as far as you are
              concerned?

                   MRs KING:   Sir, from my point of view I am content
              with how you have indicated.   You will be pleased to know
              for the moment that 'is all Ihave to say-

                     THE CORONER:       Now if    Iwork my way down the line.

                   MR- CATCIIPOLE:   Sir, Ionly rise really to echo Mr*
              King on one point and that is in relatioa to the Taylor
              Report which, certainly from Sheffield Wednesday's point of
              view we feel could be beneficial, both iri saving time and
              dealing with some matters that are not disputed-    If you
              are intending, sir, to issue a general invitation for the
              parties to attempt’ to agree certain paragraphs which may in
              the end form a useful basis to be- put to the jury, we would
              be very willing to take part in that-

                    THE CORONER:   I have got no objection to that at all.
               I had assumed that that was going to present the parties
               with some considerable difficulties but if in fact I am       ,
               mistaken on that, then of: course- if we can save time and- if
               we can have something which is agreed, then 'I. have no
               objection whatsoever.

                                              -18 -
                                                               V i/’O .'-- -r'-*
                                                                                   •   •»-
^ ■ ^ y H R / RUSSELL^;: -'Sir, ;yourkin41y?[outlined the categories - V.-r*
oflw it nes ses -y ou w i l l - b e -ca 11 i n g ..i-.w^Although; you h a ve*.s
y o u ;will' n ot ..be. providing/aJJListJoff5those;.,witnesses ,;iarevwe7S^s^S'
to'assume that you wil l. be calling “witnesses from. those
categories in the order:.that y o u have- outlined,.them? .^.Is •£££



                                              then

      ITR: 'RUSSELL      residents        then sho pk eep er s ?-r‘
                       v            .

      THE CORONER:   No, not necessarily*        That was purely a
grouping. What I would intend to do is to work, from the
outside in.    If, for example, I was dealing with the
surroundings of Leppings Lane, we would call some residents,
we would call other g r o u p s w e would call any supporters, who.
had something specific to say on- that..' * Then .we would, move
our way through the events, so to spealc*        TVdc recognise “
tha t in many cases it-is .-.not actually :possible to- r..
categorise. - You can’t say, "We will only listen to this
little bit and not to the rest." ' If we call a supporter
he is going to want to tell us the story from A to Z, and
quite rightly, because there is no way we could get him to
come backwards and forwards across the Pennines just to suit
tue convenience of a scheme which I have designed.

      However, there are some witnesses who will only give
 very restricted evidence because they don't know anything
 else, but we will try and deal with those as we go.    The
 order in which I give them was not specific.    It was just
 the way I happened to write it down.    In fact it is quite
 likely that for logistical reasons we might well start with
 local people in the morning and have people who are coming
 from a distance later on in the day-    In other words, I
 will be guided not by their category, but by the convenience
 and timings of where they live "and so on.

       Does that help you at all?

      MR. RUSSELLt   Thank, you for that clarification* ■ -The
 other matters are perhaps matters I could raise at any
 subsequent meeting if there is to be a further lawyers'
 meeting at which matters of law are going to be canvassed..
 They deal with two matters ray learned friend Mr* King has
 raised.   One of them relating to the matters arising from
 what he has termed the mini inquests, additional matters
 that ne wishes to have put* Uhat concerns me, my first
 reaction, is whether and to what extent those matters are
 going to be circulated to the other legal representatives.
 It seems to me appropriate if he is going to supply you with
 specific questions for you to ask. the witnesses, which is *
 what I understand he wishes to do, whether those questions
 should be made public to other representatives so that, we

                               -19   -
                  ^have- an opportunity to 'comment:.pn"whether.’those^t: 1:.
            questions. •were -or--were -not:- proper •emana t ingp* f roar M r ^ f C i n g ^ ^ f ^ T f ^ '

 .          .                        CORONER:   v n 0 y w i t h ’grea t "respect’,!'-we are 'getting
^ ^ ^ ^ n ! . if toLrle§al ---------------------■ “ •                               '- - •     '
            V    ^   t n. G. L * ,


                       %you I

           ?.w« •-     ***-y uuu.y*wn o-$aas«ean.*i.nteres t%rn>5therimattert-^*l:=$s^®E2«2£^s
           ;,uncierstand the- point- you'nave made,:-’but;'r think: it' is a 'v ' ^ " V * ”
             concern which maybe you.don't have to be- too worried about.-

                  Mil. RUSSELL:- Thank you.     Insofar as ny learned .
            friends night seek to dissuaded you from the course .which
            you have indicated with relation to Lord Justice Taylor's
            Report, I don't know whether you are going- to invite, each of
            us to add our two penneth. to that view on one side or other
            of the debate^ .Sir,- on my .part: mayr I suggest-.tVrat-putting
            selective parts of the Report-before the jury is perhaps, a .
            greater-evil than putting the whole, when one is perhaps,
            goin?, to have a dispute as to which parts should be the
            parts selected and bearing in mind that the Inquiry was
            prepared, and the Report written, at a time before all the
            facts were known...

                 TilL CORONER:                    Ur. Russell, what I was trying to
            indicate was that                   if there was an agreed statement as to
            what we would put                   then I would be prepared to consider it.
            If we can't agree                   then I stick by what I have said with
            regard to the use                   of the report.

                 lift. RUSSLLL: Thank you.    Finally, sir, you have
            recently mentioned the compilation video. Although you have
            said you will not be. in a position to provi.ii copies, will
            you be in a position to afford facilities for legal
            representatives to view it before the inquests start?     They
            come to you or they all gather in a particular place and at
            a particular time which has been set aside for showing the
            video to legal representatives.

                      MR. CATCH?OLE:   Sir, perhaps I could help..  Obviously
                Sheffield Wednesday for their part have copies of the-
                compilation video and I am instructed that we would be
                happyj as far as we are able, to assist any other person who
                riocsn t have a copy in providing our own copies of our copy.

                     liiE CORONER:  That would be very helpful and Mr-.
                Russell I am sure you will accept that very generous offer.

                          MR. RUSSELL:            I thank ny learned friend for that.
                     THE CORONER:    That will assist me as well.                        . Thank you
                very mucn indeed, Mr.. Catchpole.


                                                       - 20 -
        - MR.- HALE:-': ’VMy~ :friend 'from"the? Football^Supporters
        triafinn 't/oi-w nrnn'arl >                i               '^i S 'C-~




^ t h a t ^ o th'er?
         ^      / •    __   _,   J \,   .•' W        —       — - -Q   -   O   — —         .7
                                                                                        .Av    *   ,**   J   «l.ki/J
  •'your of fice perhaps sending"to each pe"rson- who" is on your
   list as a representative, a complete list of all the
   representatives so that, we may get in touch with each other
   and see-whether we can in fact agree on any specific matters
   which, without impinging on your jurisdiction, might help to
   avoid areas of contention^

       ’ If that could be done I know that-my client would be
 ■ very happy. ,, He does not want to cause any further distress
   to any of the relatives..          #.        .»•■-.      '

        THE CORONER:   Can you see any objection to my
   circulating a list to all of you of your respective names
   and addresses and references?   I don't suppose any of you
   would object to that, so we can do that.

        I hear what you say.    I think the question of the...
   Undertakings, I think, are risky in these inquests.    It is
   not for me to say what undertakings anybody should give, but
   obviously I will conduct the inquests and take whatever
   evidence I think is appropriate, whichever way it turns out,
   so to speak.   My job is to make an inquiry into the deaths
   of these unfortunate people.

        MR. ISAACS:   Sir, may I ask you to clarify two points?
   The first relates to the Taylor Report, because as I
   understood what you said at the outset, the Taylor Report
   was not to be used at all, save insofar as my learned
   friends and myself and other colleagues might actually agree
   certain facts.   That may or may not prove something that
   can be done.   Assuming that that cannot be done, how far do
   you believe you will allow the use of the Taylor Report at
   all?                                       ?7      F

        As I say, as I understood it at the outset,' it was not
   going to be used, but then I noticed when my learned friend
   Mr. King.was addressing you briefly, the impression I
   certainly got was that you were going to allow the
   transcripts to be used for cross-examination purposes, which
   was certainly not something 1 understood at the outset and
   would be something which - and I leave this to another time
   - I would make submissions against*

        That is the first point,, sir.- The second is this, and
   it is a relatively minor matter and relates to the video .
                                           - 2   1       -
                                                                                — C.>
                                                               during




                                                                        1"it tler*"i?***?Si

    conc^ive^of f s l t ^ a l ^ n             poi^U   S a n d T h e . e       it
                                              .• s ^ .r s is .S i          that

    M n ™r                                                     r
            n overview, if t h a t, is the •correeTj o rdt of what^
    /jury an --- __ _. l_j__c~-"Zuam hn he able- to understand
                                                                   1 ^     •'
    /happened_jmrir xn order rpr.£ npni rn ue.          .........      ther
                   fhe witnesses are saying.-      It. ls^an aid ratner ^
     tilar^nythSg else, but it is not inconceivable that one               .
     might want to look at the odd snatch of video.               ^deed I
     can tell you now, in one or two statements which I have read
     the videc/is referred to, or part of the video is referred
     to and it may well be necessary to look at it because you
     would not be able to understand the statement otherwis .

           MR. ISAACS:       We are very grateful for that.
          THE CORONER:   However, the last thing I want is to
     spend hours and hours re-running videos and assessing
     minutiae on it. We want to hear the people viva voce
     conventional.
            Now- the -other joint which -you -raised                I
#    Justice Taylor's Report and in particular the transcript, I
     must confess I do find this quite a difficult P » b          What
     I was trying to say is this: it would be foolish of m e t
     assume that you don’t h a v e t h e transcripts and that none of
     you are going to look at them because I am!sure you are ai
     L i n g to do that, particularly as you no doubt have g a s s e d
     some of the witn^sles are inevitable. i We have got to call
      them because they are key players, shalL we say, in this
     matter.        In that sense it is unavoidable, as 1 see          •
      that people will use the transcripts to prepare their cross-
      examination.
            What I am not very keen on doing is (a)
      MjLll.not allow, the transcript to bemused,to put..thip.gs^t
      peopie s~o t h a ^ o n e ^ u t s_.them' in .the.position, where. :they s y
      tHey“wi11 *not answer_the question.^             If I have put it to
      them~tHat'^tTTs' an Tncriminating question and they have ,
      exercised their-privilege not to answer-, then I will n
       allow whoever it is to pursue them on. that point by quoting


                                    - 2 2 -
                                                                                                  if they
                                                                                                sensibly
                                                                                             wttness3!SSB?*3s:



         ilG ii^ u ii.j.y * > .^ i L j^ _ ^ j ^ i ii« ^ u u ;j |u tE i .± 5 y u u .5 e n a .C 5 illg n a v e ^ s $ g £ ^ S fr9 ^ ^ s
:-nevec-?ever'conducted ari'vihquest of -this-size or: complexity                                                               "*
 and I' have to learn, likemost of us-probably have to,. as to
 how to do it correctly-        In that sense I have to reserve
 the right that I too may have to modify what I do.

      Have I helped you in                       any way?

       MR. ISAACSr   Certainly you have-/, sir.  One can
 .understand, if I can put~.it this way, the use of the
  transcript to perhaps remind somebody of something, they said
• which they have perhaps forgotten about. As I understand
  it, that was the sort of example you were giving just a
  moment or two ago.

       What I think my learned friend Mr. King, was saying was
 this:   that if a witness X says XY and Z and Mr. King has a
 copy of the transcript where he actually said AB and C, that
 Mr. King should be permitted to say to that witness, "Wait a
 moment, you are saying XY and Z but eighteen months ago you
 said AB and C. What is the position here?"      That is
 something we are all used to in the normal civil process,
 but not, in my submission, something which is necessarily at
 home in an inquest such as is being conducted.

      THE CORONER:   My feeling on that point is simply this,
 that what we are trying to establish is the truth as far as
 we are able.   It will depend entirely upon what the AB and
 C and the XY and Z are. -

      Can we leave this point?      We are moving on to the
 legal submission point.. •. .It is obvious, to mer and subject
 to what you may say, that we will have- to have a. session
 where we deal with legal submissions- and we- can then try and
 deal with these matters and I will try and give you rulings,
 as far as I am able,, at the time.      Is that acceptable to
 you, Mr. Isaacs?

      MR. ISAACSr   It certainly is, sir, and a very good
 idea, if I may say so..                           7 6

      Sir, there is one further matter that I have been asked
 to raise and that is the question of the.recall of
 witnesses►   Certainly one can understand why it would be
               -U-v'-oppressive: for a witness from over the Pennines or-,indeed,' v'
                     f rom down south to be coming up on- a ;number.of:.regalar^^^^rvji:
; 7'*; ■:^-i^’;%«0.pccas ions but,- sir, that: same;pointjmus talso apply -beca us
                                     :° £-evidence^nTany-^way., ^eyetuby-Ja-'s
         rV_;-.       professionaL witness, .is.:'going •to-;b&,traumatic.,.that same :4.^—
               ~ » ^ p o i n t ;mus t apply, in..my submission,v;to aLL witnesses>'^<1
^ Jf:^2Tfr?:::
             ^.^^would.''b'e'. wrong'in-‘my^subniission-:for^for^example;i*r^r-^i.iS5^>^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 1 v
        r & Z S G Z , ' ' *»     ‘ 'T_‘_ *i .** '   c r rl'                     U a/?           nmfi   K a r lrr~a nrl "A O S 1 - ...'••
                                                                                                                                       .
                   tU v h a L r ^ a n ;h a u r ^ p jt^ w n a ^ to o ^ p j.a c & 3 p tr s tn d .^ 5 iiy ^ e iiiu ,-s .i-n e u j.
              iwitlx-
              Ithr e. day s :.la t e n .to 1'comej^backjand. ^dealjwilthi. ano ther.^ha
                   :e
                   .r
              i'Hbuiir
                     ':-'an d s o'^o n ►’S^S rri:Trii)^’s ubmi’s si'oih'£tha tTwcs u 1d:ib                      er
                              if
               oppressive indeed ft Tnrl                                                           . *                    •**»*

                        THE CORONER:I take your point*   I think that is a
               very fair point and I agree.    I am not saying that no-
               witness will ever be recalled, because if you remember those
               of you who were here at the interim inquests, we did recall
               witnesses even in. that instance because things occasionally
               come up which we had forgotten or a point is" made which on
               reflection we ought to have explored.    It may be that I,
               will have to recall witnesses from time to time, but I
               accept your point.    I think it is a very valid one and in
               principle I agree with you.    I entirely accept that these
               inquests are going to be pretty hard on everybody, not least
                the witnesses.                               '
                      HR. ISAACS:  The only point that perhaps I ought to
                make, one can understand why witnesses should be recalled to
                elucidate some point that had not been raised at the time
                when he or she gave-evidence, but that is quite different
                from asking a witness to stop at some stage and then come
                back.
                     THE CORONER:   No, that wasn’t my intention.     What I
                was trying to say was that if, for example, we have a local
                resident who can only give evidence as to what happened
                outside the ground, didn't, go j.n, then obviously we will
                stop at that point with him because-there is nothing more he
                can say.   However, if we have a supporter who was there and
                then he went into the gates and so on, we will listen to alL
                of it and ditto with officers as far as they are concerned.

                      MISS NORCLIFFEr    Sir, just the one point.- We did
                 previously send to you. oir draw to your attention a number" of
                 items of documentation which the Chief Constable would like
                 to be before the jury and we have previously asked for
                 permission that that be the case.     That wasn't done, sir,
                 on the basis that the jury would be- expected to take them
                 away and read them from cover to cover, but that they should
                 be used to dip into as and when required.

                      THE CORONERt   Yes, that is right.    In fact you sent
                 me I think volume 3.   L cannot remember your volumes 1. and
                 2 at the moment so it is. difficult for me to answer this,.
  "peruse .thousands ’of page's,Torihund reds-; even,*^’o d p c u m e n t s




^drawypa rticula rj'atten tlon^tdSpa


       MISS NORCLIFFE:   Sir, does that mean that actually at
  this stage we have got permission to put before the jury....

       THE CORONER:   No, not quite, but you are pushing me
  towards that.   I want to think about this a little.bit
  further because my original intention was to go the other
  way and to make you produce each document, or each page, as.
  and when you wanted to use it- What you are really asking
  me is to allbw you to produce it'in advance and then to dip.
  It may be — I am inclined to think, at the moment that.might
  be a better way but I want to think about it a little.bit
  further.

         Has anybody got any thoughts on that?

       MR. ISAACS:   It would be nice to know, sir, what
  documents my friend is referring to and then perhaps...

       THE CORONER:   I understood we had all had copies
  because that is what you said in your letter.

       MISS NORCLIFFE:    Sir, if I can explain what they were.
  Volumes 1 and 2, and there were three volumes referred.to
  you, were in fact the South Yorkshire Police Inquiry volumes
  1 and 2, submitted‘before the Public Inquiry.’ The South
  Yorkshire Police submitted something called ’’Background
  material", and then volumes 1 and 2 which were just
  documents.   They were Standing Orders, briefing notes etc.
  Volume 3 that has been referred to by the Coroner is a mini
  core bundle, if I can call it that, documents which the
  Chief Constable considers are relevant which all parties
  have had access to,, either from the Public Inquiry or from .
  the.recent civil contribution proceedings.

        THE CORONER:   So what you are saying is there is
   nothing new in those documents.   The lawyers ought to know
   about them.

        MR. KING:   Sir, what would be helpful - we may know
   all about them if we knew what she was talking about.   Sir,
   as a very gentle suggestion again which was certainly
   adopted at the Public Inquiry, we started off with everybody
                    ::"eSp       S     d“       ^    nd .tHen: ^ lf ^         *»«<*«>*

‘^'i-'flrVT H ^ £ 0 R ? NER r ;- W e -d o n ’t want'to'do' t h a t ^ v Either'we '
.start with single sheets or agreed..,.

                  KING:.-.*? T h a t was my o p e n i n g p s i r , " to conre“-.to the ~
; “? gu        lon t0K ( ° U that if by the.;time we meet'again .it may
jnot. be agreeable.- asv:perfect,\';but-t:i£_,a^'core.bundle I"one. or •
;,two b u n d l e s ^ p e r h a p s , were b r o u g h t together w e c o u l d each'"'"
. c o m m e n t o r i t , make- suggestions- a b o u t w H a t - m i g h t be
  introduced or arguments as to what might be taken out                              and
  we could just have those in core bundles.                                        ’

        THE CORONER:          Yes,     Miss Norcliffe?

       kMISS N0RCLIFt''E:            If I could just       the point     that there
 t h L e ewere° at^ mpt a'j n?5 }e“ inS the Parties know what
 these were.   It was decided that in the first instance
 those documents would be put to you for you to look at and
  f you thereafter at this meeting said no documents
 whatsoever, then circulating bundles to every other party
 would not have been appropriate beforehand.   That was the
 reason why this particular thing has been done.

 e   J “E f90R0!«*:  Can "e leave this question of documents
 for the time being?   I have got to take a definitive
 of those 5H •t° 3 tert?Jn e*tent I have deferred one or two
of those decisions until after this mee ting because I wanted
 thought.WnSt y °U thought as wel1 as y ° u t0 bear what I


that          ^hing 1 W ° ^ l d s * y with regard to d ocuments is
nut  th^r*e going to need, obviously any documents which are
put, there has to be enough for the main representatives.
thi£k                   Xv aSt four c ° P ies ^ r the jury and I
think it is only fair I should have a copy as well        Don't
S l n ' n e e f ? do‘u”’ent? >*cause I think we worked it out we
the needs o r ^ L H n q u e s t s ! "               8°ing t0 “ ” r ade‘Iuatel>'

       Yes,, anything else?


no i nt M R ‘ ptC KS ° N: Just t0 come back on the undertakings
point.        Perhaps^my u s e of the word "undertakings" was
we c a n ^ o ^ a n d * had      nind WSS Precisely what I hope
;®nr! f ™             c ? rtain statements within the T a y l o r
Report from my clients     point of view i n s o f a r as thev relate
to the criticisms of Liverpool supporters.            W e are
certa inly happy to liaise with whoever on that point.

of . . . My SeCOnd and      third points come from the standpoint
     THE CORONER:      May I just say the difficulty about that
is that if I am going to call one hundred witnesses, it is
very difficult for solicitors, indeed anybody, to give
undertakings as to what they will say, and this is a
problem.    I would not be very happy about shutting
witnesses up in the middle of a sentence if what they are
saying is relevant to my inquiry.        I think that is a
problem when I was looking at you about giving undertakings.
It is a very major problem for you as the solicitors for the
supporters.    1 1 'rsf easier -for the oth,e:r parties", but it 'is
a very major difficulty which you have got and I am not
quite sure how we can resolve it at the moment.

     MR. JACKSON:   We will obviously have to wait and see
what people are prepared to agree before we make any further
comment.

     Secondly, sir, from the viewpoint      of a client who may
be looking at these inquests from afar      and coming in.    Am I
right in thinking there will be a list      available perhaps
three days in advance of witnesses who      will be called?

     THE CORONER:    That is what I am hoping for and of
course if I am persuaded by the arguments of your colleagues
you may get an even fuller list sooner, but certainly I
would want to try and give a three day provisi o n a ll y warned
list, so to speak, so that you would have some idea of who
was coming.    Not their statements, but their names and, if
you like, category - supporter, friend or whatever it might
be.

     MR. JACKSON:   My final point is a question:         whether
there will be a daily transcript available.

     THE CORONER:      I am coming to the transcripts     in a
moment.

        Before I move on, we are taking a bit longer than I had
an t i c i p a t e d . I am sorry about that but I think we might as
well press on and deal with major items today.           Mrs.
ilclirian, yes.         You must shout because otherwise I can't
hear you.

     MRS. MCBRIAN:   I am concerned very much a b o u t the
point, the cut-off point, wnere you say you are going to
take no evidence after 3.15.   I think the most important
thing that day is...

      THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. Mc3rian, I have got to stop
 you.   I know it sounds unfair because I haven't stop p e d the
 others, but you are moving into what I call the quest i o n of
 evidence.    In fact what you are saying is you want me to
 reconsider the cut-off point?
     MRS. MCBRIAN:   I would like you to do that.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, OK.   When we next meet for legal
submissions then you can argument at that point on the point
of law.   Forgive me, I realise this is difficult for you,
Mrs. McBrian, because you are not a lawyer.    On the other
hand, if you represent yourself you have to be treated as if
you were one and so I have to apply exactly the same, if you
like, rules to you, even though it is harder for you.    At
the next meeting when we are arguing points of law, then by
all means if there is a legal point on which one can argue
that I am wrong about the cut-off point, then let it be
argued.    Ifj having listened to the argument, I am
persuaded, then of course I will hopefully say so.    If I am
not persuaded I will also say so and we will have to accept
it because that is how it is.    Have I made that clear?

     MRS. MCBRIAN:    Yes.

     THE CORONER:    Was there something else, Mrs. McBrian?

     MRS. MCBRIAN:    No.

     THE CORONER:   I am not trying to be unfair to you
because I know it is very, very difficult in the context of
this meeting and anyway legal points, but I have got to try
and be fair to the others as well.

     What I was going to say was are there any other points
on the procedural aspects which you need to raise?   I am
not talking about legal points.   I want to stick to
procedure as far as I am able.   Right, I hope I have
succeeded.

     Transcripts, somebody raised it.    It is ray intention
to have next day transcripts, so each day's proceedings
should be available first thing next morning.     There are
two things about it.    I would like to know, and I don't
need to know this minute, but I would like you to write to
me as soon as you possibly can and let me know whether you
anticipate wanting transcripts because we have to plan how
we are going to produce them and we need to know in round
terms how many we want.    Secondly, it is going to be a
jolly expensive exercise for you because transcripts, as you
know, you get a bill from the city, and it is expensive, but
tnat is how it is so you have got to think hard.     I am not
asking you to waste your money.

     If you know you are going to want a daily transcript
then obviously tell me.     If there are some of you who say
you don't want a daily transcript but there may be the odd
occasion where you r.ay want a day's transcript, then
indicate that to tr.e as well and we will do our best to
oblige.   However, what we will not be able to do is to have

                            - 23 -
a sort of industry where on very short notice we will be
able to cough up a transcript. • I want to be as hel pful as
I can on this.   I want you to understand that we are
intending to have them available because I want them for a
start.   They will cost you money unfortunately, or
fortunately, it depends which way you look at it.      Is
that clear?

      MR. MANNING:   Sir, normally if the court is producing
a transcript there is a cost for the production and then
that, is split between the numbers off persons who want an
individual copy.

      THE CORONER:   What we do...         Well,   I will   think about
it.   We will write to you.

     MR. MANNING:   Sir, if you are going to req uest the
copy, it may be that all we were involved in would be the
photocopying charge which, of course, would be m u c h more
palatable.

     THE CORONER:   But even that is expensive, as some of
you know who have had transcripts from the interim
proceedings because it is laid down in the Coroner's Copy of
Documents Regulations 1988, which no doubt you will look up
when you get home.

        Somebody asked me in one of the letters h o w long these
 inquests will take.    Well, your guess probably is as good as
 mine, but we are planning to start o n the _l_9th. Novenbe.r.? .We
 intend to rise on about the lSth or T 9 ’tn of December.            I do
'hot think we will have firiish‘ed“'by~*~t'h'en". "1 f “ it'"is’ obvious
 we are going to finish with a day or we will carry on for
 another day or two, but I think it is unlikely.             We will
 then probablv resume on the 7th of January and carrv on
 until we finish.      Now there are problems’,''of “c o u r s e ,
"oecause if we have illness, particularly amongst the jury,
 we may have to adjourn.     It depends on the type of illness
 but I can't, of course, give undertakings that no-one will
 fall ill.     Hopefully not, but this is a question which is
 unpredictable.     Secondly, of course, I can't say how long
 you ladies and gentlemen are going to be with your cross-
 e x amination or, indeed, yoj^r_legal_subtaissio.ris so I am in
 the dark to a certain extent as far as that is concerned.

     I arc going to try, as far as I am able, to group
witnesses so that people who are saying similar things are
coming at the same time which I think will speed things up a
little bit.

        I cannot tell you how many witnesses we are going to
 have either, but I would be surprised if it was less than
 were ca lled at Lord Just Taylor s Inquiry, which was 176, I
 tr.ir.k.   It would not surprise me if it isn't more.  That

                              -   29   -
d o e s n ’t mean to say they will all be lengthy,          but I expect
there will be quite a few witnesses.

     Any comments on length?   I d o n ’t suppose there is much
one can say, is there?   I am very conscious, of course,
that it is difficult for all the families, but it is also
going to be very hard for the jury, but I don't know what I
can do about it.   I have thought quite hard ab out how to do
it and I can't see any way round it, other than the way I am
tackling it.

     Perhaps I should just mention another thing about
timing.  On the 28th of November we cannot use the Council
Chamber because there is a Council meeting and I have had to
agree not to be there.   Similarly,  it may be that on the
Gtn December we will not be able touse the Town Hall   and
the 9th of January is another Council day when we will
definitely not be able to use the Council Chamber.    Our
intention is to start on the 7th but obviously as we get
nearer the time we will think about it a bit harder.

     I am considering, although I have not take a decision
on this yet, that on the 28th if might be worthwhile,'
provided we can arrange it, to take the jury out for another
site visit for a little bit longer and let them see the
surroundings and everything else.   Perhaps Mr. Catchpole
you could check with your clients whether they would be
willing to allow us to come?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    I am certain they would be willing to
allow it at your convenience, sir.

     THE CORONER:   That would mean we weren't totally
wasting the time and it might be of bene fit to the jury to
see the ground again and to refresh their memory.    I know
things have changed a bit because some of the barriers have
disappeared and so on, but that is just how it is.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Certainly my instructions                are that the
ground is available at any time you require it.

     THE CORONER:    That's very kind of you.                 T h a n k you
very much indeed.  We will let you know about                that a little
bit nearer tne time.

     I have dealt with         the dates when we can't sit.       If we
do the visit, and I am         hoping we will be able to sit on the
6th of December, it is         only really the 9th of Ja nu a r y when
we definitely will not         be able to sit, and, of course, there
will be another day in         February if we go on that long, but I
hope not.

      I Do intericL-t-o^call ..a f ew.^exper ts._j:ighjt_.a t_ the e n d ..... I
Jhave not yet formalised ..my..thinking ,on..this so .I can-t
really tell you more than the fact I will be calling a few
experts to deal with special things, but you must remember
that even the experts, their evidence is going to be
restricted to what is relevant to an inquest.           I am sure
you all appreciate that aspects, say, of civil aspects - I
know   the civil matter has been done and in that sense Iam
lucky.    Very often what people want from an inquest is the
ammunition for the civil trial, but that does not seem as if
that is going to be necessary. However,          we still have to
take into account that we don^ t'   d e a l ’wi thcivii aspects   as
such.

     Listing I think I have already dealt with to a certain
extent.   It is going to be difficult.   We will do our best
to minimise inconvenience and to make things as sensible as
we can, but I am afraid that witnesses are going to have to
be prepared to be shifted around at relatively short notice
because it is so hard to predict how; long any particular
person is going to be giving evidence for,but we    will learn
from experience as we go along.

     As I have already said the inquests are public so the
press will be there.   We know that from last time.    They are
not here today because I didn't consider this an app ropriate
meeting for them to be here at.     They are not, hopefully,
going to report it and you should not discuss it either
because what I am very concerned about is that when the jury
comes together again it is they who reach theverdict.       It
is not 1.   It is certainly not you and it is not even you
up there, it is the jury that has to make its    mind up on the
facts and I want as    far as possible to ensure that that
happens.

     That is about it, as far as I am concerned.   Shall we
start again with you, Mr. King, and work our way round, just
in case there is something?

     HR. KING:  I have no further comments now, sir.    I am
happy to know we are going to have a further mee ting for the
legal points.

     TH E CORONER:    Oh, yes, I had written it down and I had
forgotten it, the order in which you gentlemen and      ladies
will be asking questions of witnesses.     As you know I start
off in an inquisition and ask whatever I want.       Strictly
speaking, it isn't a person's witness, but if somebody
represents a particular witness, he asks questions last.
Everybody else asks in whatever order I decide, but I would
prefer, I think it was done in Lord Justice T a y l o r ’s set-up,
that you agreed amongst yourselves in what order you wanted
to bat.    I am quite happy to be reasonable about that.
Not only am I quite happy to be reasonable about it, you
will probably have already noticed I tend to go round and
then I start again at the beginning because although one has

                            - 31 -
to draw the line somewhere I want, everybody to feel that
they haven't been prejudiced because they have gone first
and something has occurred.   Don't feel that if something
occurs to you, within reason I am amenable to al low anything
reasonable to be asked.

     MR.   KING:    I have nothing else.

     THE CORONER:       Anything else?     No.

     Now if we turn to the point on another meeting, it
sounds to me as if there are going to be various legal
submissions which have to be made.      We could do those on_
the 19 t h , but then we lose a jury day, so to speak.    If it
is agreeable to you there is no reason why I should not
decide to commence the inquests - if we met on Friday, the
16th, and I think we will meet in the Council Chamber.
Tnat will be a formal session so if you like the inquests
will commence on the 16th, but without the jury being
present, simply and solely for legal submissions.      We can ^
deal with those.      I can give you any rulings or I can think
about them over the weekend.      On Monday morning when we
start with the jury we can get straight into that.       Is that
convenient?      Mr. Isaacs?

      MR. ISAACS:     I hesitate to say it is inconvenient,
 sir, but perhaps I speak on behalf of seme of my learned
 friends who, like myself, have commitments and whose
 commitments have been arranged so that tne inquests will
 start on the 19th.     For my part I would much prefer to be
 making such submissions as have to be mad e and to be
 listening to the submissions that are going to be made, on
 the   first morning.    I appreciate what you say, sir, about
 the loss of a jury day, but in the context of inquests that
 are   going to last seven to eight weeks, perhaps one day is
 not   going to make that much difference.

         THE CORONER:    What does everybody     else think about
 that?

      MR. RUSSELL:   I would like to end orse what my learned
 friend has just said.   It is very reasonable, especially
 those of us who have clerks with diaries and have sought to
 accommodate the start date on the 19th.

      THE C O R O N E R : In other words,--what you are saying is
 that vou have booked the 19th, but if we bring it forward it
 is soing to make it awkward tor you.         That is what you are
 saying?
       MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, yes, but subject,        of course,   with
  checking with our respective offices.
     iHE CORONER:    All r i g h t . . In that case we will start
on the 19th in the morning with legal submissions.        We will
re-arrange the jury so that they come on the 20th instead of
the 19t'n.   Before I say that, this is a difficult question
for you.   How long do you judge the legal submissions are
going to take?    A very hard question but can you just give
me an indication?

     MR. KING:       I would have thought,   sir, we could do   them
in tne morning.

     MR.   ISAACS:     I agree.

      THE CORONER:   OK then, we will probably get the jury
to come...    I will think about that because it depends on
wiiat else we need to do.  We will meet then on the 19th for
legal submissions.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, there is only point.  Would it be
possible for the list of witnesses whom you intend to call
on the first or second day to be available on the Friday to
be sent through to the various solicitors?

     THE CORONER:      Yes.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am sure you haven't forgotten you
did say you would consider the overall point of perhaps
circulating the witnesses in full.

     THE CORONER:   The witness list, yes.    That is
something which I will think about.    If I decide todo it,
then I will.   If not, we will discuss it on the 19th and
you can have another go at me.   I have taken on board what
you have said.

         Pernaps'I could say one thing about that and maybe you
could help me.           One of the factors that influences rae in
tne circulation of such a list is this:          from what I have
already told you it must be obvious to you that I am
S 0 I?£ ^9e r ^nl clu ite a lot of people as potential witnesses,
ihis is, of course, because I have got to base my judgment
on wnat I read because I haven't heard them.           Mow it*is
possiole that wnen we get cracking that we may find...
Let s imagine that I have got fifty supporters as potential
witnesses on my list, it may be that as we get along that we
discover the evidence is coming out in such a way there is
really nc need to hear fifty people.           One of the
disadvantages of my circulating a list to you is that it
means I have to delete people whose names are on a list
Miicn you have seen.           If I don't circulate it I can do what
l li<e because I can make a judgment.

     now^l would not want to feel - obviously if I have put
someoodv s name down the reason I have done that is because
I t h i n k h e i s s a y i n g s o m e t h i n g w h i c h may b e o f i n t e r e s t s o - I
w o u ld n o t d e l e t e them j u s t f o r t h e h e c k o f i t .        However,
n e i t h e r would I want to w aste t h e i r tim e o r o u r tim e in
rep eatin g things.             Ha v e y o u a n y v i e w s on t h e r e v i s i o n o f
any c i r c u l a t e d l i s t downward?          Of c o u r s e , I m i g h t a l s o a d d
names u p w a r d s .

         MR. KING:         S i r , t h a t would be e m i n e n t l y s e n s i b l e and
i f I may s a y s o o n e o f t h e a d v a n t a g e s o f a l i s t i s t h a t we
can a l l a p p l y o u r minds t h e w hole tim e i t is. p r o g r e s s i n g as
we l o o k down t h e l i s t a s t o , " W e l l , t h a t g r o u p o f w i t n e s s e s
c o u l d i n e f f e c t become a g r e e d e v i d e n c e . "  T h a t w o u ld be
e n tire ly sensible.

         THE CORONER:                D o e s a n y b o d y d i s a g r e e w i t h Mr. K i n g ' s
comment?             No.     W e l l , t h a t d o e s ma ke i t a l i t t l e b i t e a s i e r
f o r me b e c a u s e I was a l i t t l e b i t c o n c e r n e d , m a y b e f r o m
e x p e r i e n c e , t h a t a n y t h i n g t h a t i s p u b l i s h e d becom es law and
I would n o t want t h a t .

          MR. CATCHPOLE:               S i r , co u ld I j u s t add t h a t one of th e
a d v a n t a g e s t h a t we c e r t a i n l y s e e o f h a v i n g a c o m p r e h e n s i v e
l i s t i s t h a t t h e r e a l a r g e n u m b e r o f u s who h a v e a c t u a l l y
s e e n a l o t o f t h e w i t n e s s e s t h a t y o u may w i s h t o c a l l .            We
h a v e h a d t h a t b e n e f i t a n d i t may b e t h a t we c o u l d s a y , a s a
s u g g e s t i o n o b v i o u s l y , o n l y t o y o u r s e l f t h a t t h e r e may b e
someb ody e l s e you m i g h t l i k e t o c o n s i d e r c a l l i n g , o r t h a t a s
t h i n g s p r o g r e s s we c o u l d p r u n e i t d o w n .

          THE CORONER:            That is r ig h t.              T h at i s one o f th e
p o i n t s o f Mr . K i n g .        I w a n t e d t o t a c k l e i t t h e o t h e r way.
I w a n t e d y o u t o t e l l me who y o u w a n t e d b u t I c a n s e e i t d o e s
c r e a t e a p r o b l e m b e c a u s e y o u h a v e g o t t o d o u b l e - g u e s s me , s o
to s p e a k , and I can s e e t h a t .                I t i s a v a l i d p o i n t and I
w i l l c e r t a i n l y v e r y s e r i o u s l y c o n s i d e r t h e p o i n t you h a v e
made.

         M rs. M cD rian, i s i t a l l c l e a r to you?           W e l l , i t may
not    a l l be c l e a r to you b u t i s t h e r e a n y t h i n g you w ant to
say    on t h e s e p r o c e d u r a l a s p e c t s ?

        MRS. MCBRIAN:         D o e s i t me a n t h a t we a l l w a i t u n t i l t h e
1 9 t h f c r y o u t o ma ke a d e c i s i o n a s t o w h a t t i m e t h e e v i d e n c e
i s t o be h e a r d , and t h e q u a r t e r p a s t t h r e e ?

          THE CORONER:              No, I c a n t e l l y o u t h i s .        We w i l l
a l m o s t c e r t a i n l y s t a r t w i t h e v i d e n c e on t h e 2 0 t h .     However,
o n t h e 1 9 t'n we a r e s t a r t i n g s o y o u s h o u l d b e t h e r e b e c a u s e
i n t n e m o r n i n g we w i l l d e a l w i t h l e g a l s u b m i s s i o n s .       In the
a r te r n o o n I w i l l d e a l w ith a n y th in g I want to say to the
j u r y a n d a n y t h i n g t h a t i s a g r e e d w h i c h we c a n p u t t o t h e
j u r y ^ a n d t h e n we w i l l p r o b a b l y s t a r t w i t h r e a l e v i d e n c e on
the, i U t h .        T h a t may b e v i d e o s , y o u s e e .       We may u s e t h e
I

01 11   '90   14:51           161)9                        MEDICO LGL CNTER                                           ©00




               afternoon          fo r   the   videos      but    1 have got        to l o c k at      that and
               d o s o m e s u d s and d e c i d e h o w b e s t      t o use       t he tiae.

                         MRS. MCBRIA-.':    So i t w i l l be t n e               ISth    that     you d e c i d e
               wh e n    the evidence w i l l be heard?

                         THE CORONER:             D efinitely        the   19th,     exactly       a s you h a v e
               been      told.

                         MR. KINu:           S i r , I t h i n k you h a v e p e r h a p s m i s u n d e r s t o o d
                 e      question.          I th in k the lady i s a s k in g :            13 i t t h e c a s e
               tnat      i t w o u l d o n l y be on t h e 1 9 t h t h a t a d e c i s i o n ' w i l l b e
               maae      a s to t h e a m b it o f t h e c ^ t - o f f tirae?          In o t h e r words
               that      t h a t i s when t h e d e c i s i o n s w i l l b e rcade?                              ’

                       THE CORONER:                      beg y o u r p a r d o n ,        I did
              m i s u n d e r s t a n d you.       Thank y o u ,'M r. King.

                     , . T h a t i s c o r r e c t . ^ J b v i o u s l y i h a v e h e a r d what vou have
              s a i d and so I w i l l p r o b a b l y be t n i n k i n g a b o u t t h e m a t t e r
              D e t w e e n now a n d t h e n b u t I w i l l w a n t t o l i s t e n t o l e g a l
              s u b m i s s i o n s o n _t h a t p o i n t on t h e 1 9 t h .       I w ill th en , in the
              i i g h u o f what i s s a i d , and a l s o any f u r t h e r t h i n k i n g which I
              h a v e d o n e , t a k e a v i e w on i t .              I t h i n k we w i l l l e a v e  it
              l i t c e t h a t , s o t h e a n s w e r i s t h e r e i s n o d e c i s i o n on t h a t
              toaay.

                    MRS.          MCBRIAN:    So v e w o u l d n o t b e a b l e t o             p r e Da r e a n y
              w itnesses          about tn is u n t i l the h earin g begins?

                        THE CORONER:             T h a t i s t r u e , b u t t h e n we a r e t a l k i n g
              a b o u t i n q u e s t s w h i c h will l a s t a t l e a s t f i v e w e e k s a n d
              p r o c a b l y e i g h t , and maybe e v e n l o n g e r s o t h e r e i s g o i n g t o
              De q u i t e a b i t o f tice t o d o a d d i t i o n a l w o r k .

                      If I        w e r e t o c h a n g e my m i n d on t h i s , o n t h e c u t - o f f
              point, if           I w e r e t o decide I w a n t e d t o a l t e r i t b e f o r e t h a t
              ^ ^ te , then        I w o u l d l e t you a n d e v e r y b o d y e l s e k n o w , b u t
              con t want           t o e n c o u r a g e y o u t o t h i n k I w i l l do t h a t . T h e r e
              are strong          reasons fo r saying th a t.                 I t is    not lu s t
              Oustinacy.

                      OK, l a d i e s 2 nd g e n t l e m e n , I t h i n k t h a t i s i t .     I as
              m ost g r a t e f u l to a l l o f you b e in g h e r e .          I h o te i t has been
              o r u s e a n a t h a t we n a v e ma d e a b i t o f p r o g r e s s !        I t is
              going^ t o be a v e r y d i f f i c u l t i n q u e s t , I ' e a f r a i d .    He w i l l
              j u s t n a v e t o a c t h e b e s t we c a n .

                        MR.    KING:        Thank you,        sir.
SECTION 5
HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE
  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                  Before

 S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B .MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                    At
              The Town Hall,
                Sheffield.

                    On
      Monday, 19th November, 1990




         TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




   From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
        Official Shorthand Writers,
    55, Queen Street, Sheffield Si 2DX
                         IN D E X TO TR A N S C R IP T




OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER

APPEARANCES
LEGAL SUBMISSIONS

STATEMENT BY THE CORONER

SUBMISSION BY MR. ISAACS

STATEMENT BY THE CORONER TO THE JURY

     S . BROWN Sworn
        By The Coroner

     M . LAYTON Sworn
        By The Coroner
        Cross-Examined   by   Mr. Payne
        Cross-Examined   by   Mr. Isaacs
        Cross-Examined   by   Mr. King
        Cross-Examined   by   Mrs. McBrien

LEGAL SUBMISSIONS
                                                                                                     1




                               F I RS T DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                           MONDAY, 1 9 t h NOVEMBER, 1 9 9 0

          THE CORONER:              Good m o r n i n g a n d w e l c o m e t o a l l o f y o u .
You w i l l n o t i c e t h a t t h e s e c h a i r s a r e e m p t y .      These are the
c h a irs fo r the ju ry .                T h e r e a s o n why t h a t i s , a s my l e g a l
c o lle a g u e s w i l l o f c o u r s e a p p r e c ia te ^ i s t h a t t.iis morning
we w i l l r e s e r v e f o r l e g a l s u b m i s s i o n s a n d a s I w o u l d h a v e
s e n t t h e j u r y o u t a s s o o n a s we c o mme n c e d I d i d n ' t s e e a n y
p o i n t i n making them be h e r e i n i t i a l l y b u t t h e y w i l l be
a v a i l a b l e t h i s a f t e r n o o n , a l l b e i n g w e l l , whe n we a c t u a l l y
g e t down t o t a k i n g e v i d e n c e .

          Most o f y o u , and c e r t a i n l y t h e l e g a l r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s
w i l l r e m e m b e r t h a t we h a d w h a t I h a v e t e r m e d a b u s i n e s s
m e e t i n g w h i c h wa s i n t e n d e d t o s o r t o u t s o m e p r o c e d u r a l
a s p e c t s s o we c o u l d m a k e t h e r u n n i n g o f t h e i n q u e s t s ^
s m o o t h e r a n d s o t h a t we c o u l d p r o c e e d p r o p e r l y b u t w i t h
despatch.             I t w a s a t t h a t m e e t i n g fchat i t b e c a m e c l e a r
t h e r e would be p o i n t s w hich needed t o be r a i s e d on l e g a l
p o i n t s a n d t h a t i s w h a t we a r e now a b o u t t o d o .

          You w i l l f o r g i v e m e , I h o p e , i f I a s k y o u t o i n t r o d u c e
y o u r s e l v e s s o t h a t t h e s h o r t h a n d w r i t e r s a n d a l s o I know who
i s who a t t h i s s t a g e .            I t i s p o s s i b l e I w i l l a s k you t o do
i t a g a i n t h i s a f t e r n o o n wh e n t h e j u r y i s h e r e , b u t I h o p e
yo u w i l l f o r g i v e t h a t .         W h i c h i s t h e b e s t way o f s t a r t i n g ?
I f I s t a r t a t number 1 and j u s t work a c r o s s .                      I f you c o u l d
j u s t i n t r o d u c e y o u r s e l f , y o u r na me a n d who y o u r e p r e s e n t .

          MISS HAMPTON:             M i s s A l i s o n Hampton o f C o u n s e l ,
 a p p e a r i n g w i t h Mr . R i c h a r d M a x w e l l o f C o u n s e l , a p p e a r i n g f o r
 the S h e ff ie ld C ity C ouncil.

      MR. HALE:               V incent Hale,          solicitor,         fo r Superintendent
 Roger M a r s h a ll.

          MR. PAYNE:             S i r , I am R i c h a r d P a y n e , C o u n s e l ,
 a p p e a r i n g w i t h P a t r i c k Limb, C o u n s e l , f o r t h e C h i e f O f f i c e r
 of P o lic e .

           MR. ISAACS:           S i r , I am P a u l I s a a c s , C o u n s e l ,
 i n s t r u c t e d by M e s s r s . H e p w o r t h a n d C h a d w i c k o f L e e d s ,
 re p re s e n tin g Chief S u perin ten dent D uckenfield.

           MR. MANNING:               I am R i c h a r d M a n n i n g , s o l i c i t o r , o f
 W alker, M o rris, S c o t t , T u rn b u ll, s o l i c i t o r s of Leeds,
 r e p r e s e n t i n g S u p e r i n t e n i e n t Murray.

           MR. KING:         My n a me i s T i m o t h y K i n g o f C o u n s e l .           I
  a p p e a r on b e h a l f o f f o r t y - t h r e e f a m i l i e s o f t h e d e c e a s e d .
         MISS SINCLAIR:          S i r , I am F i o n a S i n c l a i r o f C o u n s e l ,
a p p e a r i n g f o r Eastw ood and P a r t n e r s , t h e c o n s u l t a n t
engineers.

       MR. CATCHPOLE:           S ir,          I am S t u a r t C a t c h p o l e      appearing
f o r S h e f f i e l d Wednesday.

       MR. CALLAGHAN:                S i r , I am A n d r e w C a l l a g h a n , s o l i c i t o r ,
f o r S o u t h Y o r k s h i re * M e t r o p o l i t a n Ambulaiice S e r v i c e .

      MISS ADDELMANN:          S i r , I am A n d r e a A d d e l m a n n
of C ounsel, re p re s e n tin g the P o lice F e d e ra tio n .

          MR. RUSSELL:                  S i r , I am C h r i s t o p h e r R u s s e l l ,   C ounsel,
r e p r e s e n t i n g S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Greenwood.

      THE CORONER:              Are t h e r e any i n d i v i d u a l f a m i l y members
who a r e n o t r e p r e s e n t e d by Mr. K i n g a n d who w a n t . . . ?       Yes,
Mrs. M cBrien.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:       I am J o a n M c B r i e n a n d I am r e p r e s e n t i n g
our fam ily in t h is m a tte r.

         THE CORONER:         I s t h e r e anybody e l s e i n t h a t c a t e g o r y ?
Mr. C h u r c h i s n o t h e r e ?     I j u s t w a n t t o b e q u i t e s u r e we
h a v e n ' t m issed him.

          Now, t h e S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e A m b u l a n c e S e r v i c e , c a n y o u
j u s t t e l l me w h a t y o u r w i s h e s a r e w i t h r e g a r d t o
r e p r e s e n t a t i o n a n d why y o u f e e l t h a t y o u r c l i e n t s c o n s t i t u t e
an i n t e r e s t e d p a r t y i n th e s e p ro ceed in g s?




                              MR. CALLAGHAN:                 Sir,     you
     MR.   CALLAGHAN:    Sir, you know the representation on
previous occasions and I should say it is my intention to stay
only for today and in the case of one or two witnesses. I
will not take any major part in the Inquiry.
     THE CORONER:   I have got no particular objection to
you being here.   I thought you probably would not be here
continuously but I wanted to be sure about that.   Perhaps
the best thing would be if we started with you really and
if we started with appropriate legal submissions.   It may
be easiest if we start with Mr. King and then we will move
across the table, so to speak.
     MR. KING:    Sir, my primary legal submission is
directed to your preliminary ruling on the last occasion
that this Inquest should be concerned only with events up
to about 3.15 pm.    As I understand your ruling, sir, it
was designed to ensure that this Inquest would only be
concerned with events leading to the crushing on the
terraces and the first arrival of an ambulance.
     As you know, sir, the families whom I represent are
very anxious that this Inquest should deal with what to
them is a very major issue, as to how their loved ones came
by their deaths, namely how the services and the rescue
services, and those attending with the emergency, coped
with it immediately after people were brought off the
terraces because death was not certified in many, if not
most, cases until after 4 pm.   Sir, I do not know if you
have had an opportunity to read these.    I did ask those
instructing me to send to you statements from each of the
families whom I represent setting out a number of
individual questions directed to their own Inquest but also
incorporating in their individual cases why they were
anxious to learn of what happened between the time there
was a first sighting of any loved one being brought off the
terracing and the pronouncement of death.    I do not know
if you had an opportunity to read them.
      THE CORONER:   I have briefly because these did not
 arrive until Friday afternoon but I have looked at them.

      MR. KING:    What I would like to do is take you
 through some individual examples in order to persuade you
 that this is a question which ought to be gone into at this
 particular Inquest.    I do not know whether that is a
 format you want to follow or whether you want first to hear
 some other representatives as to their attitude to my
 submission.    I am happy to go into considerable detail
 about it.
      THE CORONER:   There are several points which have
 occurred to me and the first point I would like you to deal
with is this; you were not present but you will be aware
that in April/May this year we sat for two-and-a-half weeks
approximately and we dealt with the 95 deceased and we
3ealt with three issues which Coroners deal with;^ who the
deceased was, when he/she died and where he/she^died.    I
specifically excluded from discussion at that time the
question of how he or she died because as^you^will
recollect the DPP was still actively considering the matter,
and we did not want to trammel his investigation but, on
the other hand, I felt it was right we should allow people
to hear what we could deal with.
     I will raise the second point at the same time because
it may be easier for you to deal with the two things
together.   At those hearings we dealt in considerable
detail, in fact infinitely more detail than we would
normally deal with in an Inquest, with events after the^
pathological cause ,of death and I did it because I realised
that the families were desperately anxious to know what had
happened immediately after the incident.    My question to
you is - and I think this is what we need to deal with and
get right - bearing in mind we have only dealt with the
question of who, when and where and that we have done it in
considerably greater detail than one would normally expect
to do, why is it necessary to review that very activity
again which I think is what you are really asking me to do?

     MR. KING:   Sir, as I understand the individual
Inquests there was not an enquiry into, in the individual
cases, the impact of the organisation rescue on the
survival or otherwise of the particular loved one.    All
that was done when   one looks at those Inquests   was to
identify the time of -a first sighting,that is to say,
somebody who seemed to be unconscious, and of a time when
effort was made to resuscitate in any given case and then
death was certified.    In many of the cases there was a
large gap of time after 3.15 pm when it was not
investigated at the individual Inquests the nature of the
services available to deal with those being brought off and
if I can just give   one or two examples of that, you have
examples of people who are brought off at 1522     and itis
said that there was an effort to resuscitate by a lay
individual and then that particular lay individual is not
heard of again, or the officer is not, and it is said that
the given loved one arrives at the temporary mortuary.
There has been no investigation directed to the global
organisation of what happened immediately after they were
brought off the terraces. Certainly I have been through
 the individual transcripts and there does not seem to be
 any evidence directed to that issue and those witnesses who
 were called coyld not deal with those issues, sir.
     THE CORONER:   Are you suggesting that the cause of
death in respect of these individuals is not in fact the
pathological cause of death which we have been given but due
to a novus actus in effect by person or persons whose
evidence you have not yet heard?
     MR. KING:   Certainly the families, and I put it as
openly as this, sir> and putting it b l un t l y c a r d s on the
table, are not convinced at all that had there been a far
more sensible, logical organisation of the rescue services,
of the major disaster team being brought in, of proper
medical equipment being available, of proper triage bexng
carried out, that those measures, had they been there, xn
several cases, would not have resulted in the survival of
their loved ones.   They cannot - obviously they were not
there - produce through me concrete evidence of that at thxs
stage but at every stage of an Inquiry into this disaster,
and this certainly is true even in the Taylor Inquiry, that
particular aspect of the disaster has never properly been
gone into.                        c
     Again putting it very simply to you, sir, most of the
families I represent feel there has been a complete blanket
(not a deliberate blanket) been held down over what happened
after they were brought off the terraces and before
individuals were certified dead and there has been no effort
made systematically to analyse what was the organisation at
    time for the rescue, what might have been, and what could
have made a difference.    A very simple example again is that
I am instructed there is evidence of Dr. Gumpert given at the
Inquest that without an electrocardiogram we can never be
sure whether or not there is a pulse and when dealing with
individual loved ones taken off the terraces and simply dealt
with by lay people, the absence of such sort of equipment
means that one would never know whether or not that
individual was alive or dead at that stage.    It is a
matter - and I do not mean this pejoratively - which is swept
under the carpet as if to say, "All we are interested in is
the immediate crushing leading to those being brought off the
terraces".    I cannot put it any more firmly than that, sir.

      THE CORONER:    You have put it very plainly and I
 appreciate it.    I will give a ruling on your application in
 a few moments but do you want to develop it further?
 Obviously I want an opportunity to hear from your colleagues.

      MR. KING:    Have you the individual statements which
 were supplied?
      THE CORONER:   I do have those in front of me.   I would
 not want to go through all of them but if you wish to pick
 one or two as examples I am prepared to listen to you and
 indeed it also makes it easier for everybody else.
     MR. KING:    Sir, if you were to turn to No. 11 to start
with, which is the submissions to you of      the Jonesfamily,
Richard Jones, I do not knowwhether you have been given one
or two documents.    I have two documents in relation to Mr.
Jones one headed "Dear Miss Steel" and one headed "Dear Mr.
King".
     THE CORONER:    No. 11, did you say?
     MR. KING:   Yes, sir.    I beg your pardon, sir, it is
No. 10.   Sir, if you look --
      THE CORONER:    Mr. King, may I just stop you for one
moment because something has occurred to me, and I have been
reminded, which I ought to say to the Press before we go
further?    The session this morning is being heard wxthout
the Jury and the reason we have not got the Jury is because
we are dealing with legal points.     That means no doubt that
you can report we are in session but you should not actually
report what is being said.     You will no doubt be familxar
with the provisions of Subsection 2 of Section 4 of the
Contempt of Court Act and I say you must not report what we
are discussing.     If we had wanted the Jury to hear we would
have had them present but we do not wish them to hear at thxs
stage.    You may, when we have finished the Inquest, if you
still feel it is a reportable and interesting aspect then, of
course, that is a different matter but for the moment please
do not report the content of the legal matters we are
 discussing.    Mr. King, I am sorry to interrupt you, would
 you continue?
     MR. KING:   Sir, the document I am looking at and I
appreciate those alongside me are not looking at any document
but it is just to help you is one headed to myself, "Dear Mr
King".
      THE CORONER:   I have a document headed "Dear Miss
 Steel" dated 22nd October.
      MR. KING:     Sir, this is dated 7th November.
      THE CORONER:   I have not got it I am afraid.    It is
 not in front of me.
      MR. KING:   I apologise for that and I will take you
 through, if I may, through five points which are raised by
 Mr. and Mrs. Jones.   Sir, they make the basic point that the
 report into the death of their loved one, Richard, was
 certified at 1600 hours in the temporary mortuary and,
 therefore, so far as the family are concerned, so far as
 evidence is concerned, they presume, as they say they must be
                                                        7




entitled to, up to that time the evidence of death is not
clear as having already occurred.
     Point No. 2, sir, is extracted from the evidence given
by Dr. Gumpert at the Inquest already held here and in fact
it was evidence given on the occasion of Kevin Tyrrell and,
sir, it is a quotation from his evidence which you may
recall:
     "I would like to observe that feeling the carotid pulse
     is quite difficult in someone who has a low blood
     pressure as would have been here.   In fact it can be .so ■
     difficult it is impossible and you have to have an
     electrocardiogram on to know whether the heart has
     stopped or not.”
     Then there is the statement of Mr. Eccleston, which is
certainly a statement in the large bundle of statements given
to the West Midlands Police, and indeed Mr. Eccleston gave
evidence to the Taylor Inquiry in which he says this:

                                  /"For an extremely long.
                                                                                    /




   '   " f o r a n e x t r e m e l y l o n g t i m e we w e r e w i t h o u t a n / f o r m
       o f m e d i c a l e q u ip m e n t o f any d e s c r i p t i o n .      I still
       c a n n o t u n d e r s t a n d why t h e l o c a l h e a l t h a u t h o r i t y s
       m a jo r m e d i c a l d i s a s t e r team were n o t c a l l e d upon.            I
       understand th a t a l l h e a lth a u t h o r i t i e s in th is
       c o u n t r y have a major. d i s a s t e r p o l i c y .         It is
       im p o ssib le a c c u r a te ly to e stim a te the d i f f e r e n c e t h i s
       w o u l d h a v e made i n s a v i n g l i f e .        I do, however,
       h e l i e v e t h a t t h e L i v e r p o o l f a n s s h o u l d h a v e been
       given tne chance".

And t h e q u e s t i o n r a i s e d by Mr. a n d M r s . J o n e s i s t h i s ,
sir:    t n e r e was a m a j o r i n c i d e n t v e h i c l e .     Why was i t n o t
called?       Lack o f e q u ip m e n t u n d o u b t e d l y r e s u l t e d i n d e a t h s .

          S ir , I pause tn e r e .        Of c o u r s e , Mr. a n d M r s . J o n e s
w e r e n o t t h e r e a n d o f c o u r s e t h e y a r e n o t e x p e r t s , b u t you
w i l l s e e , s i r , from t h e b a s i s of t h a t e v i d e n c e t h e y a r e
f i r m l y o f t h e b e l i e f t h a t one c a n n o t j u s t i g n o r e an
i n q u i r y , an i n q u e s t , i n t o t h a t a s p e c t .

          S i r , n u m b e r 4 p o i n t made by Mir. a n d M r s . J o n e s c o me s
from t h e s t a t e m e n t made, a g a i n i n t h e l a r g e b u n d l e , s i r ,
from Dr. G ly nn P h i l l i p s , p a r t i c u l a r l y w h e r e h e s a y s t h a t
a f t e r 3 . 1 5 p.m . he g a v e mouth t o mout r e s u s c i t a t i o n t o a
man f o r 15 m i n u t e s , a n d j u s t a s h e w3: g i v i n g u p t h e h e a r t
s p r a n g t o l i f e , a n d a f t e r t h a t - t h e man s t a r t e d b r e a t h i n g
on h i s o wn.         We know t h a t t h i s d o e s n o t p r o v e t h i s man
l i v e d , o r i f h e d i d h e may h a v e b e e n b r a i n d a m a g e d , b u t
t h e p o i n t we a r e t r y i n g t o p u t a c r o s s t o t h e c o r o n e r i s
t h a t a f t e r 3 . 1 5 p . m . n o t a l l t h e p e o p l e who w e r e l a t e r
c e r t i f i e d d§ad were n e c e s s a r i l y dead .

          S i r , f i n a l l y Mr. a n d M r s . J o n e s d i r e c t y o u r a t t e n t i o n
t o t h e l o n g s t a t e m e n t w h i c h I am s u r e y o u h a v e s e e n , s i r ,
of Dr. J o h n A sn ton i n w hich t n e r e i s a s e r i e s o f r e a s o n e d
c r i t i c a l c o m m e n t s on t h e d i s o r g a n i s a t i o n o f t h e n t e d i c a l
and t h e r e s c u e a t t e m p t s , h o n e s t and i n good f a i t h tn o u g h
th ey w ere, a f t e r tn e p e o p le were b ro u g h t o f f t h e t e r r a c e s .

           S i r , t h a t i s Mr. a n d M r s . J o n e s i n t n o s e c o m m e n t s a n d
i n t h e s n o r t l e t t e r , s i r , w h i c h you h a v e , w h i c h y o u h a v e
a l r e a d y r e f e r r e d me t o , s i r , t h e y e m p h a s i s e a n i s s u e a s t o
th e f a i l u r e to implement . t r i a g e a f t e r th e d i s a s t e r
h a p p e n e d , a g a i n , c o n c e n t r a t i n g on w h a t D r . G u m p e r t h a s
s a i d as to th e f a c t t h a t w ith o u t an e l e c t r o - c a r d i o g r a m i t
i s n o t p o s s i b l e t o know w - x e t h e r a h e a r t h a s s t o p p p e d .

          S i r , c a n I move on f r o m Mr. a n d M r s . J o n e s ' c o m m e n t s
 a n d j a s t g i v e y o u o n e o r two m o r e e x a m p l e s - I a p p r e c i a t e
 t h a t i n ma n/ ways i t i s r e p e t i t i o u s b u t i t i s m a k i n g t h e
 p o i n t - t o number 14, s i r , w hich i s in t h e c a s e o f W illia m
 Roy P e m b e r t o n .

         THE CORONER:             And t h i s    one i s     addressed        to   you.
    '    MR. KING:            S ir, i t is not often th at in s tru c tio n s             to
Counsel a r e g iv e n in advance to th e T r i b u n a l , and I
s u s p e c t , s i r , t h a t i t i s n o t a w i s e move i n m o s t c a s e s .

       THE CORONER:            You a r e    probably       right.

          MR. KING:          S i r , i t was a n e f f o r t i n t n e r e l a t i v e l y
s h o r t t i m e s i n c e we w e r e b e f o r e y o u t o p u t b e f o r e y ou t h e
v a r i o u s m a t t e r s which th e f a m i l i e s wished to p l a c e b e f o r e
yo u a n d i t was f e l t t h i s was t h e e a s i e s t way t o d o s o ,
sir.

          S i r , i f I c a n t h e n t u r n t o Mr. P e m b e r t o n , y o u w i l l
s e e t h a t he makes t h e f o l l o w i n g p o i n t s :         t h e r e p o r t into
t h e d e a t h o f h i s l o v e d o n e Roy t h a t l i f e a g a i n i n h i s c a s e
was p r o n o u n c e d e x t i n c t a t 1 6 . 0 0 h o u r s h o u r s , a n d a g a i n i n
the absence of m edical evidence to the c o n t r a r y , the
f a m i l y c a n o n l y a s s u m e t h a t t h e i r l o v e d o n e was a l i v e
u n t i l t h a t h o u r , a n d s i r , i f y o u t h e n go t o p a r a g r a p h 3 o f
t h a t d o c u m e n t you w i l l s e e t h e r e i s a r e f e r e n c e t o t n e
s t a t e m e n t o f Mr. S a x t o n o f t h e S t . J o h n ' s A m b u l a n c e
S e r v i c e , b e c a u s e he r e f e r s t o t n e r e s u s c i t a t i o n o f a young
man a t 1 5 . 5 0 h o u r s , i n d i c a t i n g i n t h e h e a r t - f e l t v i e w o f
Mr. P e m b e r t o n , a s w i t h a l l t h e o t h e r f a m i l i e s , t h a t d e a t h
must have o c c u r r e d a f t e r 3 . 1 5 p.m.

           A g a i n h e r e f e r s y o u , s i r , i n p a r a g r a p h A, t o t h e
s t a t e m e n t o f D r . B y r n e when h e q u o t e s t h a t h e wa s
a p p r o a c n e d by a s e n i o r P o l i c e O f f i c e r a n d a s k e d t o s t a r t
c e r t i f y i n g t h e d e a d a s t h e r e may b e s ome s t i l l a l i v e , a n d
s i r , a g a i n , t h e p o i n t h a s b e e n ma de t h a t a s we o n l y know
f o r c e r t a i n t h a t d e a t h was a t 4 o ' c l o c k , t o i g n o r e t h e s e
c o n c e rn s as to the adequacy o f the a t t e n t i o n s and the
rescu e e f f o r t s a f t e r 3.15 is to not i n v e s t i g a t e what could
w e l l h a v e b e e n a m a j o r r e a s o n f o r why s o m e b o d y d i e d a n d
did not su rv iv e.

          T h e f i n a l p o i n t o n Mr. P e m b e r t o n , s i r , i n p a r a g r a p h
7, i s th e q u e s t i o n he a s k s :        why was i t t h a t t h e v e r y
s e r i o u s l y i l l a n d d y i n g , a n d t h o s e who a p p e a r e d t o b e
dead , were not tak en to th e h o s p i t a l in th e very f i r s t
a v a i l a b l e a m b u l a n c e , and he r a i s e s h i m s e l f t h e i s s u e a s t o
why t h e s e r i o u s a c c i d e n t r e s p o n s e v e h i c l e wa s n o t c a l l e d
o u t t o t h e s t a d i u m , a s he u n d e r s t a n d s to be t h e c a s e .

          S ir, if       I can th e n d e a l w i t h p e r h a p s one ex am p le of
m in u tia e , of        d e t a i l , i f one t u r n s t o    the cases of the
Hicks s i s t e r s , of V i c t o r i a and Sarah H ic k s, s i r , wnich i s
a t n u m b e r s 7 a nd 3 i n y o u r l i s t , s i r , you w i l l n o t i c e t h e
c a s e o f V i c t o r i a , t h a t on t h e f a c e o f t h e s u mma r y w n i c h
W3S p r o d u c e d      a t the In q u e st p r io r to        t o d a y , t h e r e was a
gap in tim e . There i s a gap in time betw een 1 5 .2 1 , which
was t h e t i m e when P o l i c e C o n s t a b l e M c G u i n n e s s r e s c u e d
V i c t o r i a f r o m a p i l e o f t h o s e who u n f o r t u n a t e l y h a d
f a l l e n , a n d 1 5 . 2 3 wnen Mr. T u r n e r was s e e n h e l p i n g
V ic to r ia out onto the p itc h .
                                                                                                                10




          ' Mr. H i c k s h a s d r a w n t o y o u r a t t e n t i o n , s i r , t h a t he
    has drawn to t h e a t t e n t i o n o f t h i s I n q u e s t t h e e v i d e n c e of
    a g e n t l e m a n , a Mr. T a y l o r , w h o s e e v i d e n c e i s t h a t h e was
    on t h e v e r y t e r r a c e w h e r e V i c t o r i a was a f t e r s h e h a d b e e n
B   " r e s c u e d " by P . C . M c G u i n n e s s , a n d t h a t f o r some s i x
    m i n u t e s he d i d n o t , i n f a c t , r e s u s c i t a t e b e c a u s e t h e p o o r
    man d i d n o t know w h a t t o d o , a n d o n e c a n u n d e r s t a n d t h a t ,
    b u t a s Mr. H i c k s s a y s , t h o s e s i x m i n u t e s c o u l d h a v e b e e n
    v i t a l , to, t h e . . . . . s u r v i v a l o f h i s l o v e d , o n e V i c t o r i a . * , h a d s h e
    r e c e i v e d ttie p r o p e r a t t e n t i o n .

             S i r , t h a t i s j u s t an example of m a t t e r s w h ic h ,                       i n Mr.
    H i c k s ' s s u b m i s s i o n t o y o u , t h r o u g h me, o u g h t t o b e
    inv estig ated.

              S i r , i f one t u r n s t o S a r a h H icks a t number 8, a g a i n
    i f o n e l o o k s a t t h e t i m i n g s we know t h a t a t 6-m i n u t e s -
    p a s t - 3 a M i s s M c C a f f e r y s e e s S a r a h , who c l e a r l y h a s
    f a l l e n , a n d we know a t 2 1 - m i n u t e s - p a s t - 3 , h e l p s t h e f a l l e n
    Sarah through onto the p itc h .                    Again, th e time gap th e r e
    betw een o - m i . i u t e s - ; j a s t - 3 and 2 1 - m i . \ u t e s - p a s t - 3 . We know
    i t was n o t u n t i l 2 0 - p a s t - 4 t h a t D r . B u l l e x a m i n e d S a r a h
    a n d c e r t i f i e d n e r d e a t h , a n d we know f r o m t h e s ummary t h a t
D   i t i s s a i d t h a t a t s ome t i m e b e t w e e n 1 5 . 3 8 a n d 1 5 . 5 0 a n
    u n i d e n t i f i e d me mb e r o f t h e m e d i c a l t e a m s t a t e d i n h i s v i e w
     t h a t S a r a h was a t t h a t t i m e b e y o n d h e l p .

               A l l t h o s e t i r o e s , s i r , go b e y o n d 3 . 1 5 a n d t h e y a g a i n
     i l l u s t r a t e the need in the subm ission of the f a m i l i e s fo r
     ta e tim es a f t e r 3 .1 5 t o be th o ro u g h ly i n v e s t i g a t e d .

              S i r , th o s e a r e j u s t fo u r examples b u t ,         s i r , i f you
     r e a d t i e p a p e r s w n i c h I u n d e r s t a n d a n d I am s u r e y o u h a v e
     they e x p re ss tn e f la v o u r of a l l th e o th e r su b m issio n s
     t h a t , i n f a c t , we c a n n o t know t h a t a c u t o f f p o i n t a t t h i s
     s t a g e i s t h e r i g h t c u t o f f p o i n t a t 3 . 1 5 and i t i s
     p r e m a t u r e , s i r , s o t o d o , i n my s u b m i s s i o n t o y o u .    That
     i s how I p u t i t .

              THE CORONER:               T h a n k y o u v e r y much i n d e e d , Mr. K i n g .
     I t n i n k w h a t we w i l l now d o i s t o g i v e t h e r e s t o f yo u a n
     o p p o r t u n i t y t o ma*e p o i n t s .       I t h i n k we o u g h t t o s t a r t
     w i t n Mrs. M cB rien.             I t n i n k you would p r o b a b l y s u p p o r t
     what nas been s a i d , b u t i s t h e r e a n y t h i n g i n a d d i t i o n           to
     - m a t Mr. K i n g h a s s a i d t h a t y o u f e e l yo u w o u l d l i k e t o
     t e l l me.          Mrs. N c b r i e n c a n I say i f you a r e more
     c o m f o r t a b l e s i t t i n g down - i n d e e d , t h a t g o e s f o r a l l o f
     you - i f you a r e more c o m f o r t a b l e s i t t i n g down, s i t down.
      I d o n ' t m i n d - i t d o s s n o t make a n y d i f f e r e n c e .       I know
     s ome o f y o u r l e g a l c o l l e a g u e s s i t t i n g a r o u n d y o u a r e u s e d
      t o s t a n d i n g s o t i e v w i l l t e n d t o r i s e , b u t you do w h a t i s
     com fortable.              Mrs. M cBrien, i s t h e r e a n / t h i n g you w ant to
     aj*i *.o w h a t Mr. Kin;; n a s t o l d me?

              tlrtS. McBRI£:«:               No, I go          along w ith e v e r y th in g             that
      Mr.     King has s a i d ,           tn a n k you.



H
                                                                                                    11




         THE CORONER:            I f I s t a r t a t t h a t e n d a n d w o r k my way
    down t h e r o w , i s t h a t s a t i s f a c t o r y t o y o u , g e n t l e m e n a n d
    ladies?    I t i s e a s i e r f o r me.

B          MISS HAMPTON:              I h a v e no s u b m i s s i o n s ,   th a n k you.

           THE CORONER:            Mr.    Hale?

              MR. HALE:           I am s u r e t h a t a t a n a p p r o p r i a t e t i m e y o u
    w i l l i n s t r u c t tn e J u r y and p re s u m a b ly a l s o i n s t r u c t th e
    a d v o c a t e s a s t o how f a r y ou a r e p r e p a r e d t o g o .           As we a l l
    know t h e r e w e r e w e l l o v e r 3 , 0 0 0 w i t n e s s e s .     O b v i o u s l y yo u
    c a n ' t c a l l them a l l .        You w i l l h a v e t o e x e r c i s e some s o r t
    o f s e l e c t i o n a n d yo u w i l l h a v e t o r e s t r i c t t h e a r e a s i n t o
    w h i c h yo u a r e p r e p a r e d t o e n q u i r e f u r t h e r a n d f u r t h e r , on
    t o p o f t : i e e n q u i r i e s ma d e by t n e T a y l o r R e p o r t .      I may be
    over s im p lify in g m a tte rs a l i t t l e , but I th in k i t is very
    w e l l known by e v e r y o n e c o n c e r n e d t h a t t h e P o l i c e , f o r
    exam ple, have a d m itte d n e g l i g e n c e .          T h e r e i s no s e c r e t
    about th a t at a l l .            T here have been c i v i l p r o c e e d i n g s ,
    o t h e r p e o p l e nave been j o i n e d i n thgm, so i t t h e r e f o r e
     s e e m s t o me t o b e a w a s t e o f y o u r t i m e a n d a w a s t e o f
D    e v e r y o n e ' s t i m e i f we a r e j u s t g o i n g t o go o v e r a n d o v e r
     a g a in p o in ts te n d in g m erely to prove t h a t t h i n g s could
     h a v e b e e n d o n e b e t t e r , and o u g h t t o h a v e b e e n d o n e b e t t e r ,
     e v e n a l l o w i n g f o r h i n d s i g h t , s o I am s u r e y o u w i l l b e a r
     t h a t in mind.

            There a r e a r e a s , however, which were n o t e x p lo r e d                   by
     t h e T a y l o r I n q u i r y a n d my l e a r n e d f r i e n d Mr. K i n g h a s
     mentioned one.              There is a ls o the area of . . . .

            THE CORONER:             Wnich on e i n        particular         h a v e you g o t
     in   mind?

               MR. HALE:            A b l a n k e t was p u l l e d down o v e r t h e r e s c u e
     s e r v i c e s , b u t t n e r e was a l s o a l a c k o f i n q u i r y i n t o t i e
     p r e - m a t c h c o n d u c t o f t h e f a n s a n d t h a t I know - I h a v e
     seen tne l i s t of w itn e s s e s - t h a t i s som ething t h a t is
     g o i n g t o be g o n e i n t o , b u t I h o p e we a r e n o t g o i n g t o
     w a s t e a l o t o f t i m e on n e g l i g e n c e a l o n e , b e c a u s e one i t e m
     o f n e g l i g e n c e i s t n e s ame a s a t n o u s a n d i t e m s o f
     n e g l i g e n c e , a n d y o u w i l l no d o u b t i n s t r u c t t n e J u r y on a
     v e rd ic t of m isadventure.

               Wnat we a r e l o o k i n g f o r , I am s u r e , i s s o m e t h i n g
     z o i n g “ 5eyond t h a t , and I would nope t h a t p e o p l e . a r e n ot
     g o in g t o w a s t e t h e i r t i m e , b u t to c o n c e n t r a t e on l o o k i n g
     f o r r e c k l e s s n e s s , som ething t h a t w o u ld .e n a b le -y o u to
     i n s t r u c t the J u r ^ to fin d a v e r d i c t o t h e r than
     m i s a d v e n t u r e , and I would m e re ly m e n tio n t h a t .

            Tnere       i s one o t h e r a s j e c t and t h a t i s e n t i r e l y a
      m atter for       my l e a r n e d f r i e n d Mr. K i n g , b u t I s e e t n a t ne
      represents-       43 f a m i l i e s w i o s e c i r c u m s t a n c e s may n o t a l l be
      th e same.        T n e r e was a p r o b l e m a t t n e T a y l o r I n q u i r y wnen



H
t h e ' P o l i c e w e r e r e p r e s e n t e d by o n e r e p r e s e n t a t i v e a n d i t
s u b s e q u e n tly t r a n s p i r e d t h a t i t co u ld w e ll have been
b e t t e r i f t h e r e had been s e p a r a t e r e p r e s e n t a t i o n o v e r
certain aspects.                H appily, tnose a s p e c ts have n ot
m a t e r i a l i s e d a n d n o r e a l h a r m was d o n e .

          I w o u ld l i k e t o s e e an end t o            t h i s I n q u e s t whe n i t i
o v e r and I would n o t w a n t somebody                   coming b a ck a g a i n and
asking" f o r i t to b e - r e <   —o^pefied^afid          s - t - a r t e d - a l l over**again
because of la ck of r e p r e s e n t a t i o n            s e p a r a t e l y by s ome
p e o p l e wao may b e a l l e g e d t o h a v e          played a p a r t in the
deatns.




            /T nat     is   a m a t t e r which..-ny l e a r n e d       friend
                                                        13




That is a matter which my learned friend will, I am sure, fully
understand. I merely mention it now so it is not said that it is
mentioned with hindsight afterwards. There may, indeed, be a
great deal of difference between the responsibility or lack of
responsibility on the part of some of those who died, and
separate representation would in normal circumstances be required
because it may be that one family would make an allegation
against another. Again, I give as an example,, and I am not
saying that any such person exists, but if it were shown that
someone who died had come “at the very last minute with a-great »<
deal of alcohol inside him and had made his way right down to the
front, pushing and crushing, and had caused some deaths, then
that would be a matter where he or his relatives might well
require to be separately represented.
     THE CORONER:   Yes, Mr. Manning, if I may say so, the issue
of representation is (a) for the families, because that is to
whom you were applying your mind, and (b) for the legal
representatives who obviously have to weigh whatever conflict of
interest there may be between their clients. . So that is really
not a matter for me, and it is not probably even a matter for
you. It is a matter for Mr. King and his instructing solicitors,
and. of course, primarily for the parties themselves.
     Perhaps I should say one other thing. You have mentioned a
couple of verdicts and matters like that. I am not getting into
an argument at this stage as to what verdict if any the Jury
would bring in, or even what directions, if any, I am going to
give them, because the objective of this Inquest as far as it has
one is to hear the evidence and to enable the Jurv to reach a
verdict on the evidence. I have the advantage of having seen
loads of statements. I do acknowledge that, but experience has
taught me in much simpler Inquests than this that it is not
infrequent that what you think is going to be the verdict does
not turn out to be because the evidence when it actually comes,
or the nuance, if you like, or the innuendoes, or any word you
care to use, is different to what I had anticipated from just
looking at the statement. So I have made it as far as I am
able a rule not to predetermine the answer but to wait until I
have heard the evidence. 1 say this not as a criticism of you
but just as a clarification for everybody. I do intend to
listen to what is said, which is the reason why we are here
this morning. Obviously, I have read statements and I have
ideas myself, but the crucial thing is the Jury, they have got
to make up their mind, and they do it in the light of the
evidence, and I will do my best. I can't do more than that. I
am sorry. Mr. Payne.
     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, with regard to the .submissions by Mr.
King, the position of the Chief Constable is that he is neutral.
I have got no-submissions to make about what Mr. King is asking
you to do, but I wish it to be heard that the position of the
Chief Constable is that he wants to do everything he can to
assist you in the conduct of this Inquest, and certainly does not
wish to do anything to put in the way of Mr. King any obstruction
into any enquiry that he wants to make on behalf of the relatives
of the people who died. Sir. that is the position.
     As a comment on what Mr. King has said, strictly it appears
to us that he is saying that there is the possibility, to put it
in a legal term, of a novus actus. i.e. something which
intervened after the crushing and before the deaths, which caused
or contributed to the deaths of at least some of the people, and
the response of the Chief Constable to that submission, if I put
it correctly, is that we can Quite see that is something which
people would wish to see investigated on the question of how it
ca®e!about .- I-.        that, commeat. in an. endeavour to be .
helpful, but the position of the Chief Constable is that he has
no submissions one way or the other.
     May I just say while I am on my feet with regard to what Mr.
Hale has just said, as a matter of fact it is not correct that
the Police have admitted negligence. It is well known and has
been well publicised that what has happened is that the Police
have agreed to make payments to those people who were injured   -d
to the dependents of those who died, and that such payments are
in the process of being made. Also there has been a civil action
in respect of apportionment of liability in respect of those
matters.
     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much, indeed. I accept
entirely what you say and in a sense I accept what Mr. Manning
says as well. It is not really relevant to my proceedings
whether or not negligence has been admitted or not admitted. It
is neither here nor there. So I did not comment on it, but I
appreciate what you have said.
     MR. ISAACS:   I think, sir, in fact, that is Mr. Hale.     Mr.
Manning sits to my left.
     THE CORONER:      I beg your pardon.   Forgive me, please, both
of you.
     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I have no submissions.  It is entirely s
matter for you having regard to the breadth or depth which you
consider appropriate for this particular Inquest.
      MR. MANNING:   Sir, I have exactly similar comments as far
 as my client is concerned.
      MISS SINCLAIR:      I have no submissions on this matter, sir.

      MR. CATCHPOLE:   I add to that. The matter is entirely for
 you. You are the best person, having read all the evidence, to
 make that judgment, and no doubt that was the reason we had, as
 you have already pointed out, sir, a fairly detailed
 investigation into the earlier Inquests.
      MR. CALLAGHAN:   Sir, this is not an application of which I
 have had previous notice, and which in the circumstances of the
 application is some surprise to me. All I think I should, sir,
 is this is not the time and place for some sort of Public Inquiry
 into the activities of the Ambulance Service and the Emergency
 Services, and it is not appropriate to bring such a matter into
th£ arena as a sort of side wind.   Beyond that, sir, it is
obviously a matter for you.
     MISS ADDELMANN:   Sir, I have no observations or submissions
about the point, and I can do no better than echo those remarks
made by my learned friend, Mr. Catchpole.
     MR. RUSSELL:   I too endorse those remarks. None of us,
other than my learned friend, Mr. King, has seen the original
statements, and so are being invited to comment upon a course in
the dark because we have not seen the nature of an example of the
material he now seeks to rely upon. I recognise it is a matter
for you, and if you decide I don't take a stance one way or the
other.
     THE CORONER:   Shall I then deal with this point? Is there
anybody else wants to say anything on this issue? Mr. King?
     MR. KING:   Sir, only to emphasise that it is not a side
wind which I am embarking on. I am seeking to address causes,
contributory causes to the deaths, and I am concentrating on
that, and it is in that context I have invited the Court to look
beyond 3.15, and certainly we are Sealing with it from the point
of view of possibilities of novus actus. yes-, I accept that.

     THE CORONER:   I have listened hopefully with attention, and
perhaps I ought to say this to you, Mr. Russell, before I go on.
I know you have not had the advantage of seeing the letter, but
it is only fair to say Mr. King in his summary of the points as
far as I can see summarised the points which his clients were
making entirely fairly. There is nothing extra in the letter, so
to speak, except connecting words, basically. That is for your
reassurance, if I can put it like that.
     Throughout, and in fact almost from the word "go” on the
15th April. 1989, when I first learned about this incident, one
of the underlying criteria which I tried to apply in thinking
how to set about dealing with the Inquests was to as far as
possible treat the Inquests as if they were completely
standard, if I can put it like that - it is a horrible word -
but completely normal Inquests. The fact that it was national
news, that it was 95 young people, that it created a terrible
amount of anxiety, pain and so on, in some ways is unique
because of the numbers, but each individual death I dealt with
families are in exactly the same situation, and I tried to
think and I still try to think, what and how would I set about
if I had had a road traffic incident or a works accident as
opposed to an incident in a football stadium.  I have thought
back on many occasions to say a road traffic incident where
somebody might have suffered a serious head injury. That
person may well have bsen at the road side for X number of
minutes while one was waiting for the ambulance services to
attend. They may then have been taken by an ambulance to a
hospital. They may have gone into the resuscitation room.
They may have been worked on by the doctors. They may have gone
into hospital and they may have then died two. three days, may
 be longer after the incident. Or alternatively, you could have
                                                        16




a situation where by chance the road traffic incident occurs on
the road and a doctor happens to be. He walks up to the
patient, looks and says, "I am sorry, the injury is so severe
that this person is dead". Or you could have a situation where
the person has this road traffic incident and is taken into
hospital and is certified dead on arrival.
     In none of those instances would I as a matter of routine
call evidence of what happened after the incident ;itself was
concerned, and indeed, the pathologists' in the 'example? which i
have used would have given as cause of death serious head injury,
for instance, or multiple injuries with fracture of the skull, or
something of that nature. It seems to me that the fact that the •
person may survive an injury for a number of minutes or hours or
even days, is not the question which I as Coroner have to
consider. My task is to establish who the person was - I am
sorry to repeat this - where he died, when he died and how he
died. It is from my understanding of the pathological evidenc .
the overwhelming pathological evidence is and was that the people
died as a result of crushing or traumatic asphyxia. Different
words were used, but the sense was always the same. The
underlying problem which these poof men and women were subjected
to was an inability to breathe. >
     That does not mean to say that some of them did not in fact
respire for a period of time or even have a heart beat
thereafter, but the damage was done, and indeed, both Dr.
Gumpert, Dr. Slater, Prof. Usher, who dealt with this question in
an overall point of view, all in fact said, as I understand their
evidence, exactly the same.
     One of the points, Mr. King, which you have made is that
because ;a person has not been certified dead until a particular
point in time, one must therefore assume that he is alive. With
the greatest respect I don’t accept that as a reasonable -
"reasonable" is a very unkind word — as a proposition which I
would take. Indeed,-if you think about it for a moment I am l .*e
you would agree with me, if a body were to be found in a
macerated state one would call a doctor who would
certify death, but it would be a little bit illogical to
assume that that particular body was actually alive
until that point.
      The issue of death certification and the timing of it is
 important, because one wants to have if possible certainty. That
 is the first thing. Secondly, the conventional way of
 establishing a person is definite dead is that a medical man says
 so. but to draw the conclusion that until a medical man has said
 so a person is alive is in my view an impossible proposition to
 maintain.




                     /I do understand the anxiety.
          I do u n d e r s t a n d t h e a n x i e t y w h i c h a l o t o f t h e f a m i l i e s
have about t h i s i s s u e , b u t as I have a lre a d y s a id the
overwhelming m e d ic a l e v id e n c e , th e p a t h o l o g i c a l e v id e n c e ,
a n d t h a t i s . t h e c r u c i a l o n e I am i n t e r e s t e d m , i s t h e
d a m a g e t h a t c a u s e d t h e d e a t h wa s d o n e d u e t o t h e c r u s h i n g .

          Now I p a c k e d t h e a r r i v a l o f t h e f i r s t a m b u l a n c e n o t
because th e re is a n y th in g m agical about t h a t bu t because
when we l o o k a t t h e v i d e o s we c a n a c t u a l l y s e e t h a t a n d i t
is a convenient m arker, th a t is a l l .                        I f t h e f l *;St
am bulance had a r r i v e d a t 3 .3 0 I would h a v e p i c k e d t h a t t i m e .
I t i s s im p ly i n t e n d e d a s a m a r k e r , b u t , and t h i s i s an
im portant p o in t, I consid ered the m edical evidence.                                  The
m e d i c a l e v i d e n c e w a s t h a t o n c e - I am n o t q u o t i n g v e r b a t i m -
b u t t h e s e n s e o f w hat P r o f e s s o r U sher s a i d , and, i n d e e d , t h e
o t h e r s a s w e l l , was t h a t o n c e t h e c h e s t was f i x e d s o t h a t
r e s p i r a t i o n c o u l d no l o n g e r t a k e p l a c e , t h e n i r r e c o v e r a b l e
b r a i n damage would o c c u r b e tw e e n f o u r and s i x m i n u t e s .
That is the p o in t.
          Now I f e l t t h a t t h e e v i d e n c e ' w h i c h I h a d h e a r d a n d i n
th e l i g h t o f what I had r e a d t h a t th e l a t e s t t i m e , th e
l a t e s t , wh e n t h i s p e r m a n e n t f i x a t i o n c o u l d h a v e a r i s e n w o u l d
h a v e b e e n a p p r o x i m a t e l y s i x m i n u t e s p a s t , w h i c h i s when t h e
match s to p p e d .          I t a l m o s t c e r t a i n l y was b e f o r e , b u t l e t u s
assume s i x m i n u t e s p a s t , add a n o t h e r s i x m i n u t e s t o t h a t ,
t h a t i s t w e l v e m i n u t e s p a s t and t h e n a s I say I w en t on to
fin d a c o n v e n ie n t m arker beyond t h a t p o i n t in tim e .                       In
o t h e r w o r d s , w h a t I am t r y i n g t o s a y i s I d i d n o t j u s t p i c k
th e a r r i v a l of t h e f i r s t ambulance e n t i r e l y o u t o f th e b lu e ,
I d i d t r y a n d c o n s i d e r i n t h e l i g h t o f t h e e v i d e n c e w h i c h we
ha d h e a r d w h a t c o u l d h a v e b e e n t h e l a t e s t t i m e when t h e r e a l
dam age was d o n e .
           I have a l r e a d y i n d i c a t e d t h a t a t t h e - I w i l l c a l l them
 t h e i n t e r i m i n q u e s t s i f I may j u s t f o r t h e s a k e o f a na me
 we d i d e n d e a v o u r t o g i v e a g r e a t d e a l m o r e i n f o r m a t i o n o r
 e v i d e n c e t h a n we w o u l d e v e r d o i n a n o r m a l i n q u e s t a n d m
 t h a t s e n s e I b r o k e my own r u l e s t r a i g h t a w a y b e c a u s e I s a i d
 I wanted to t r e a t t h i s m a t t e r as i f i t were a c o m p le te ly
 s t a n d a r d n o rm a l r o a d t r a f f i c i n c i d e n t , i f you l i k e .    I
 d i d n ' t , I gave a g r e a t d e a l o f in fo rm a tio n f o r v a r io u s
 r e a s o n s w h i c h I d o n ' t n e e d t o go i n t o n o w .

          As a n a s i d e I c a n a s s u r e y o u t h a t w i t h i n t h e l i m i t s o f
 o u r a b i l i t y t h e s u m m a r i e s a n d t h e e v i d e n c e w h i c h was g i v e n
 was an a c c u r a t e r e f l e c t i o n o f w h a t p e o p l e s a i d a n d i f t h e r e
 wa s a g a p , f o r i n s t a n c e , a s h a s b e e n s u g g e s t e d i n some c a s e s
 which i s u n e x p l a i n e d , th e re a s o n w a s n 't b e c a u se t h e r e i s
 some h i d d e n e v i d e n c e w h i c h we h a v e p u t u n d e r t h e c u r t a i n ,
 b u t b e c a u s e we d i d n ' t k now o f i t o r c o u l d n t f i n d i t o r i t
 d o e sn 't e x is t.      The t r u t h o f th e m a t t e r , o f c o u r s e , i s t h a t
 p e o p l e w e r e n ' t b e i n g w a t c h e d i n d i v i d u a l l y c o n t i n u o u s l y by
somebody e l s e         r e c o r d i n g w h a t was h a p p e n i n g . I t is e n tire ly
f o r t u i t o u s as   to w hether or no t th e re is a w itn e ss or
w i t n e s s e s who    happens (a ) to have been w ith a p e rs o n ,
who r e m e m b e r s    who h e i s a n d ( c ) h a s s ome i d e a o f t h e t i m i n g .

         Some o f y o u who w e r e t h e r e w i l l r e m e m b e r t h a t i n s o me
c a s e s we h a d a g r e a t d e a l o f e v i d e n c e w i t h r e g a r d t o w h a t
h a d h a p p e n e d p o s t - c r u s h , s h a l l I s a y , a n d i n o t h e r s we
next to n o th in g because I t is very sad p a r t i c u l a r l y fo r
t h o s e f a m i l i e s w h e r e we h a v e g o t s o l i t t l e t o s h a r e w1^
t h e m , b u t we a r e l i v i n g i n t h e r e a l w o r l d a n d m s ome c a s e s
t h e r e wa s o v e r w h e l m i n g - f o r i n s t a n c e , t h e r e w e r e d o z e n s o f
p h o t o g r a p h s a s y o u know - s ome o f t h e p e o p l e w e r e a l l o
t h e n e w s p a p e r s a n d i n o t h e r s we c o u l d n o t f i n d a n y .
c a n ' t be h e l p e d , i t i s j u s t one of th o s e t h i n g s .

          B e a r i n g i n mind t h a t I i n t e n d a t t h i s s t a g e t o d e a l
w i t h t h e q u e s t i o n o f how, and I do i n t e n d t o d e a l w i t h i t
r e a s o n a b l y c o m p r e h e n s i v e l y , I h a v e t o remember two t h i n g s ,
t h a t my p o w e r s a r e l i m i t e d .          I don t h av e an open ended
a u t h o r i t y to c a r r y o u t an i n v e s t i g a t i o n .        The R u l e s and t h e
A ct, in d e e d , a r e q u i t e c l e a r as to th e l i m i t s o f what th e
coro n al in q u iry should be.                      I ad m it t h a t t h e word        how i s
a l i t t l e b i t f l e x i b l e a n d a s s u m i n g we c a l l a l l t h o s e
w i t n e s s e s on t h a t p r e l i m i n a r y l i s t w h i c h I h a v e c i r c u l a t e d
h o p e you w i l l a g r e e t h a t I h a v e .been r e a s o n a b l y f l e x i b l e
w i t h t h a t w o r d , b u t n e v e r t h e l e s s I do h a v e t o d r a w a
 I n d e e d , t h i s was d o n e i n o t h e r i n q u e s t s .          I f you             ^ack
 to the Zeebrugge in q u e s t , f o r in s ta n c e .                 T h e 1 ®a r n e ^ , ^ ° P ® r
 t h e r e drew a l i n e .            He wa s j u d i c i a l l y r e v i e w e d o n w h e r e h e
 drew i t and i n t h a t p a r t i c u l a r c a s e t h e D i v i s i o n a l c ° u j t o r
 t h e C o u r t o f A p p e a l , I c a n ' t remember now, c l e a r l y s a i d t h a t
 a l i n e has to be drawn and i n th e Zeebrugge c a s e th e y a g re e d
 i t wa s r i g h t .         I am d o i n g my b e s t .          I am t r y i n g t o d r a w a
 l i n e as w e ll.
          I f you t h i n k o f t h e o t h e r m a jo r d i s a s t e r s w h e re
 i n q u e s t s h a v e a l r e a d y t a k e n p l a c e , you w i l l f i n d t h a t l i n e s
 w ere drawn t h e r e as w e l l and I t h i n k you w i l l f i n d t h a t t h e
 l i n e w i t h r e g a r d t o t h e q u e s t i o n w h i c h we a r e now t h i n k i n g
 a b o u t wa s v e r y , v e r y mu c h t i g h t e r t h a n w h a t we h a v e a l r e a d y
 done.
          In answer to your s u b m issio n , I s t i l l c o n s i d e r t h a t as
 a g e n e r a l p r o p o s i t i o n we a r e g o i n g t o a c c e p t - I am g o i n g t o
 t a k e t h e s e i n q u e s t s a n d d e a l w i t h t h e q u e s t i o n o f how o n t h e
 b a s i s of what happened to about 3.15 o r th e r e a b o u t s .                     I
 h a v e e x p l a i n e d i t t o y o u s o I am n o t g o i n g t o r e p e a t i t a n d
 I b a s e i t m a in ly upon t h e p a t h o l o g i c a l m e d ic a l e v i d e n c e .

            Having s a i d t h a t , I t h i n k i t i s p ro b a b ly r i g h t to say
  b e c a u s e we w i l l b e c a l l i n g w i t n e s s e s i t may b e t h a t s o me o f
  t h e t h i n g s w h i c h w o r r y y o u may b e d e a l t w i t h t o a m i n o r
                                                                                                19




degree but i t is c e r ta in ly           n o t my i n t e n t i o n   to allo w us       to
s t r a y down t h a t p a t h .

          I have a ls o got to say, i t is only r i g h t , t h a t what I
t h i n k y o u a r e r e a l l y i n v i t i n g me t o d o , Mr . K i n g , i s t o h o l d
a f u r t h e r j u d i c i a l in q u ir y i n t o m a tte r s i n t o w hich, as I
u n d e r s t a n d i t , a r e o u t s i d e my a u t h o r i t y a n d sco^>e.         I also
seem t o r e c o l l e c t , a l t h o u g h Lord J u s t i c e T a y l o r s I n q u i r y
i s n ' t - as I h a v e a l r e a d y s a i d t o you a t t h e b u s i n e s s             ^  .■
m e e t i n g , I d o n ' t r e a l l y w a n t t o s p e n d t o o muc h t i m e on i t -
b u t I do r e c o l l e c t t h a t t h e emergency s e r v i c e s w ere v e ry
w ell re p re s e n te d a t t h a t In q u iry and, indeed, a l o t of
d i s c u s s i o n , f r o m my r e a d i n g o f t h e t r a n s c r i p t s , d i d d e a l
w ith the is s u e s of the m edical re sp o n se .

          W h e t h e r o r n o t t h d t was s a t i s f a c t o r y , w h e t h e r L o r d
J u s t i c e T a y l o r s h o u l d h a v e done m ore, w h e t h e r somebody e l s e
s h o u l d l o o k i n t o t h a t whe n we h a v e f i n i s h e d t h a t i s n o t h i n g
t o d o w i t h me .          H o w e v e r , a s f a r a s I am c o n c e r n e d , my
i n t e n t i o n i s t o s t i c k w i t h w h a t I g a v e y o u a s my i n i t i a l
prelim inary in te n tio n .

          I h a v e , of c o u r s e , a l r e a d y looked th ro u g h th e documents
w h i c h y o u s e n t me a n d i n s o f a r a s i n o n e o r t wo i n s t a n c e s
w itn e s s e s a re m entioned, i f I th in k , and, in d e e d , I have
t h o u g h t t h a t o n e o r two o f t h e s e i n f a c t I t h i n k t h r e e a t
t h e moment, you h a v e g o t a p o i n t .                 I t would p e r h a p s be
a d v a n t a g e o u s t o c a l l t h o s e p e r s o n s a n d we a r e m a k i n g
ap p ro p ria te arrangem ents.                 Please don’ t th in k th a t I have ^
s a i d , " G o o d g r i e f , f i f t y p a g e s , I am n o t d e a l i n g w i t h t h a t ,
I have a lre a d y sp en t q u ite a b i t of tim e th in k in g about i t
and I w i l l h o p e f u l l y have a n o t h e r lo o k .           I f I w ere - which
i s h i g h l y u n l i k e l y - i n a n y p a r t i c u l a r i n s t a n c e t o f e e l we
o u g h t t o go a l i t t l e b i t f u r t h e r d o w n - t h a t l i n e b e c a u s e
t h e r e i s a s p e c i f i c p o i n t t o b e ma d e i n a n y p a r t i c u l a r
in s ta n c e , then I w i l l i f I th in k i t n e c e s s a ry , t e l l you.
However, I t h i n k i t i s u n l i k e l y from w h a t I h a v e s e e n and
what I h a v e r e a d and f o r t h e r e a s o n s which I h a v e g iv e n you.




                   MR. KING:          Sir,    t h a n k y o u fx>r t h a t .
                                                         20




     MR. KING:   Thank you for that.   Can I raise a
separate matter, sir, which is not connected with the issue
of cut off but is connected with the issue of 50 pages
which you have referred to?
     THE CORONER:    I was not saying that as a criticism.

     MR* KING:.  Not,-at all,, sir.   One only has to state
the number of families whom I represent to know that.
Sir, a number of the families have raised specific
questions relating to the summaries which were put before
you in their individual Inquests.     I just give one
example, sir; in the case of No. 13, Jonathan Owens, y°u
will note they have a particular concern as to the timing
when their son came to the ground and a particular concern
to the fact that the summary suggests he joined the crowd
at twenty to three when, in fact, they point out to you
that the positive video evidence shows they were standing,
not having joined the crowd at all, round about ten to or
eight minutes to three.     I put that as an example.
     Are you willing, sir, to go through those individual
questions - not now - and indicate at some stage, perhaps
even in writing to us, whether or not you would be prepared
to reopen those individual Inquests to deal with those -
may be small points in the whole but to the individual
families - important points of factual errors which seem to
have crept in by reference to positive evidence which can
now be laid before you?
     THE CORONER:   My recollection of the papers is that
they affected very few or where I feel it is justified.    I
think those two things go together.   As I say, I have not
had sufficient time to study it in detail but if I were to
think there was a genuine error and that that error was
actually relevant - the incident which you have given me
indicates with respect to the family it is an anxiety to
them - but the crucial point is not whether he was standing
in a crowd or whether he was standing aside but where was
he or at least at what time was he still outside the
ground?   One has to ask the question, does it actually get
us any further forward?
     MR. KING:   May I just interpose to say that the
example I gave was directed as much to the timings outside
the ground in fact.
     THE CORONER:   If we have made a mistake, and we will
be checking that...

      MR. KING:     I am obliged.
                                                           21




     THE CORONER:   When points have been made of actual
error we have been trying to check.   If we agree with
them, as Mr. Fraser and some of the others will remember,
we have made from time to time ad hoc amendments when
points of error were pointed out to us.   I am not averse
to that, not in principle anyway, and if it helps somebody
by clarifying something then I will be pleased to do so but
I would not want necessarily to spend endless time on
clarifying minutiae which, in the final analysis, do not
matter so far as the Jury are concerned.   I am sure you
accept that.
     MR. KING:   I understand that, sir, but I am sure when
families are supplied with an "agreed" summary and they see
matters which are of great concern to them which appear to
be incorrect then obviously they are desirous that that
should be rectified as quickly as possible.
     THE CORONER:     I take it none of you have any adverse
comments on that?
     MR. KING:   What I am going to suggest is that those
instructing me extract from those documents which do
confuse two issues, those which are directed specifically^
to individual questions and they can be then sent to you in
a more orderly manner which enables us the more quickly to
obtain help from you.
     THE CORONER:   That would be very helpful indeed
because then we would really know what we are looking at
and what we have got to concentrate on.

     MR. KING:      Yes, sir.
     THE CORONER:      Are there any other comments from
anybody?
     MR.   ISAACS:   Yes, sir.   I just wondered how we are
going to   deal with these matters.   I know that you started
with Mr.   King and I thought probably what you would do is
run down   the line so to speak.
     THE CORONER:   Yes, we will do that.      Have you got
any submissions to make?
     MISS HAMPTON:   I have no submissions raised by Mr.
King, though he has raised one particular matter which
concerns the City Council with regard to the agreed summary
of facts.   They have been through the proposed summary
prepared for today's hearing and there are one or two
matters, they have instructed me on, which concerns them,
sir.
                                                                  22

                                                          /            '




       THE CORONER:    I think I will be able to short circuit
this submission. You will recollect, ladies and gentlemen,
at the business meeting a suggestion was made that we
should try and extract various paragraphs out of Lord
Justice Taylor's Report as an agreed statement.              I was not
particularly enamoured of the view and for some reason
which at the moment I cannot account for I forgot to
  211 ion st^.   in&stiry^ tticit w© wexfi: actually- in.-.the process
of preparing what we thought was an actual non-
controversial, entirely neutral, account of various
activities which we hoped it would be possible to put to
the Jury so that they had an underlying base on which one
could build the edifice, so to speak.
     In the events which have happened, we have heard from
most of you, if not all, but whilst quite a lot of you have
actually come back and said that you are reasonably happy
with the summary there have been quite a number of you who
have had substantial points of criticism to make with
regard to the content.   Unfortunately some of these points
- and I do not think I am criticising anybody and I am not
going to name any names either - were not made until Friday
or even later.   When I say Friday, I mean Friday late
afternoon.   I have come to the conclusion that we are not
going to use these summaries at all.   We will build, if
that is the right word, what we need as we go along.
     I mention that now, and I will mention it when the
Jury are here, but what we are going to do is that we have
got some two dozen slides which we are going to show.
They are shots of the ground from the air and so on in
order to give the Jury some idea of what we are talking
about and then we will just build the evidence on it as far
as is necessary for the purposes of the Inquest.    I think
that probably deals with your point.    I know that many of
you thought it was a jolly good idea but in the event it
has not worked out.    I thought it was a jolly good idea as
well which is why I intended to do it but I would rather
not.   Some of the points which were made, I could see what
was being said and some were very good, but I would rather
not have anything which people were not entirely happy on.
Some of you might feel you have been pushed because you
have been asked to agree to something.    If you are not
happy with the evidence, that is another matter altogether.
I take no responsibility for what the witnesses say.     We
have to accept the evidence that is given.    Are there any
other submissions you want to make, Miss Hampton?

       MISS HAMPTON:      No, thank you, sir.

       THE CORONER:      Mr. Hale, what about you?
                                                             23




     MR. HALE:   I wonder if you could remind me of your
procedure for documents?   I imagine it is going to be
impractical to assess what documents are going to be
required in advance, never to depart from it, but from time
to time one may wish to put in a document and there will be
the need to supply copies of a document and so on.

      THE CORONER:    Yes, those of you who were at the
business it was suggested in effect we would have a core
document, of bundles.     I was almost persuaded but not
quite.    In the end I decided    on the point that your
instructing solicitors made.        Idid write to them and say
that I did not want to do it that way.       What we do intend
to do is build up the documents as we go along.         We might
find there are not as many as we fear.        I may be wrong but
we have to remember we are dealing with an Inquest and not
a Public Inquiry.     On balance, I think it would be better
to do it this way.     If I am proved wrong we can review it
and if need be I will review it but I think this is the
best, easiest and simplest way of doing it.         I do agree if
you are going to ask me to accept ‘a document then you must
bring with you sufficient copies of that.       It is a waste of
paper, I appreciate, if I decide against you and I do not
adduce it but I do not see how I can get round that
particular problem.      Is there anything else you want to
raise with me?

     MR. HALE:       No.

      THE CORONER:         Yes, Mr. Payne.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I wonder if we may enquire what will
be your practice with regard to the tape recordings and
video recordings, which we understand have been made, of
some of the statements of some of the witnesses you may-be
calling in the Inquest?

     THE CORONER:          Are you talking about the PACE
statements?

      MR. PAYNE:   Yes.   Our enquiry is as to how you have
 it in mind to present that evidence?

      THE CORONER:   The position is that in the normal
 course of my model, if you like, for an Inquest of a
 traffic incident (and forgive me for using such a simple
 example but it is easier for me) what we would normally do
 if there had been a PACE audio recording done of the driver
 is that we would either read the typed version of the
 transcript or, depending on factors, we would listen to the
 audio recording.   In this particular circumstance they are
 very long statements, exceedingly long, and they will take
 hours to go through but I feel it is right we should extend
the practice and hear these statements.   My present
position is that we should listen to the audio tape.   I
think it will be easier than trying to listen to
transcripts but I fear we are in for some pretty heavy
stuff when we get to them.   If there is any change in that
I will announce it.
     M R . PAYNE: Do we understand from that, sir,, that the
playing of the tape will amount to the evidence of the
witness in chief?

     THE CORONER:   Yes.   My normal practice is that what
normally happens is that the officer who has taken the
statement introduces it and I will either read it or play
it as the case may be and then at some convenient point
call the witness who has made the statement.  I will
usually ask then to confirm that it was an accurate
recording or accurate reading of what was said.   I do not
ask them if that is true because that is potentially
incriminating and I do not think it is fair to ask them but
I do ask them whether they have any quarrel with the
transcription, for instance, and then I normally give them
the opportunity to ask any additional questions, subject to
the rules, which the witness may or may not respond to.

     MR.   PAYNE:   Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:    So I do reserve the right to ask
additional questions in chief but I can assure you I shall
explain  all this,Mr. Payne, this afternoon when the Jury
are here and so I will not deal with it now.    Iam very
well aware that the rules of this Court, with regard to
incriminating questions, are different to the procedure at
a Public Inquiry.

     MR. PAYNE:     Thank you very much, sir.




                         /MR. ISAACS.
     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, you have just touched upon the
very matter upon which I make the submission that I
indicated just a short time ago, and that is the question
of the privilege against self-incrimination, and
particularly so far as it affects Chief Superintendent
Duckinfield, whom you know I represent, and the burden of
my submission to you now is to ask you for a ruling that
Cnief Superintendent Duckinfield be not' obliged by you to
give evidence before this   Jury, so that is the burden of
my submission and one can   hear from the ....

     THE CO RON Ei': Just a minute.  Sit down for a minute,
Mr. Isaacs, please.   Ouiet please.  This is my Court and I
am not going to permit interjections of this nature.     Mr.
Isaacs is entirely within his rights to make whatever
submission, legal submission particularly, in the absence
of the Jury - wnich is why they are not here, so that they
cannot hear any of this —    that hs feels it is that he
wishes to put to me.

     It is entirely within my province whether I accept
nis submissions but it is not within yours to try and
either shout him down or - and"I don't think you would
succeed, actually, because he has got a microphone and you
have not - or to indicate to me your feelings on the
matter.

     I have said on several occasions that I want to
conduct these inquests properly and fairly and I intend to
do tnat, but I intend to conduct them in accordance with
the rules.   There are rules and you will hear about them
this afternoon wien the Jury are here, because they have
got to near about them as well, and I will not allow you -
forgive me for putting it like this - to interject.   We
have p.ot to have order in the Court.  I don't want to turf
anybody out, I don't want to wield a big stick.   That is
tne last thing I want to do because I realise that
inquests are very, very charged, aren't they, and you feel
very strongly so I sympathise with you in that regard, but
please remember we are still in a Court and within tne
limits of my ability it is going to be like that.

      Now, Mr.   Isaacs, carry on.

      MR. ISAACS:    Sir, let it be said and let there be no
 mistake about it, I am fully aware that there is a body o?
 opinion w-io would like to have Chief Superintendent
 Duckinfield before this Jury, before you, cross-examined
 upnill and down dale as he was before the Taylor Inquiry
 and you, sir, know that before the Taylor Inquiry ne was
 examined in chief, he was cross-examined and there -are
 loO-plus pages of transcript of tne evidence that ne gave,
 and I know, sir, that I am knocking on an open door wnen I
 submit to you tnat tnis, of course, is a wholly different
 inquiry indeed.
                                                           26




'    Sir, may I pass to you a bundle that has been
prepared which may be of some assistance so far as this
submission is concerned?

     THE CORONER:    Thank you.

      HR. ISAACS:         Sir, so there is no misunderstanding,
the bundle that I have handed in is effectively a bundle
of legal law reports, some press cutting, some
correspondence between, for example, tne Chief Constable
who c o n d u c t ’d part of the inquiry into some of these
matters, and those instructing me, and certain ot.ier press
statements made, for example, by the Director of Public
Prosecutions, and I shall come to them in due course, but
there are no, for example, statements that nobody else has
seen.     They are all documents that are effectively in the
public domain or are matters of correspondence which I
shall be referring to.

     Sir, may I make these preliminary observations:  one,
I accept - indeed it is quite clear - that     Duckinfield
may be considered an important participant in the events
of that day.  That is clear beyond peradventure.
Secondly, that although this is a high profile inquest it
is important, and I know, sir, from the remarks you have
already made, not to disregard the interests of any
individual and I was heartened, if I may put it that way,
to hear you say a relatively short time ago that you would
do your best to treat these inquests as if they were a
normal straightforward inquest, and you made the analogy
which I was proposing to make, though you made it before
me, between this as a high profile inquest and the simple
road traffic accident where tnere is a fatality.

     So, sir, wnat I would wish now to do is to draw your
attention, and I do it this way because there may be those
here uno are not conversant with the principles of law
involved, to my submission under four headings.  Firstly
the lac, second wnat in my submission are the relevant
authorities, thirdly the risks which in my submission Mr.
Duckinfield still faces, and fourthly why in the
circumstances Mr. Duckinfield should not be obliged by you
to come into the witness box.

      I appreciate in saying the last, that a view that
 could be taken, well, he snould come into t^e witness box,
 ne should identify himself, and then you, sir, perhaps
 would say, "I am not going to allow any questions in
 cross-examination to be put to him", for the reasons that
 1 shall go tnrough, but tne essential nature of my
 submission is that he should not even have to go that far,
 and I shall take them in turn.

      The first matter, sir, is the law, and there arc two
 areas where one could look.  These are not in your bundle
 because I anticipate that you will be fully aware of them.
                                                             27




The first, of course, is Rule 22 of the Coroners Rules of
1984, dealing with self-incrimination, sub-Rule 1 - and
tnis is the matter that I referred to:

     "No witness at an inquest shall be obliged to answer
    -any question tending to incriminate nirnself."

And then Section 14 of the Civil Evidence Act, which in ray
submission is to the same effect but I refer to it for the
sake of completeness.  That is the Civil E v i d e n c e A c t of
1968, sub-section 1:

     "The right of a person in any legal proceedings,
     other than criminal proceedings, to refuse to answer
     any question or produce any document or thing if to
     do so would tend to expose that person to proceedings
     for an offence or for the recovery of a penalty, (a)
     snail apply only as regards criminal offences under
     th e law of any part of the U n i t e d Kingdom, and the
     penalties provided for by such law and (b) shall
     include a like right to refuse to answer any question
     or produce any document or thing if to do so would
     tend to expose the husband or wife of that person to
     proceedings for any such criminal offence or for the
     recovery of any such penalties."

I mention sub-section (b) only because it is there not
because, of course, it is in any way relevant to this
rase.

      So, sir, that is the position.  Mr. Duckinfield, as
with any witness Defore you and before the Jury, has that
privilege not to answer any question which may tend to
incriminate him.   So, sir, what does that mean?^ Could I
then ask you to turn to the bundle?   My submission is that
there are two cases, one in the-Court of Appeal one in the
liouse of Lords which followed, in which the House of Lords
confirmed the decision of the Court of Appeal, which gives
you a great deal of guidance as to v lat constitutes a
risk, a tendency, of incrimination.   The first one is that
in tne Court of Appeal, the case of Re Westingnouse
Electric Corporation Uranium Contract Litigation i-iDL
PocKet No. 235 (No. 2 ), reported in tne third volume of
fie nil Indiana Keports of 1977 at oage 717, and I would
ask you at this stage, sir, to find that, which is at .
folder 6.

      Sir, the fact  of that cas-= are wholly different to
t.ne tacts of this, but of course it is the statement of
principle, the ratio of the case to which I wish to refer.
May I first of all read that part of the preamble to t-ie
headnote:

      "Evidenco - Privilege - Incrimination of witness or
      spouse - Belief tnat evidence would expose witness to
      proceedings for offence or recovery of penalty -
'   Reasonable ground for belief - Sufficient to snow
    real and appreciable risk that proceedings would be
    taken or increase of an existing risk of proceedings
             II
     • • •



and then it goes on to deal with discovery of documents,
production of documents and I don't weary you with that
now, sir.

   ’ Sir, T don^t think: it* will be helpful t r y w or to
titose who are listening to this submission to deal with
the facts of that cas , other than to say that it was
action involving an American corporation against RTZ, Rio
Tinto Zinc Corporation Limited, and there was an
application for discovery of documents which Rio Tinto
Zinc did not wish to produce because they said that to
produce those documents would give rise to the possibility
that they may well face prosecution or a penalty within
European Community law, but I now deal with what was held,
and this, sir, is at page 718, a n d t h e s e are the
statements of general principle wnich in my submission
apply to the giving of evidence iii any Court, and
tnerefore before you, sir.       *

     THE COrlQNER:  May I just stop you - the page numbers
are missing off mine.

     MR. ISAACS:    It is the second page - the next page
after the first.   I do apologise, sir.

      "Held - A witness was protected from incriminating
      himself by the prociuction of documents ....

- and, it therefore follows, by the giving of any answer
to any question -

      "... if he could satisfy the court that there was
      reasonable ground to believe that production of the
      documents would furnish evidence against him which
      would be used in proceedings for a penalty ....

- and agai , that was, of course, relevant to that case,
but it applies to proceedings for a criminal offence, and
indeed it could be said, having regard to the wide ambit
of t.ie Coroners Rules, for example proceedings in relation
to .disciplinary matters, wnich of course you, sir, know
Hr. Duckinfield along with otaers still faces.

       "Reasonable ground for the belief might appear from
       tne circumstances of the case or from matters put
       forward by the witness himself, but the witness was
       required to snow only that tnere was a real and
       appreciable risk, or an increase of an existing risk,
       tnat proceedings would be taken against nim for an
       existing penalty offence, and not that proceedings
       were likely to be or would probably be taken."
Yoy will see, sir, as we go through the reports, that one of the
points made by those who objected to the claim to the privilege
was that, "Well, the European Commission already know about this,
and so you are not going to make your position any w o r s e " . We
shall see, sir, I hope, how both the Court of Appeal and the
House of Lords dealt with that proposition, because that might be
a— point that is taken here.

     Sir, knowing that you don't have page numbers could I ask
you to turn to the next page over, page 721, the right-hand side
of the first judgment which was that of t t e ttesit e r i’of the Rolls,'
Lord Denning.  It is the right-hand side of the page, and he
deals with the common law as to self-incrimination.          I ask you to
look first of all at between D-E:

           "Today we are not dealing with a party to a cause, we
           are dealing with a witness.   At common law, when a
           witness is being examined in the witness box or is
           subpoenaed to produce documents to the court then,
           quite understandably, he jnay have something he
           wishes to keep secret to himself so that his
           neighbours or his competitors should not get to
           know of it;  something which he might reasonably
           believe he ought not to be compelled to disclose.
           Not, at any rate, if it exposes him to risk of
           some ill befalling him.   The common law does in
           some circumstances cast its protection over him.
           It adopts the maxim nemo tenetur seipsum p r o d e r e .
           No ;one is bound to furnish evidence against
           himself. It says:   ’If a witness claims the
           protection of the court, on the ground that the
           answer would tend to incriminate himself and there
           appears reasonable ground to believe that it would
           do so, he is not compellable to a n s w e r ” .

Then there is some reference by the Master of the Rolls to a
certain number of cases which I shall not weary you with, because
they are all dealt with in the judgment itself and the statements
of principle in the judgment.

      Could you go down to H on that same page:

           ’’But if it appears to the judge that,       by being
           compelled to answer, a witness m a y ” (I stress the ’’m a y ”
           sir) "may be furnishing evidence against himself, which
           cou ld” (I stress the ’’co u l d ” sir) ”be used against him
           in criminal proceedings or in proceedings for a
           penalty, then his objection should be upheld.

           There is the further point:         once it appears that a
           witness is at risk, then ’great latitude should be
           allowed to him in judging for himself          of the effect of
           any particular q u e s t i o n ’: see R. v. B o y e s ” .
                                                               30




I would ask you to pay particular attention to the next few
lines, sir:

          ” It may only be one link in he chain, or only
          corroborative of existing m a t e r i a l , but still he is not
          bound to answer if he believes on reasonable grounds
          that it could be used against him.          It is not necessary
          for him to show that proceedings are likely to be taken
          against him, or could probably be taken against him.
          I,t m ay be, improbable, that they will be taken but
          nevertheless, if there is some risk of their being
          taken, a real and appreciable risk as distinct from a
          remote or insubstantial risk, then he should not be
          made to answer or to disclose the documents".

I stop there for my purposes in relation to this authority,         at
least in the judgment of Lord Denning.

     Could I then ask you to turn over to the next page.    We now
move to   the judgment of Lord Justice Roskill, which is pages 724
and 725, and I ask you to look at page 725, the right-hand side
of the page at D.

          "It has long been a rule of English law, as Lord
          Denning MR has pointed out, that a person cannot ....
          be required to answer questions or produce documents
          which may lead to his being, if I may be forgiven a
          colloquialism, ’convicted out of his own m o u t h ’. There
          is a long line of authorities dealing with this topic
          of which the earliest cited to us was R . v . B o y e s . a
          decision of the Court of the Q u e e n ’s Bench subsequently
          expressly approved by this court in Re Reyno l d s . ex
          parte R e y n o l d s . Those two cases, and there are others
          to the same effect, show clearly that a mere assertion
          of a claim for privilege on the ground of an alleged
          risk of self-incrimination is not enough to enable th«
          privilege to be successfully claimed.         Nor, of cours
          will the court uphold such a claim for privilege when
          it is made in bad faith.”

May I stop there for a moment, sir.   An example of that would be
this, and there are reported cases to this effect, where a man
has for example, given a statement to the Police.   He goes into
the witness box as a prosecution witness.   Mav be because he has
been given immunity he says, ”1 do not wish to answer these
questions because the answers may incriminate me", when in fact
he does not wish to protect himself but what he is trying to do
is to protect another by not giving that'evidence, for example, a
previous employer or a friend.  In those circumstances he would
not be acting in good faith but in bad faith and the privilege
would not be upheld.

At F:

           ’’The first question which a court must ask itself is
           whether the facts proved in evidence disclose the
           commission of an offence, in some cases a criminal
                                                             31




           offence.         The first question here is whether those
           facts disclose that there is a liability on Rio Tinto
           for .what counsel for Rio Tinto called ’a penalty
           o f f e n c e ’......

           What, then is the degree of risk of penalty proceedings
           following?        It seems to me that once a party to legal
           proceedings who is resisting production of documents
           can show facts which establish the existence of a
           penalty offence (or in other cases the commission of a
           criminal offence) the courts should be slow to deprive
           that party of his privilege against self-incrimination,
           which the common law now for some three centuries, and-
           s 14 of the Civil Evidence Act 1968 today, accords him.
           In the absence of bad faith, to say that there is no
           risk of proceedings may in all but the plainest cases
           involve a court claiming for itself a degree of
           prescient foresight to which it would not be wise to
           pretend for it its forecast were wrong and if
           proceedings and penalties were to follow, damage will
           or at least may be done by an erroneous decision of the
            court which it would not be easy thereafter to undo or
            r e d r e s s ."
                                   •


I ask you to turn over the page again to what would be 726, the
left-hand side of the page at D.  Again, after a review of the
authorities, Lord Justice Roskill says:

           "It cannot, I think, be right in these cases for
           the court to attempt a quantitative assessment of
           the probability one way or the other of the risk
           of proceedings ultimately being taken, and then
           to seek to draw the line one way where the
           probabilities in the view of the court are
           thought to be more or less evenly balanced and
           the other where the balance is more disparate.
           It is not for the court to resolve problems of
           this kind by calculating odds.    I think that the
           right Question to ask is that posed'by Shaw LJ; can
           exposure to the risk of penalties (or in other cases to
           the risk of prosecution for a criminal offence) be
           regarded as s o far beyond the bounds of reason as to b e
           no more tnan a fanciful pos sib il it y?”

In fact,   later on Lord Justice Shaw said exactly that.

     Could I ask you to turn from that case to part 7 of the
folder you have been handed, because the case ended up in the
House of Lords, where as I say the Court of A p p e a l ’s view was
upheld, as were the dicta of the Master of the Rolls and the
learned Lord Justices.   It is interesting to note when the House
of Lords dealt with the case what was said in relation to this
question of the information already being in the possession of,
let us call them m the context of this case, the prosecuting
authorities.   I anticipate you are lacking in numbers again.       If
I could ask you to turn over the first page and go to the second.
This would be page      on the right-hand side, sir, dealing with
                                                                 32

A


    th^t part of the case as to what was held by their Lordships.      I
    would draw your attention to (ii) starting with "The RTZ
    companies” .


®             "(ii)  The RTZ companies were entitled to claim the
              privilege from the production of documents given by s
              14(1) of the 1968 Act notwithstanding that the
              commission had knowledge of the cartel and had not
              taken any action ±h'respect of it.'for if the documents
              were produced under the letters rogatory the RTZ
              companies would be exposed to a greater risk of
              proceedings being brought against them by the
              commission for recovery of a fine than they were •
              exposed to at present, since production of the
              documents might authenticate and support the existing
              information in the hands of the commission and affor'4
              conclusive proof of a breach by the RTZ companies oi‘
              the prohibition against cartels, and might cause the
              commission to decide to take action against the RTZ
              companies” .
                                        u

    So, sir,, we have there the House, of Lords dealing with the point
    that may be raised in this case as to the decision that has been,
    taken by the Director in this case, but who knows what will
    happen in the future.

         Could you then turn four pages on to what would be page 445,
    between B-C, still the speech of Lord Wilberforce.  He says at C:

              ”1 base that conclusion in part on evidence which was
              before and considered by the High Court and the Court
              of Appeal and in part on the proposition that the
              tendency to expose to a penalty would be increased if
              the documents in question were to be validated and
              connected with the RTZ .companies by sworn evidence,
              as opposed to being, as they are now. pieces of papc
              found in a fil e ’’.

    Sir, it w o n ’t have escaped you the difference between, albeit the
    evidence that was given before Lord Justice Taylor was all taken
    down, it was not evidence that was given on oath, but of course
    the evidence before you would be given on oath.

         Then. sir. could you turn  another six pages, pages 456 and
    457.   ”To give any evidence".  This is the speech of Viscount
    Dilhorne. between G-H. and you  appreciate, sir. I am only picking
    those parts which are germane to this matter:

               ’’Secondly, it was argued that the discovery of the
               document would not in the circumstances tend to expose
               the RTZ companies to such proceedings". (That is for a
               penalty)   "It was said that as the commission had
               knowledge from the ’Friends of the E a r t h ’ documents for
               a considerable time of the existence of the cartel and
               had taken no action, there was no real risk of such
               proceedings if the documents in the possession of the



H
                                                                            33




          RTZ companies were disclosed                  .


Then he deals with the arguments and reference to certain
authority.
     *-                   .       / c“7 rh*=> risht^hand sidG < b0tw00n
c D andV he ^ s T w h l t ^ X saii by Lord Denning in the Court
of i p £ » l to which I have Just referred you. he says:

           ••With these observations I                              ^ g ^ se'haS”
           reduced6thehburden wh“ S " r ^ m e r l V hlsy on^a P ^ . o n ^
                                                du P a r < e a r l i e r
           cases and based his con^                         iable r iS k with a remote

           or E S S S ^                            5^                             S *
            i; r/rUri^
            apprehend danger, and,         .      person required
            to be allowed to the witness and to a person
            to produce d o c u m e n t s .
            If the RTZ companies are compelled to prod..=e the
            documents which they were asked to l
                                               P^ o t l d b e
            cannot reach the conclusion that it would b.      ^
            fanri f u l to suppose that that wouxa
            no   greater risk than at present of Proceedings for
            t h e recovery of a penalty being brought against
            them.    The documents might weii             the
            support the information now in the hands
            commission”..


 S . ? lvenh?hiSrhn?heL§omm?ssion h a ^ i d l n c i


  sufficient to cause them to take a differen

       There is just       one further part I would              ask vou to :Look at,
  and that is in the       speech of Lord                         privilege claimed by
                            C o u l d   y o u   go to the ^ S h ? - h a n d side. sir. at
  B:
             ••I do not think that your l o r d s h i p s are entitled to
             dismiss as fanciful the risk that if              docMient
                                                                    ^ would


              sensitive h j.         j-aingr the RTZ companies
              the commission to take against tn           m-hpruise
              speedier and severer action than they mignt otherwis
              have do n e ” .

   S i r . having regard to both past and recent e v e n t s . some events so
                                                             34

A

    recent as to be only a matter of days ago in relation to pressure
    which, properly placed, perhaps, is being placed upon the
    Director of Public Prosecutions, sir, those observations, those
    dicta of Lord Diplock, have a particular relevance to this
    particular case.
B
                                /So, sir, that is the law ....




H
                                                             35




     Sir, that is the law that I would wish you to take
cognisance of as far as the privilege against self­
incrimination and what it involves and what, sir, you have
to find.
     Then, sir, to move on: what are the risks?        third
heading.   Although I make these submissions on behalf of
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, I venture to suggest to
you, sir, that they could just as well be made in relation
to any number of individuals who may be called to give
evidence before you but of course it is Mr. Duckenfield whom
I have concern for.
     First of all, the risk of criminal prosecution.   Could
I ask you to turn to part 1 of the bundle?   Part 1 deals
with the announcement of the decision not to prosecute any
Body or person involved in this tragedy.   Sir, you will
know that by letter of the 30th August,       which is the
first, there is a letter from a Mr. Cleugh, the Head of t
Police Complaints Division to the Chief Constable of the
South Yorkshire Police.   It is dated the 30th of August,
reading as follows:
     "The Director of Public Prosecutions has now received
     from the West Midlands Police the final report in this
     criminal investigation, together with substantial
     supporting evidence and documentation.    You will
     recall in August 1989 that the Director requested a
     full .criminal investigation following publication of
     the Interim Report produced after the Public Enquiry
     conducted by Lord Justice Taylor into the circumstances
     surrounding the disaster at Hillsborough Stadium,
     Sheffield on the 15th of April, 1989.
     The most careful consideration has been given to all
     the evidence and documentation.   The Director has
     decided that there is no evidence to justify any
     criminal proceedings being instituted against South
     Yorkshire Police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
     Messrs. Eastwood and Partners or Sheffield City Council
     in connection with the disaster at the Hillsborough
     Football Stadium, Sheffield, on the 15th of April,
     1989.
     The Director has also concluded that there is
     insufficient evidence to justify proceedings against
     any Officer of the South Yorkshire Police or any other
     person for any offence."
      You, sir, will note the difference between ...there is
 no evidence" and "...there is insufficient evidence. :
    "I am sending a copy of this letter to you by FAX..."

He also sends a copy of this letter to a number of different
people, including Mr. Sharp the Chief Constable of Cumbria
and, of course, to you, sir, and to the Police Complaints
Authority and various solicitors.

     It isf noteworthy" that in the press release that
accompanied that letter, dealing with essentially the
matters I have just referred to, it read originally:
     "Following a lengthy and detailed investigation by the
     West Midlands Police and close consideration of Lord
     Justice Taylor's Report, the Director of Public  ^
     Prosecutions, Allan Green QC has concluded there is no
     e vidence..."

"No" is crossed out in the press release and there has been
written in for the world to see, "insufficient i
     "...upon which a prosecution for manslaughter or any
     other criminal offence may be brought against the South
     Yorkshire Police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
     Messrs Eastwood and Partners or Sheffield City Council
     in connection with the disaster at Hillsborough on the
     15th April, 1989."
     The Director has also concluded that there is_
     insufficient evidence to justify the institution of
     proceedings against any Officer in the South Yorkshire
     Police Force or any other person of any offence.
     The situation, sir, is this, in my submission, and we
shall look at further documents in due course, that the door
so far as Mr. Duckenfield and others is concerned is not
shut. To use an expression that was mentioned to me some
time ago which I happily adopted, a line was drawn and
everything that has come above that line has meant that the
Director has taken the view there is insufficient evidence
to prosecute.   My concern so far as Mr. Duckenfield is^
concerned, is that there should be nothing below that line
which might lead the Director to reconsider his decision.

     It may be said there is no real prospect of the
Director reconsidering his position and his decision so far
as this matter is concerned, but, sir, having regard to the
dicta that I have previously referred to, that, in my
submission, cannot be right.
     I ask you now, sir, to turn to section 2, because after
the decision of the Director was announced those instructing
me wrote to Mr. Sharp, the Chief Constable of Cumbria who
was conducting an investigation into disciplinary matters,
and it may be that those instructing me perhaps
misunderstood the situation so far as the Director s
decision was concerned.   At that stage they indicated that
Mr. Duckenfield would then be prepared to make a statement,
or might be prepared to make a statement, for the purposes
of the disciplinary proceedings.   They received by letter
of the 6th September, 1990, this reply:
     "You are correct when you say that the DPP has decided
     that there is insufficient evidence to prosecute^yaur
     client for any criminal offence arising out of the
     Hillsborough tragedy.   It is also correct to say that
     the disciplinary issues now have to be considered by
     South Yorkshire Police in consultation with the Police
     Complaints Authority.   I believe you are also aware
     there are outstanding civil actions being brought by
     various parties with an interest in the matter and that
     there are ninety-five Coroner's inquests to be
     reconvened.
     I am aware that at the interview on the 3rd of July,
     1990, your client intimated that once the DPP had made
     his decision in respect of the criminal issues he would
     consider being interviewed in respect of any
     disciplinary matters.   If that is still his wish then
     I am ready to conduct that interview, but it must be
     understood that the disciplinary matters are very
     closely related to the criminal issues so any interview
     would have to be conducted under a Police and Criminal
     Evidence Act caution and the transcript of the
     questions and answers would have to be sent to the DPP
     for further consideration of the criminal matters.

     That is the position in respect of any new or
     additional evidence which comes to light, for example,
     that which may arise out of the civil actions or the
     Coroner's inquests.   It is not for me to advise you or
     your client as to how you, or he, should proceed, but
     it seems to me that you should be aware of the
     foregoing information."
     Sir, one could not have a clearer statement, in my
submission, of it being said that anything that is said by
any witness in these proceedings, but my concern is Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield, who after all is the only police
officer in this matter who was suspended and remains
suspended as a result of this tragedy, that anything that is
said by him will, as a matter of course, be sent to the
Director and, who knows, it may be that the Director on
receiving such information will reconsider his decision.

     In my submission it cannot be said that the risk   to
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield is a fanciful one as   to the
likelihood of proceedings taking place.   Indeed, one   knows
that only a matter of days ago, and I ask you to look   at
    /

section 8 now of the bundle, at two newspaper cuttings
dealing in the main with application for funds on behalf of
Mr. Duckenfield and other police officers, but at the bottom
of the newspaper cuttings there are two of them, this is
said:
        "Meanwhile, relatives of victims of the Hillsborough
        disaster handed in1'a 5<Qt000 signatuxe petition at t. e
        Home Office yesterday calling for those allegedly
        responsible to face criminal proceedings.
This was the Yorkshire Post of Saturday, 17th November.   It
is said then that the Director found there was insufficient
evidence to bring criminal charges against the police,
Sheffield Wednesday or Sheffield City Council:
        "But the Vice Chairman of the Hillsborough Family
        Support Group, Mr. Bill Pemberton, said the Group
        believed those responsible for the tragedy should be
        made legally accountable for thejlr actions.
Something to the same effect was in the Daily Telegraph on
Saturday, 17th November, 1990.   You will find it, sir, at
the bottom of the article by Mr. Colin Wright.
     Here we have a situation where there is even before a
word of evidence has been given by any police officer before
you, sir, and this jury, there is pressure upon the Director
to reconsider his decision.   We know, sir, I know that you
know, that attempts have been made, albeit not against Mr.
Duckenfield but against, I think, Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club, to apply for judicial review of the
Director's decision to oblige him to reconsider fn d ,t0.j?rjnS
proceedings against a party whom he has previously decided
should not at this present time face prosecution.
     If such a step can be taken by Mr. Edey in respect of
Sheffield Wednesday, then of course it is open for others to
take similar action.   It may be that they will be as
unsuccessful, but who is to say?
     Sir, that is the risk so far as prosecution by the
Director is concerned.   The risk there is a real and
substantial one because one does not know what evidence will
come out of these inquests and if obliged to give evidence,
what may be said by Mr. Duckenfield which may, who knows,
tip the balance.
      There is also a risK, of course, so far as private
 prosecutions are concerned because that is also a feature
 that has entered the public domain and although perhaps it
 is common knowledge all I can do in this regard is to draw
 your attention to again newspaper articles dealing with the
 possibility of private prosecutions. Could I ask you to
                                                                   39


A



    look at section 4 of the bundle?    The first is a newspaper
    cutting, again by the eponymous Mr. Wright who no doubt is
    above us now, The Daily Telegraph, 31st August, 1990.    The
B   heading to this article is "Private Prosecutions Likely as
    DPP Rules out Hillsborough Charges.     The first few lines
    are:
         "Private prosecutions are expected to be brought by
         many of the relatives of the ninety-five football
         supporters killed in last year's Hillsborough Stadium
         disaster after the Director of Public Prosecutions
         ruled yesterday that no criminal charges should be
         brought against police or officials involved in the
         tragedy."
    Further down that first column, dealing with the comments
    made by Mr. Eddy Spearitt from Runcorn, he said:
         "My reaction is one of sheer disgust. British justice
         is obviously something that has ceased to exist.   now
         « h ninety-five peopll be squashed to death and no-one
         held responsible?   I will certainly be pursuing a
         private prosecution."
    Of course, these things may have been   said in a moment °f
    anguish on hearing news which was not   welcome news from the
    Director's office, but as far as you,   sir, are concerned,
    there is clearly the possibility that   private prosecutions
    may be brought.
         Then the second sheet in that particular section, an
    article in the Yorkshire Post written by Mr. Mike Woodcock,
    again dealing with the response of families to the
    Director's decision, the first column, about half way down.

          "The Hillsborough Family Support Group Chairman, Mr.
          Trevor Hicks, pledged not to let the issue of
          prosecutions drop.

     He is quoted as saying:
          "The first stage now is to take legal advice, but one
          thing I can say for certain, we won t let it drop.

     That is about ten lines up from the bottom of that first
     column.
          So it goes on, sir, all perhaps to the same effect in
     the newspaper cuttings that you have in that particular
     section.
          Finally, sir, so far as risk is concerned, a n d ! say
     this briefly but you, sir, do have the details, it is




H
                                                                                  40




something I mentioned earlier, and this is at section 3 of
the bundle:
       "Mr. Duckenfield, as with some other Officers, still
       has hanging over his head the disciplinary proceedings
       pursuant to the making of complaints under Regulation
       of the Police Disciplinary Regulations of 198d .

Though d o c u m e n ts h a v e b e e n s e r v e d on him p u r s u a n t   to
R egulation 7 d e alin g w ith those m a tte rs.




                       Of course, anything he says
Of course, anything that he says in answer to any question
could be used against him in relation to those matters.
Sir, that is the third aspect of the submission I wish to
make.
     Sir, you could say, "I will call him" and he could_
give his name and rank and perhaps his address and we will
see how we go, let him be asked individual questions and
when they have been asked then I will advise him as to
whether he has to answer that question or not.
     My submission to such a proposition, sir, is that each,
and every question that he would be asked, which would have
any relevance to the matters which the Jury would have to
consider, would be a question the answer to which is bound
to have a tendency to incriminate.   May I ask you to look,
sir, at the report of the case against Crown v. West London
Coroner, ex parte Grev and others reported in the second
volume of the All England Reports for 1987 and I hope on
this occasion you have some numbers on the pages?

     THE CORONER:   I do.
     MR. ISAACS:   I anticipate it is an authority which
you are familiar with.
     THE CORONER:   That is right.
     MR. ISAACS:    Dealing with the head notes then:
     "Following the deceased's death in police custody •
     allegations were made against various police
     officers concerning their use of force against
     the deceased during his arrest and removal into
     custody and their failure to summon an ambulance
     promptly when he became unconscious. At the
     inquest the coroner gave no directions to the
     jury as to the definition of unlawful killing or
     the requirements necessary for a verdict of
     unlawful killing."
 Then, sir, it deals with what happened with the Jury asking
 for help and the Coroner giving them that help in a rather
 unorthodox way.   Sir, that is not what concerns me. One
 then looks at what the Divisional Court said in quashing
 the verdict and ordering a new Inquest for the following
 reasons:
      "(1) When directing the jury as to the standard
      of proof required, a coroner ought to direct the
      jury that they had to be satisfied beyond
      reasonable doubt if they wished to bring in a
      verdict which involved a finding that a criminal
    offence had been committed and that for other
    verdicts (except an open verdict) they had to be
    satisfied on the balance of probabilities.
    Furthermore, when directing a jury on
    manslaughter comprising unlawful killing alleged
    to have occurred because of neglect on the part
    of police, the coroner was required to direct the
    jury on four matters — "
I pause there.   My submission is this, against the
background of the submission I have already made, namely
that any question which Mr. Duckenfield was asked would
have the tendency to incriminate that in relation to those
four matters that the Divisional Court referred to, if any
question is asked of Mr. Duckenfield which touches upon any
of these four matters, or of any of the four ingredients of
the first matter to which the Divisional Court refers,
there will be a tendency to incriminate him in the very
nature of the question itself because these are questions
which would be directed to the possible commission of a
criminal offence.   Those matters1-are these:
     •• firstly that they had to be satisfied, on the
     evidence, of four ingredients, namely (a) that
     the police were under a duty to have regard to
     the health and welfare of the deceased..."

So any question to Mr. Duckenfield as to his duty in
relation to the spectators at Hillsborough, or those who
tragically died, would require an answer which would have a
tendency to incriminate. It continues:
     "...(b) 'that in the circumstances there was a
     failure to do what should have been done for the
     health and welfare of the deceased..."
So any question asked of Mr. Duckenfield as to what he did
or did not do that day which touched upon the health and
welfare of the deceased would be a question which would
require an answer which would tend to incriminate him.- It
goes on:
     "...(c) that the failure amounted to a
     substantial cause of death...”
So any question asked of him - of course this is only a
privilege of self-incrimination - as to causation between
what he did and any death or deaths, or the deaths of those
who died in general terms, would be a question which would
tend to incriminate, that is, the answer would tend to
incriminate and:
     "___(d) that the failure amounted to
     recklessness..."
So any question as to his knowledge of any fact which wou ld
tend to show that there was a risk or that he was
indifferent to it, or that he ran the risk, even
inadvertently, would in my submission be a question which
required an answer which would t e n d t o incriminate within
the principles of law which I have previously addressed you
upon.   The head note actually deals with the test for
recklessness saying:

     "...secondly that the test for 'recklessness' was
     whether a police officer, having regard to his
     duty, was indifferent to an obvious and serious
     risk to the health ancTwelfare of the deceased
     orT^"recognising that risk to be present,
     deliberately chose to run that risk by doing
     nothing about it; thirdly that a failure to
     appreciate that there was such a risk was not by
     itself sufficient to amount to recklessness; and
     fourthly that the jury could only return a
     verdict of unlawful killing if they could
     attribute the unlawful conduct to a single police
     officer but on no account should they name or
     identify any such officer."
I am not concerned with No. 4 or indeed perhaps with No. 3
but I anticipate now, sir, you have seen the thrust of my
submission in relation to this last section of the
submission that I made to you which is that it is difficult
to conceive of any question that Mr. Duckenfield could
properly be asked which would be relevant to this Inquiry
which would not in its answer have the potential to
incriminate him.
     Of course, from his point of view, and I make this
very clear so that there is no misunderstanding, he denies
any criminal behaviour, of course, but this privilege is
not there for that purpose.   It is there to protect him in
the way that Lord Denning said in the authority I cited
earlier that no man should have evidence brought against
him which is produced from his own mouth.
      If each and every question is potentially one the
 answer to which will have a tendency to incriminate then,
 sir, what is the purpose of calling him, with respect?    In
 my respectful submission, sir, there is hone.   There are
 grave risks so far as the matter generally is concerned by
 calling him and by saying to each and every question he is
 asked either, "No, Mr. King, I am afraidthat is not a
 question which Mr. Duckenfield should be required to
 answer" or if you, sir, do not take that particular point
                                                         44




on that particular question Mr. Duckenfield or perhaps
myself saying, "Sir, I object to answering that question.
I rely on privilege".   The risk of prejudice so far as the
Jury is then concerned is overwhelming both in so far as
Mr. Duckenfield is concerned and indeed the position so far
as the South Yorkshire Police themselves as a body are
concerned (and here I intrude a little on to Mr. Payne's
t e r r i t o r y ).

     One can perhaps, no matter ho w carefully you are
directing, see the difficulty that would be in the mi n d of
the Jury if to every question the position of privilege is .
claimed.  They would be bound to think, "What has this man
got to hide?"  You, sir, know and my learned colleagues and
I know, that such a privilege is said not to be taken
against a man but lay people and lawyers are quite
different and there comes a time when they say to
themselves, "There is something funny here.   We are not
being told the whole truth and whatever".    My concern is
that even in the asking of a question that ma y be
disallowed by you there will be sufficient in the question
to prejudice the Jury against either Mr. Duckenfield or
others.

     I come back to the point I made earlier about the line
being drawn.   Everything at the moment is above the line.
I am concerned there should be nothing be low the line which
may prejudice Mr. Duckenfield.    M ay I go b ack to the
analogy you drew as to the straightforward case of the
reckless driver and the fatality?

     I anticipate that it would be your practice - let us
say no PACE interview had taken place - that the driver had
relied .upon his right not to answer any questions, as has
taken place in this case so far Mr. Du ckenfield was
concerned, and you would not in those circumstances wit h
the driver facing the possibility of p rosecution say to the
driver, "You must answer these questions as to what you did
and what you thought" etc.   You would not expec t the driver
to answer those questions in those circumstances.    Mr.
Duckenfield is in exactly the same position.

     It may be said that Mr. Duckenfield is such an
important participant in the events of that day that
without him what is the point of going on at all but in m y ' ***
submission that would be misconceived bec aus e the privilege
is only against self-incrimination.  There are many, m any
people, both police officers and civilians who can give
evidence as to the facts and the factual decisions that Mr.
Duckenfield took on that day and so the Jury will not in
any way be deprived of the opportunity of hea ri ng about
what happened.  They would just be deprived of not being
told by Mr. Duckenfield.
     I come back again to the point that I made at the
outset.   Whilst this is a high profile Inquest, it is
important not to disregard the rights of any individual who
has interests of his own and important interests which are
affected by the law.
     I finally say this - and I know I have been on my feet
for quite some time and I do not want to weary you
further - that if it be felt necessary by you, and both you
and I know, sir, that there are no PACE statements or
interviews by Mr. Duckenfield, that the Jury must hear
something about what Mr. Duckenfield said about the day
then, sir, upon instructions - and it is only on this basis
that I put this - I have no complaint with what Mr.
Duckenfield said to the Taylor Inquiry going before the
Jury. I say that because that is all above the line as
opposed to anything new below the line.
     That has already been considered by the Director and
my concern is that there is something else. It may be
said, "We can ask him the same questions and if the
Director has already considered those matters, well then,
frankly what has he got to worry about?" Sir, the asking
of the question (a) is unlikely to be in the same terms and
(b) the answer is unlikely to be in the same terms and it
does not have to be an answer which is an admission of any
offence.   It only has to be, on the authorities, a step
possibly towards this, and again, sir, you have the dicta
where that is made abundantly clear.
     I fear, and I know you are mindful of this, sir, that
this is really the last opportunity for the families (and
one can understand their concern and I do not criticise
them at all) through my learned friend, Mr. King, or Mr.
Hytner who may well be brought in, as Mr. King mentioned on
the last occasion to, cross-examine Mr. Duckenfield or
other witnesses, to produce extra evidence to get that
which they have, which we see, been pressing for. It is in
those circumstances that seeking to protect M r .
Duckenfield's interests, to be fair to him whilst being
fair to others, and being mindful of the restricted area of
Inquests as this is not a Public Inquiry, this is not the
Spanish Inquisition, this is not the Star Chamber, not only
should be the questions which be is to be asked that he
should not be obliged to give evidence at all. Those are
my submissions, sir.
      THE CORONER:   Can I just make two small points before
 I call anybody else? Perhaps it was my fault, I do not
 recollect, but if I instanced an RTA where the driver was
 reckless then I made a mistake because if a driver had been
 reckless he would have been charged with causing death by
                                                          46




reckless driving and under Section 16 of the Coroner s Act
I would have had to adjourn it sine di£. The point I was
trying to make was that under normal circumstances it was
the ordinary driver.
     MR. ISAACS:   Let us say, it is probably my fault,
careless driving or driving without due care.
     THE CORONER:   It makes no difference to the argument
but I just wanted to be clear that we were talking about
the same thing.
     MR. ISAACS:   It is important. The seriousness of the
crime is neither here nor there. It is a privilege, as you
and I know, against self-incrimination in any offence,
am obliged to you, sir.
      THE CORONER:   It is 1236 and in twenty minutes we
will be rising because at two o'clock we are starting with
the Jury. Can you indicate whether any of you feel you
wish to address me on the point which Mr. Isaacs has inade.
What you are saying is that there is clear authority that a
person does not have to answer questions which tend to
incriminate him, to use the text of the rule, and you cited
the rule plus several cases. Do any of you feel you want
to address me on the point which Mr. Isaacs has made? As I
understand it, what you are saying is that there is clear
authority for saying that a person does not have to answer
a question which may tend to incriminate him and you cited
the rule plus several cases. It is exceedingly difficult
to formulate questions where people are in danger of
prosecution which are meaningful and in the circumstances
what is the point of getting the man or the witness to come
 into the box at all? You are not suggesting that a PACE
 statement, if there is one, or anybody else should be
 excluded?
      MR. ISAACS:   No, sir, not at all.
      THE CORONER:   Have I summarised very, very briefly
 the heart of your submission?
       MR. ISAACS:   Indeed you have, sir. To call him in
  those circumstances would only serve to disadvantage him as
  well as others in addition to the prejudice which would be
‘ caused. You have summarised it absolutely correctly.
      THE CORONER:   The fourth point you have made is that
 the damage of refusing to answer the questions is out of
 proportion to the benefit of having him here as a witness?

      MR. ISAACS:   There is no benefit in having him here
 because any question he is asked is bound to have the
tendency to incriminate him on the basis of the principles
I have put before you.
      THE CORONER:   I look to Mr. King, first of all,
‘because he is the most likely person to      address me onthe
 issues. Are you likely to address me on this?
     MR. KING:   Sir,  I would wish to. There are two
matters. One I would wish to hear if anybody      else has
anything to say in support and, secondly, in the light of
what has just fallen from my learned friend's lips as to
the use of the transcript I would like to take certain
instructions from those whom I represent.
     THE CORONER:   Mr. Isaacs, it seems to me that it
would be wise, before I give a ruling on your submission,
to allow other people to have their say so that I can hear
different points of view and secondly, it gives me a chance
to think about it as well. If you do not think it rude,
what I intend to do is not proceed with the point at this
stage because we cannot deal with“the submissions on what
is quite an important point actually in twenty minutes and
we will deal with it either at four this afternoon, subject
to your agreement, when the Jury go or if it is more
convenient to you we can deal with it at four tomorrow or
any other day.




                  /Mr. Duckenfield is not going.
                                                             48




t-ir. Duckenfield is not going to be called in the immediate
future, so in that sense it is not urgent that we have got
to have a ruling this morning.

     Hi’. ISAACS:  Sir, save for this, that I am afraid -
and you may have gleaned tnis from some of tne newspapers,
I think - that I will not have the privilege of being
before you on most days during this Inquest.

       THE CORONER:     I had not appreciated that.

      MR. ISAACS:  You had not, sir, but no, I am afraid
that is the position.   Without going into any details I am
afraid that the cost of representation would be so great,
and there is no sufficient funds for him at the present
time.   The Police Authority have unfortunately failed to
agree that he or others in a similar position should have
their representation paid for, so I am afraid that he will
not be represented during the course of this inquest, sir,
otaer than on the days when, if you do decide that he
should be called, he is actually “giving evidence.

     THE CORONER:   And presumably on the days when any
statement - in fact, I think there is one,  it is not very
long but I think there is one - were to be dealt with?

     MR. ISAACS:   That may or may not be the case, sir,
but one can understand tne difficulties.   May I say this,
in relation to what you said just a moment ago, and this
perhaps is a little special pleading?  You said a moment
ago you did not want to be rude - I think I can speak on
beholf of all my learned friends, it is a long time since
we have been before a tribunal wiich is so courteous and
we are very grateful to you for that.   We are not perhaps
used to being treated so well.

       TiIE COilOuER:   Will you be here this afternoon?

       MR .   ISAACS:   I shall be here this afternoon,   sir,
yes.

     THE COrtONEK:    In that case shall we deal with it
tnis afternoon?    Is tnat a^resable to all of you?  I know
it makes it a longer day but I did say at our business
meeting that the lawyers nave to put up with the strain.
I don't like to subject my jury to too heavy pressure,
because it is not fair on them, but we have just got to
put up with it, so to speak.    Is that agreeable to
everybody?   Good.

     Is there any other --- perhajs you could outline the
nature of your submissions, so I know what we have got in
store, so to spesk.

        HR. HAJJKIiiG: The first thing I am going to do, if I
 :tiav, is to pay tribute to tne way in ..'nich my learned
                                                          47




tendency to incriminate him on the basis of the principles
I have put before you.
      THE CORONER:   I   look to Mr. King, first of all,
‘because he is the most likely person to       address me on the
 issues. Are you likely to address me on this?
     MR. KING:   Sir,   I would wish to. There are two
matters. One I would wish to hear if anybody else has
anything to say in support and, secondly, in the light of
what has just fallen from my learned friend’s lips as to
the use of the transcript I would like to take certain
instructions from those whom I represent.
     THE CORONER:   Mr. Isaacs, it seems to me that it
would be wise, before I give a ruling on your submission,
to allow other people to have their say so that I can hear
different points of view and secondly, it gives me a chance
to think about it as well. If you do not think it rude,
what I intend to do is not proceed with the point at this
stage because we cannot deal with the submissions on what
is quite an important point actually in twenty minutes and
we will deal with it either at four this afternoon, subject
to your agreement, when the Jury go or if it is more
convenient to you we can deal with it at four tomorrow or
any other day.




                  /Mr. Duckenfield is not going.
Mr. Duckenfield is not going to be called in the immediate
future, so in that sense it is not urgent that we have got
to have a ruling this morning.

     HR. ISAACS:   Sir, save for this, that I am afraid -
and you may have gleaned tnis from some of tne newspapers,
I think - that I will not have the privilege of being
before you on most days during this Inquest.

        THE CORONER:    I had not appreciated that.

      H R . ISAACS: You had not, sir, but no, I am afraid
that is the position.    Without going into any details I am
afraid that the cost of representation would be so great,
and there is no sufficient funds for him at the present
time . The Police Authority have unfortunately failed to
agree that he or others in a similar position should have
their representation paid for, so I sm afraid that he will
not be represented during the course of this inquest, sir,
otaer than on the days when, if you do decide that he
should be called, he is actually :giving evidence.

     THE CORONER:   And presumably on the days when any
statement - in fact, I think there is one,  it is not very
long but I think there is one - were to be dealt with?

     MR. ISAACS:   That may or may not be the case, sir,
but one can understand tne difficulties.   May I say this,
in relation to what you said just a moment ago, and this
perhaps is a little special pleading?   You said a moment
ago you did not want to be rude - I think I can s o e a k on
beholf of all my learned friends, it is a long time since
we have been before a tribunal wiicrt is so courteous and
we are very grateful to you for that.   We are not perhaps
used to being treated so well.

        TiiE COROuER:     Will you be here this afternoon?

        MR.   ISAACS:    I shall be here this afternoon,   sir,
 yes.

      THE CORONEK:    In that case shrill we deal witn it
 tnis afternoon?   Is that agreeable to all of you?   I know
 it makes it a longer day but I did say at our business
 meeting that the lawyers nave to put up witn the strain.
 I don't like to subject rny jury to too heavy pressure,
 because it is not fair on the~:, but we have just got to
 put up with it, so to speak.   Is that agreeable to
 everybody?  Good.

      Is tnere any other --- perhaps you could outline the
 nature of your submissions, so I know what we have got in
 store, so to speak.

        MR. HAN’NIiiG: The first thing I am going to do, if I
 •■nav, is to oav tribute to tne wav in jnich mv learned
friend Mr. Isaacs has put the matter before you, and the
second thing I am not going to do is to repeat it.  It
does not get stronger or better by repetition.

     You know that I represent Superintendent Murray.      He
has made a statement under the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act.   I expect that in one form or another that
will be brought before this hearing at some stage, and
having done tha.t. I f ind myself adopting* and -.11 the more
so, the views that have been canvassed before you.

     At the end of tnis hearing the verdict will be one
for the Jury and as learned as we hope we may be in the
ways in which a Coroner's Inquest is to proceed, the fact
of the matter is that the probability is that most of the
people wio will be on the Jury have never been on any
jury, and I shall certainly be surprised if they have ever
been on a Coroner's Jury.  with tne best directions in the
world, the fact of the matter, as we know from juries and
experience, is that some people can take one what seems to
be minor and inconsequential point and make that the
deciding and turning factor upon Vh i c h everything else
falls.
     It is impossible, in the words that have been read to
you  by my learned friend, for it to be conceivable that a
Jury wiLl not in its mind's eye say, "What on earth is
going on nere under this rule against self­
incrimination?", and "Why are we not being allowed to see
tne person?", and t.ierefore there is damage beyond measure
in even going to that stage wnich suggests that a person
should be called into a witness box, give their name and
address, and somebod/, wiiether it is you_or whether it is
tne witness or the lawyer for that witness, referring to
tne Rule, and wiether then the Jury is asked to retire,
tne fact of the matter is tney have got the whiff of
something and wnen they have got that scent the brain
begins to run wild and we can have no control over what
part that is likely to play in the ultimate decision
making process.

      Therefore, in adopting tne legal submissions and in
 not seeking to put them before you over and over again, I
 have to say tnat considering wnat questions may be raised,
 and consiaering those criteria which have been put before
 you as to th* sorts of questions which clenrly have to be
 in tne ninri, and have to be enquired into, if tnose are
 tne questions whicn normally would be asked and tnere is
 tne Rule and tne law, and tnat is what we, and you, sir,
 are here to uphold, the law, if the law says that a person
 slould-not be put in tnat position, categorically siould
 not, then it seems to me, with respect, that you should
 tnerefore make a ruling tnat you are not going to nave tie
 witness put into it, and you can make whatever explanation
 you want, because you can simply read tne law to tne Jury
                                                                    50




    and make them clear that they should dismiss that from
    their minds.

         THE COKOWEi’s  Mr. King,      I will skip you,   if I may -
B   not out of discourtesy.

          HISS SI'nCLAIK:          Sir, I do not adopt the submissions
    made by my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs, and indeed, I have
    no1 other’'subm'is-s i’£>'R"S"tc* BS'ak e at /t<n-.isS\ sta.ge.«

         TliC COixOnER:     You do not?

          HISS SINCLAI.’
                       .:     I do not.

         MR. CATCHPOLL:    Sir, can I say, on behalf of tne
    Officers of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, that we
    came nere prepared and expecting to see e v e r y witness
    called to give evidence, subject to the normal rules, and
    indeed, as I hope has been made clear, we are anxious to
    help througnout.   I would like, however, to reserve my
    position in the light of any ruling you nay make.      If tne
    senior Police Officers are not going to be giving evid-n^e
                                            .. .     T ould liice
D   at tnis inquiry naturally that is something i w
    to have the opportunity of discussing with my clients.
    cannot predict what the outcome will be of that, and if
    necessary I will make an application at a later stage.        At
    present I have no observations actually on the
    applications made by my learned friends.

         MRS. McBRIEli:   Sir, I would personally be very
    pleased if Mr. Duckenfield would appear in this Court so
    that I can put questions to him directly. As he was t“ie
    main participant in the disaster I was looking forward to
    meeting Mr. buckenfield so that   I would be able to meet
    him face to face.   That is all.

          MR. CALLAGHAN:      Sir,   I have no observations to make.

          MISS ADDLEMA’::   Sir, as you are avare I represent
     tne Police Federation and the ruling that you are about to
     make clearly ..ill nave a generalised application and apply
     to certain witnessrs v.io.n I represent.  Sir, in short, at
     tnis stage I » o u H wisn to say that in principle I also
     echo and~aaopt tn->s-i submissions wnicn have been made by
     my learned frienc, Mr. Isaacs.     Clearly individual
     decisions are zoir.g to nave to be made by certain
     individuals, dependent upon your ruling.

            Wnat I would say, sir, in particular, is tnat in my
     resp-czful sub~ission it would indeed be preferable for
     sucn individuals net to give evidence at all if that
     indeed was your decision, ratner tnan running tne risk of
     sowing tne seets o: prejudice in tn*i Jury's minds in tne
     «ay wnicn has aesn described bv my learned friend >ir.
     Isaacs and ry rr.enc :;r. Manning, if I may say so, so
     e lo quently.



H
                                                           51




     For  my part I would submit that it must be right that
tnere is  very little indeed which could be asked of such a
witness, the- answer to which would not have a tendency to
incriminate.   Sir, I won't repeat all the submissions
which have been made by my learned friend but I would
specifically wish to reinforce those particular ones.

     HR. RUSS£LL:   Sir, as you will recall I represent
Superintendent Greenwood and I would endorse :.:ha.t has been
said principally by my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs.     Sir,
it may be that you would prefer me to add my two penny
worth to those arguments at 4 o'clock.

     THE CORONER:     It depends how long you will be.  Yes,
Ithink tnat mignt be wiser because I don't want    to rush
you.   Is anybody at tnis end going to want to ....

     MISS H A M P T O N :   I have no submissions.

     HR. HALE:   I will say that in principle I would
support Mr. Isaacs because his arguments are so very
soundly based and based on precedent.   Unether I avail
myself of tnem will be a different matter.   Mr. Marshall^
may wish to give evidence bu-t that, of course, will be his
choice.

     MR. P*\Yi»£: Sir, the position of the_Chief Constable
is that ne supports tne position taken by individual
Officers, and accordingly, therefore, supports the
submissions made by Mr. Isaacs*

     TiK CORONER:    Very well.  We will leave this
submission tnen, at this stage, in order to particularly
enable fir. Ring to consider it and to put anything he
wants to me.

     May I just ask whether you will have any othir legal
submissions wnich are burning and which need to be made
today?   Pleas, don't think tnat I wish to stifle you in
any sense of tne word.   I am just trying to assess
timings.   iio? Good.

        We in this roo.n - you know n - lo get in - as far as
 tne le.,: _l representatives -are concerned there is quite a
 lar.^e room - it is caile". the safe and I think it has got
 steel doors - tne key to it is under tne control of tne
 local authority ana arrangements have been made for it to
 be open between 9 and 10 and A and 5, so that if you wish
 - and I stress if you wish - you can deposit any of your
 p.npers - tnis goes for you as well, of course, Mrs.
 .'ic’
     .-rien - in that room, but you cannot assume that t’ns
 l^cul autnority will take responsibility for them.      The
 roo:^ wi]l be under the char.;e of one cna > with a key and
  ne ..ill open and siut it, but you nave to accept tne risk,
 so to s>eak.     Vou don't have to use it.   It is a facility
 which we have tried to pr vide.
         S e c o n d l y , t h o s e o f y o u who w e r e —h e r e f o r L o r d J u s t i c e
T a y l o r ' s I n q u i r y , we h a v e b e e n p r o v i d e d w i t h t h e b i g r ooms
on t h e o t h e r s i d e o f t h e m a i n s t a i r c a s e - o n e i s c a l l e d
t h e M a n d e l a Room, t h e o t n e r I h a v e f o r g o t t e n t h e name o f .
T h e M a n d e l a Room h a s b e e n l a i d o u t w i t h a b i g s c r e e n l i k e
t h i s , s o i f t n e r e i s a n o v e r f l o w o r s o m e b o d y w a n t s t o know
w h a t i s g o i n g on b u t d o e s n o t w a n t t o b e .in t h e C o u r t ,
t h e y c a n go a n d w a t c h a n d n e a r .          As I u n d e r s t a n d i t , i f we
ersef f o r e xa r r f p le y & v4?d'e©:J you* w i l l s e e trve v i d a o - b u t yo u
w i l l n o t b e a b l e t o s e e t h e C o u r t , b e c a u s e we h a v e o n l y
g o t one c am era .              In. t h e n o r m a l c o u r s e o f       e v e n t s youw i l l
be a b l e t o s e e and n e a r w h a t i s g o i n g on i n C o u r t b u t i n
c e r t a i n c i r c u m s t a n c e s y o u may h a v e a s l i g h t l y l i m i t e d
r e c o r d i n g , b e c a j s e o f t h e f a c i l i t i e s - we h a v e h a d t o d r a w
 th e l i n e somewhere.

          T h e o t h e r room h a s b e e n l a i d o u t a n d i s i n t e n d e d
r e a l l y m ainly f o r th e f a m i l i e s , i f they want to withdraw
and s i t and be q u i e t .          T h a t i s one h a l f o f i t and i n tn e
o t h e r h a l f we h a v e b u i l t s m a l l p a r t i t i o n s , c u b i c l e s , s o i f
a n y o f y o u w i s h t o s p e a k t o y o u r c l i e n t s y ou h a v e g o t a
m e a s u r e o f p r i v a c y b u t t h e y a r e n o t s o ; n d p r o o f , s o yo u
h a v e t o j u d g e how g o o d t h e y a r e a n d w h e t h e r y o u w a n t t o
use tnem.           They a r 6 t h e r e f o r y o u r u s e i f yo u w i s h .

           At t h e b a c k o f t h e h a l l I t h i n k t h e r e i s a l i s t o f
 r e s t a u r a n t s , w h i c h h a s n o t b e e n p u t up by tne, s o i f y ou
 w a n t t o go a nd l o o k a n d s e e w h a t i s w h a t and w .ie re you c a n
 g o - a n d no d o u b t t h e r e a r e d o z e n s o f o t n e r s a s w e l l - we
 a r e r i g n t i n t h e c e n t r e o f town so i t s h o u l d n o t be to o
 d i f f i c u l t to e a t and have r e f r e s h m e n t s .

           We n a v e h a d q u i t e a l o n g s e s s i o n .  I h ope you w i l l
 f o r g i v e me, b u t I w a n t e d t o g e t on w i t h i t .      We a r e g o i n g
 to r i s e .     I s t h e r e a n y t h i n g - y e s , M rs.. McBrien?

            MRS. McflRIEN:             I j u s t wanted to say so m eth in g
 r e l a t i n g to the o th e r m a tte r e a r l i e r in th e day.                 I    was
 w o n d e rin g i f t h e tim e l i m i t s c o u ld be e x t e n d e d , i n            the
 i n d i v i d u a l i n q u e s t s , th e tim e l i m i t of 3 .1 5 f o r the            day in
 q u e s t i o n c o u ld be e x te n d e d f o r i n d i v i d u a l i n q u e s t s     but not
 a; }p] y t o t h e g e n e r i c i n q u e s t ?

            THE C0.10NER:          T h e a n s w e r t o t h a t i s t h a t I t o o k Mr.
  K in g 's s u b m is s io n to i n c o r p o r a t e t h a t p o i n t and I have
  s a i d w n a t I w a n t a n d am n o t g o i n g t o c h a n g e my m i n d on i t .
  I am g o i n g t o s t i c k t o w h a t I h a v e s a i d , 3 . 1 5 o r
  t h e r e a b o u t s , s o I a~ n o t e x t e n d i n g i t b u t - w e d i d s a y t h a t
  i f t i e r e a r e any s p e c i f i c e r r o r s wnich you w ere g o in g to
  b r i n g t o my a t t e n t i o n i n t h e s u m m a r i e o , t h a t I w o u l d
  c o n s i ~ e r i t , and t h a t would a p p l y t o you a s w e l l , of
  c o u r s e , a s f a r a s y o u r boy i s c o n c e r n e d .

           .MRS. McBRIEli:            Thank you.
          MR. KING:         I was       j u s t going to remind y o u r s e l f , s i r ,
and t h e r e f o r e anybody         l i s t e n i n g , t h a t you d i d i n d i c a t e
t h a t in any i n d i v i d u a l      c a s e i t was o p e n t o t h e f a m i l i e s ,
e i t h e r through m yself           or r e p r e s e n t i n g th e m s e lv e s , to put
b e f o r e you i n d i v i d u a l   s u b m i s s i o n s r e l a t i n g t o t' i-mi ngs
w h ic h had t o be s o r t e d         out.

         THE CORONER:            Yes,     wiiere t h e r e a r e     errors      which a r e
m a t e r i a l , s h a l l we s a y .

          MR. KIN’G:        I t h i n k you d i d s a y , s i r , i f a n y t h i n g d i d
e m e r g e i n t h e c o u r s e o f t h e e v i d e n c e w h i c h r e f l e c t e d on
t h e p r i m a r v c as -: o f my s u b m i s s i o n s , y o u w o u l d o b v i o u s l y
c o n s id e r th a t too.

           THE CORONER:              Yes, I t h in k t h a t goes w i t h o u t s a y i n g ,
 I hope.           I n o r d e r t o a s s i s t y o u , my t e a m i s g o i n g t o
 a r r a n g e f o r o n e member t o s t a y i n t h e room d u r i n g t h e
 l u n c h n o u r , so i f y o u , w is h t o l e a v e y o u r p a p e r s h e r e you
 may do s o , b u t a ^ n                 ^ a s t o ^ a t y Qur r i s k .              ye d o n 't
a n t i c i p a t e a n y p r o b l e m s a n d we a r e - ' h a v i n g s o m e b o d y t o
w a t c h i t , b u t we a r e n o t t a k i n g a n y r e s p o n s i b i l i t y .

        S h a l l we r e c o n v e n e a t 2 o ' c l o c k ?

                              ( Luncneon A d jo u rn m e n t)
 /
                         (Jury P r e s e n t )

     THE CORONER:   I should explain to you. ladies and
gentlemen, that we actually started this morning at 10 o ’clock,
and the reason why you were not invited to be here was because we
were spending the morning doing legal submissions, and what would
have happened is I would have asked you to come in and then go
straight out again, and I thought you were prefer not to do
that, but this afternoon we will begin with the evidence and
anything else we need to do.
     I remind you that you that you have already been sworn. You
remember that? It was quite some time ago. If you think about
it, just treat the gap as a long weekend. We are now proceeding,
but you are still on oath. Your task is still exactly the same
as it was before.
     You will remember in April-May time we were dealing with
individuals, were not we. We were taking each individual person
and listening to medical evidence and any other evidence which
was being presented to us. To a certain extent what we are now
going to do is going to be a bit different, because what we were
trying to do then was to deal with:;the first three points that
Coroners deal with, who, when and where. Now we are going to
start thinking about how did they come by their deaths. ^ In some
respects, that is more difficult, and I think you may find that
because it is more difficult and because it is a different
question, the form in which the evidence will be given will also
be different. So be prepared that there may be a different
atmosphere, because although I don't want us to forget that we
are dealing with 95 individual people who lost their lives and
that we are dealing with 95 family groupings who are very
concerned and very interested, we are now in many respects, not
entirely, but in many respects dealing with sometimes
technicalities and may be a lot of detail, but it is because we
are looking at the how.
     You probably don't remember, but when I spoke to you before
and I think I did say this, how is not quite the same as why.
That is a different question. There are loads of asking words,
who, when, where, how, why, whom. We are supposed to be thinking
mainly about the word "how”. I have looked it up in the
dictionary, and the definitions are not very good and there are
pages and pages of it, but one of the definitions is "bv what
means” . Included in the "how" there may be little bits of
elements of "wny" and "who", but we are only going to go as far
as is necessary down that road to help us to establish the "how"
so at the end of the day you can reach, hopefully, a verdict
based upon the evidence.
     I will remind you of one or two of the rules which I have to
do even at this early stage, because it is terribly important,
but I want to say one or two domestic things.   You know where you
are. It is a bigger room. We have a bit more space. Last time
you lived on sandwiches; if you can remember, for quite a long
time. We are not doing that again, not that I was not very, very
grateful to the WF.VS for doing it, but we are in the centre of
                                                          55




town so there are plenty of facilities, including a restaurant
upstairs. So we are going to say to you, fend for yourselves,
and my Jury Officers will sort out the financial reimbursement.
There are rules and limits, but they will have told you that. If
they have not, ask, so that you know how much you can spend
without being out of pocket. It is adequate, you will find.
     One advantage of giving you sandwiches, was that we had you
nicely segregated from everybody else, and we won t have that if
we allow you to run free, but after all, you go home in the
evenings as well, don't you, so I can't see any good reason why
you should not do whatever you wish, but please remember the rule
is no discussion with anybody about the case.  It is very
difficult, but you must follow it, particularly in a building
like this where you can see there are quite a lot of people here,
I have met quite a lot of these people and I still don't
recognise most of them, and so it is very easy if you start
talking to strangers you may find you are talking to people who
you in no circumstances you should have opened your mouth to. So
don't talk to anybody. So will you please do that for me?
     If you find I am going on for .too long, because we won't be
rising quite as frequently as we did at the Medico Legal Centre
because it is slightly different’now, but if you think I am going
on.too long you are near enough now to attract my attention and
to say, "Can we stop and have a cup of coffee", or something, and
of course, if any of you need to stop because you are not feeling
well or because you were indisposed in some way then obviously
you must let me know. It is exceedingly important that you are
all here, because if we are not we have to stop. We have no
control over our lives completely, but unless there is a really
compelling reason why you cannot be here please be here. It does
not actually inconvenience me, because if I am not here I am
doing something else, but it inconveniences everybody else,
because we would have to adjourn it until we are back again, so
to speak, as a group.
     I think that is all I need to say on domestic matters. May
I ask, were any of you in Court this morning, because somebody
suggested that you were? None of you were in Court? That is
good, because we did not want you in Court.   That is right, none
of you, members of the Jury, were in Court in the morning? That
is important, because if we have legal submissions and I ask you
to go out you must stay out. It may be when it is all over and
we have finished I will explain to you why we do that, but I
don't think I will do it now because we have not got much time,
and it can wait, I am sure.
      I am not going to tell you the potential verdicts which you
 will have to consider because we are going to hear the evidence,
 and when we have heard the evidence I am going to sum it up,
 hopefully, and I will direct you with regard to the law ana
 anything else I need to tell you, and then you will retire and
 take your time and so on.
      I do want to draw one or twc rules toyour attention,
 because it is exceedingly important that you shoulc understand it
                                                           56




now and that everybody else should understand it. This is not
actually a rule but it is a general point. We are doing
Inquests. There are 95 of them but we are doing them together.
This is not a trial. Nobody is accused of anything in my Court.
It is not a Public Inquiry, so we don't roam beyond my brief. It
is not adversarial in the sense that the parties can introduce
their own witnesses and put them up to me to listen to and then
make a judgment. I introduce the witnesses. That is not to say
that if parties want to draw my attention to a particular witness
or witnesses whom they would like me to consider, they caw do
that and have done because a lot of water has flowed under the
bridge since we last met, but in the final analysis it is my
decision whom we call, rightly or wrongly, and it is an
inquisition.
     The next thing to understand, and this is very, very
important, is that this is an inquisition not on behalf of the
relatives, not on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police not or.
behalf of the club, not on behalf of Eastwoods, not on behalf of
the supporters generally. It is an Inquiry by me, and if you
like because I am called Her Majesty’s Coroner you may take it it
is on behalf of the State or Her Majesty the Queen. So it is
important to understand that, and I have to keep on reminding
myself of this as well, because otherwise we get misled into
thinking we are doing this for others, and of course you realise,
and I am conscious and so are you and everyone else, of the
families, so it is important that the evidence which we call
should seek to be intelligible and relevant and answers as far as
one can some of the things which concern and worry them. It is
very important to know that this is not done because they are
bereaved people. It is because somebody has died and the Act
says that when that happens the Coroner should hold an
inquisition either on his own or with a jury. Well, we are with
a jury, of course. •
     I have already indicated to you the overall limitations o*
an Inquest, so i am not going to repeat that, but there is
another very important corollary to this, and that is Rule 22.
am goingto read this rule to you because you have got to
understand it, because it may be relevant at some point. It
won't be relevant today, but I want to get it right at this
stage. What it says is:
           "(1) No witness at an Inquest shall be obliged to
           answer any question tending to incriminate himself.

           (2) Where it appears to the Coroner that the witness
           has been asked such a question the Coroner shall inform
           the witness that he may refuse to answer” .

 Now, this is a fundamental principle of Coronal Inquisitions, and
 it may well be a fundamental principle in a load of other courts,
 but I am not interested in what happens elsewhere. I am
 interested here. An important thing to understand is that if
 somebody exercises their right it is a right. It is not that
 they may or may not. They have a right not to answer questions
 which may incriminate them. You must not draw inferences from
the exercise of their rights.
     That does not mean to say that you may not hear evidence
from other people which may tend to incriminate them. That is
not the point, but you cannot expect somebody to stand up and
say, "I did it". It happens in TV series, but it does not happen
generally speaking in real life, but it is part and parcel of the
overall structure of Coronal jurisdiction, and it is designed (a)
to protect the individual or individuals who may be involved, and
(b) to ensure that if it were to be that some other proceedings
were to take place in some other court we have not muddied the
water.




                          /So there is actually a dual
          T h e re i s a c t u a l l y a d u a l a d v a n t a g e , i f you l i k e .
One, i t p r o t e c t s t h e i n d i v i d u a l from b e i n g f o r c e d t o sa y
t h i n g s w h i c h h e d o e s n o t w a n t , o r b e i n g f o r c e d t o l i e on
o a t h w hich i s n o t v e r y good and tw o, i t f a c i l i t a t e s o t h e r
proceedings i f th o s e are a p p ro p ria te .                    It* i s n o t f o r us
to say w hether they a re o r they a r e n ’ t .

          In a d d itio n to t h a t th e re a re v a rio u s o th e r r u l e s .
T h e r e a r e r u l e s a b o u t t h e s o r t o f q u e s t i o n s w h i c h may b e
asked.          I n f a c t I c a n d i s a l l o w q u e s t i o n s i f I don t
c o n s i d e r them t o b e p r o p e r q u e s t i o n s . ^      There a r e r u l e s
a b o u t when y o u f r a m e t h e v e r d i c t , a s i t i s k n o w n .        You
m u s t n ' t name p e o p l e w h a t e v e r yo u d o , b u t I w i l l t e l l y o u
more a b o u t t h a t n e a r e r t h e t i m e .

         Now y o u c a n s e e i n f r o n t o f y o u a s e r r i e d r a n k o f
d e s k s a n d l a d i e s a n d g e n t l e m e n who a r e s o l i c i t o r s a n d
leg al re p re se n ta tiv e s.            They h a v e a l r e a d y i n t r o d u c e d ^
t h e m s e l v e s t o me b u t w o u l d y o u m i n d j u s t d o i n g i t a g a i n
s o t h e j u r y k n ow s who i s s i t t i n g i n f r o n t o f t h e m ?

         MISS HAMPTON:          A l i s o n Hampton o f C o u n s e l a p p e a r i n g
w i t h Mr. R i c h a r d M a x w e l l o f C o u n s e l o n b e h a l f o f t h e
S h e f f ie ld C ity C ouncil.

         MR. HALE:           V incent H ale,       so licito r,       on b e h a l f o f
S u p e r in t e n d e n t Roger M a r s h a ll.

          MR. PAYNE:            I am R i c h a r d P a y n e , C o u n s e l , w i t h
P a t r i c k L i m b , C o u n s e l , a n d we a r e i n s t r u c t e d b y Hammond,
S u d d a rt, s o l i c i t o r s , to appear f o r th e C hief C onstab le of
South Y o rk s h ire P o l i c e .

       MR. ISAACS:         P a u l I s a a c s o f C o u n s e l , i n s t r u c t e d by
H ep w o rth and C h ad w ic k , s o l i c i t o r s , on b e h a l f o f C h i e f
Superintendent D uckenfield.

          MR. MANNING:             R ic h a rd Manning, s o l i c i t o r , W alker,
M o r r i s , S c o t t , T u r n b u l l o f L e e d s , i n s t r u c t e d on b e h a l f of
S u p e r in t e n d e n t Murray.

          MR. KING:          S i r , a n d m e m b e r s o f t h e j u r y , my n a me i s
Tim othy King.              I am a b a r r i s t e r a p p e a r i n g o n b e h a l f o f
f o r t y - t h r e e fa m ilie s of the d eceased.

        MISS SINCLAIR:        My na me i s             Fiona S i n c l a i r ,    C ounsel,
 f o r Eastwood and P a r t n e r s .

       MR. CATCHPOLE:          My na me i s S t u a r t C a t c h p o l e ,
 C ounsel.   I am i n s t r u c t e d o n b e h a l f o f S h e f f i e l d
 Wednesday F o o t b a l l C lub.
                                                                                                           59




             MRS. McBRIEN:      S i r , a n d m e m b e r s o f t h e J u r y , I am
     J o a n M cBrien and I a p p e a r on b e h a l f o f o u r f a m i l y m t h i s
                                                                                                                I
     m atter.
               MR. CALLAGHAN:     Andrew C a l l a g h a n ,               so licito r,       on
     b e h a l f o f th e Ambulance S e r v i c e .

           MISS ADDELMANN:               My na me i s A n d r e a , A d d e l m a a a o f
     C ounsel.       I am i n s t r u c t e d by R u s s e l l , J o n e s a n d W a l k e r
     and I r e p r e s e n t t h e P o l i c e F e d e r a t i o n .

              MR. RUSSELL:              I am C h r i s t o p h e r R u s s e l l .        I am a
     b arrister.               I am i n s t r u c t e d by s o l i c i t o r s c a l l e d B a r l o w ,
     Lyde and G i l b e r t and I r e p r e s e n t t h e i n t e r e s t s o f
     S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Greenwood.

               THE CORONER:             You m i g h t a s k , h a v i n g t o l d y o u a l l
     a b o u t t h i s i n q u i s i t o r i a l s y s t e m a n d h o w l do i t a l l :
     what a re th ey d o in g h e re ?                 The a n s w e r i s t h a t t h e r u l e s
     which I h av e a l r e a d y r e f e r r e d t o p e r m i t i n t e r e s t e d ^
     p a r t i e s to be p r e s e n t , o b v io u s ly .          The r u l e s p e r m i t them
     t o a s k q u e s t i o n s w h i c h i s why M r s . M c B r i e n i s t h e r e , a n d
     t h e r u l e s a l s o p r o v i d e t h a t p e o p l e c a n b e r e p r e s e n t e d by
     t h e i r l e g a l r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s a n d t h a t i s why t h e y a r e
     here.
             Of c o u r s e , i f i t i s c o r r e c t a n d o p p o r t u n e t h e y w i l l
     ask q u e s tio n s of th e w itn e ss e s and w ith in th ? l i m i t s
     w h ic h I h a v e o u t l i n e d t o you t h e y w i l l b e p e r m i t t e d t o do
     so.

               Now w i t h o u t a n y f u r t h e r a d o , a l l I w i l l s a y i s t h a t
     th e s e i n q u e s t s a r e c o n ce rn e d w ith a d i s a s t e r which
     h a p p e n e d a t a f o o t b a l l s t a d i u m known a s H i l l s b o r o u g h
     F o o t b a l l S t a d i u m , on t h e 1 5 t h o f A p r i l , 1 9 9 0 .     You w i l l
     l e a r n a s we g o a l o n g m o r e d e t a i l s a b o u t i t .

           Now I t h i n k         the f i r s t     thing     i s we w i l l c a l l S t e v e n
      Brown.

                                     STEVEN BROWN S w o r n

                                        Bv THE CORONER:

Q. Can y o u g i v e me y o u r f u l l name? - A. I am P o l i c e
   C o n s t a b l e S t e v e n Brown o f t h e W e s t M i d l a n d s P o l i c e .

Q.    I s i t r i g h t , M r . B r o w n , t h a t y o u h a v e w i t h y o u some^
      o v e r h e a d p h o t o g r a p h s o f v a r i o u s s c e n e s ? - A. Y e s , s i r .

q. T h e s e a r e p h o t o g r a p h s m a i n l y o f t h e s t a d i u m a n d i t s
   s u r r o u n d s ? - A. Y e s .
                                                            S.   BROUN




       THE CORONER:                L a d i e s and g e n t l e m e n , I h o p e you ha v e
g o t good e y e s i g h t , t h e model i s       over th ere:

These photo g rap h s,          m o s t o f them w e re t a k e n a f t e r t h e
inciden t?          I n f a c t a l l o f them w e re t a k e n a f t e r t h e
i n c i d e n t ? - A. M o s t o f t h e m , y e s , s i r .

Can y o u p u t t h e m u p o n e a t a time- a n d we w i l l , r m m b e r
them.         L e t ' s p u t th e f i r s t one up.        We a r e g o i n g t o
g i v e t h e s e a l l "C" num bers i n o u r u s u a l way.               This is
C.249.          T h a t i s w h a t ? - A. A e r i a l p h o t o g r a p h o f t h e
ground, s i r .
Can y o u p u t t h e n e x t o n e u p?    T h i s w i l l b e C . 2 5 0 . - A.
T h is i s a p h o to g ra p h of th e s o u th s t a n d and th e Spion
Kop.
Can y o u p o i n t on t h e m o d e l ?       OK.       Next one.         What
t h i s ? - A. T h i s i s a p h o t o g r a p h , s i r , o f t h e n o r t h s t a n d .
( C .251)
 I t i s ta k e n a c r o s s t h e L e p p ing s Lane t e r r a c e s ,      is   that
 r i g h t ? - A. T h a t i s c o r r e c t , s i r .

          THE CORONER:               L a d i e s and g e n t l e m e n o f t h e j u r y , i n
 f o o t b a l l p a r l a n c e , a p p a r e n t l y , t h e s t a n d i s a p l a c e where
 you s i t and t h e t e r r a c e i s t h e p l a c e w h e re you s t a n d :

 Yes, n e x t p le a s e .      What i s t h a t ?           ( C . 2 5 2 ) • A. I t     is    a
 ph o to g ra p h , s i r of th e w est t e r r a c e       and w e s t s t a n d .

 ( C . 2 5 3 ) - A. T h i s i s a p h o t o g r a p h o f t h e p e r i m e t e r g a t e s
 a t L e p p in g s Lane end o f th e g r o u n d . .

 Some o f t h e p e r i m e t e r g a t e s .     In f a c t i t i s        a photograph
 i n t w o b i t s , i n e f f e c t ? - A. T h a t i s c o r r e c t ,     sir.

 Can y o u p u t t h e s e c o n d o n e u p a s w e l l ?            (C .254).        The
 n e x t one p le a s e .       T his is a n o th e r a e r i a l view .             That
 g i v e s a b e t t e r i m p r e s s i o n o f t h e L e p p i n g s L a n e e n d ? - A.
 Yes, s i r .

 (C .255).           Next p l e a s e .     T h i s i s v e r y s i m i l a r t o o n e you
 h a v e a l r e a d y s e e n , b u t w h a t a r e we i n t e n d i n g t o s e e on
 t h i s o n e ? - A. S i r , t h i s s h o w s t h e t u r n s t i l e s 1 t o 1 6 .

  T u r n s t i l e s 1 t o 16?      (C .256).         This      is. what?     • A. T h i s
  shows t h e t u r n s t i l e s   A t o G.

  (C .257).           Can y o u s e e t h e A t o G on t h e r e ?         There a re
  th e b i g "Bs" and th e n u n d e r n e a th i t t h e r e a r e th e
  l e t t e r s , A, B, C, D, E, F , G.‘             N e x t . - A. T h i s s h o w s
  t h e c o u r t y a r d a r e a beyond t h e p e r i m e t e r g a t e s and a l s o
                                                                                                      61



                                                                        S.   BROWN


      t h e m e ta l p e r im e t e r w a l l and t u r n s t i l e s        which have th e
      l e t t e r s A, C, B, f r o m l e f t t o r i g h t .

0.    Can y o u p o i n t    to     t h e A, C a n d B? - A. A h e r e , s i r .                C
      a n d B.
Q. T h a t i s     how t h e t u r n s t i l e s w e r e n u m b e r e d . T h a t was
   C . 258.          What i s t h i s ? - A. S i r , t h i s i s g a t e B.

Q.    ( C . 259)
           THE CORONER:   Are you sure, Mr. Jones?                                      What is
      turnstiles 1 to 16?

               DCC JONES:             C.256.        Two p h o t o g r a p h s , s i r , C . 2 5 5
      and C .256.          T u r n s t i l e s A t o G, C . 2 5 7 .      C o u r ty a r d and
      m e t a l w a l l C . 2 5 8 a n d C . 2 5 9 i s g a t e B.         We h a v e m i s s i n g
      t u r n s t i l e s A, C a n d B.

              THE CORONER:                No , we h a d t h a t .

Q. Can y o u p u t t h a t b a c k ?      T hat is" t u r n s t i l e s . . .              W h at i s
   t h a t ? - A. T h a t i s t u r n s t i l e s A, C a n d B, s i r ,                 a ls o the
   c o u r t y a r d and th e m e ta l w a l l .

Q.    I see, these are bracketed.                  Now p u t g a t e B u p a g a i n ,
      please.        That i s one of th e e x i t g a te s .         (C .259).       Wh at
      i s t h a t ? - A. T h a t s h o w s g a t e C t o t h e l e f t o f  the w a ll.

Q.     Can y o u p o i n t a t i t ?       - A. Y e s ,        sir.

Q.     ( C . 2 6 0 ) . - A. S i r , t h i s p h o t o g r a p h s h o w s       the g a te locks
       and t h e o b s e r v a t i o n p a n e l i n th e g a t e .

Q. T h e o b s e r v a t i o n p a n e l i s         that l i t t l e    square thing?         - A.
   Yes.

 Q.    ( C . 2 6 1 ) . - A. S i r , t h i s s h o w s a v i e w o f t h e c o n c o u r s e
       beyond th e t u r n s t i l e s and a h o l e i n t h e w a l l w hich l e a d s
       round to th e n o rth - w e s t t e r r a c e .

 Q.    ( C . 2 6 2 ) . - A. T h i s      shows t h e         tunnel     leading to enclosures
       3 and 4 and a l s o shows t h e s t a n d i n g                  s i g n and t h e l e t t e r s
       B and A above th e            tunnel.

 Q. T h i s i s b e h i n d       t h e t u r n s t i l « s . *.   - A. L e a d i n g   from    the
    concourse in to               the e n clo su re s.

 Q.    Down t o w a r d s t h e t e r r a c i n g .    ( C . 2 6 3 ) - A. T . i i s
       p h o t o g r a p h shows t h e s t a n d i n g s i g n on a p i l l a r a t            the    far
       r i g h t of the photograph.

 Q. Can y o u a g a i n p o i n t t o i t u p t h e r e p l e a s e ?   I f you h a d
    f o l l o w e d t h a t you w ould h a v e f i n i s h e d up i n e n c l o s u r e 1.
                                                              S.   BROWN


( C . 2 6 4 ) . - A. T h i s s h o w s a d o u b l e g a t e a t      th e end o f      the
c o n c o u r s e end o f th e t u n n e l .

( C . 2 6 5 ) . - A. T h i s s h o w s t h e g a t e s a t t h e t e r r a c e e n d o f
th e t u n n e l and th e r a d i a l fe n c e which s e p a r a t e s the.t.wo
enclosures.

End o n ,    of c o u rs e ,   the r a d ia l    fence?       - A. Y e s .

(C .266).       T h i s p h o t o g r a p h was o b v i o u s l y t a k e n v e r y s o o n
a f t e r the in c id e n t.        What i s i t ? _ A. T h i s s h o w s t h e
g a te s a t the r e a r of the e n clo su re s g iv in g acc e ss to a l l
of th e e n c l o s u r e s in th e L eppings Lane t e r r a c e s .

Can y o u p o i n t w h e r e t h e y a r e ?     I c a n see^ them b e c a u s e I
know w h e r e t h e y a r e .          (C .267).     J u s t p o in t to the
tunnel e x it.           Y e s . - A. T h i s p h o t o g r a p h s h o w s t h e
b a r r i e r s i n e n c l o s u r e s 3 and 4 .

( C .2 6 8 ) Could you p o i n t o u t w hich i s e n c l o s u r e 3 and
w h i c h i s e n c l o s u r e 4 ? - A. T h i s i s e n c l o s u r e 3 a n d
e n c lo s u re 4.

I t i s j u s t a n o v e r v i e w . - A. T h i s p h o t o g r a p h s h o w s t h e
p e r i m e t e r f e n c e s s e p a r a t i n g th e t e r r a c e s from t h e p i t c h .

(C .269).      The p e o p l e on t h a t p h o t o g r a p h h a d n o t h i n g t o
do w ith i t .     I t j u s t h a p p e n s t h a t t h e y w e r e t h e r e . - A.
T h i s shows t h e t o p o f t h o s e f e n c e s w h e r e t h e w i r e b e n d s
inw ards towards the e n c lo s u re s .

 ( C . 2 7 0 ) . - T h i s shows t h e r a d i a l f e n c e s s e p a r a t i n g    the
 e n c l o s u r e s i n th e L e p p in g s Lane t e r r a c e s .

 (C .271).     - A. T h i s s h o w s t h e p o l i c e c o n t r o l b o x a n d t h e
 electric      c l o c k and d i s p l a y b o a rd above i t .

 J u s t show u s w h ere t h e c l o c k i s .         - A. T h i s    is    the
 e l e c t r i c clock.

 Sw itched o ff?        - A. S w i t c h e d o f f ,    and t h e d i s p l a y b o a r d
 here.

 T h e p o l i c e c o n t r o l b o x i s t h a t b u i l d i n g w i t h t h e wo r d ^
 " S k i p s " w r i t t e n on i t , o r t h a t s t r u c t u r e ? - A. Y e s , s i r .

 ( C . 2 7 2 ) . - A. F i n a l l y , s i r ,   th is   is    an i n t e r n a l view of
 th e p o lic e c o n t r o l box.

 That w i l l be C .273..

         THE CORONER:             Any q u e s t i o n s o f    this    O fficer?
                                                                                                 63


                                                                 S.   BROWN


           MRS. McBRIEN:            S i r , h a v e you a p h o t o g r a p h o f t h e
   a r e a p a s t g a t e C, t h e no m a n ' s l a n d a r e a , w h e r e p e o p l e
   w e re n o t s u p p o s e d t o go b u t t h e y w e n t f o r s a f e t y r e a s o n s ,
   I think?          H av e y o u a n y p h o t o g r a p h s w h e r e t h e y c o u l d h a v e
   gone i n t h a t passageway?                                  _

            THE CORONER:          I know w h a t M r s . M c B r i e n i s a f t e r .
   We w i l l h a v e a l o o k a n d s e e w h e t h e r we h a v e g o t a
   photograph of th a t a re a .            I t i s i n f a c t on t h e a e r i a l
   s h o t s i f you l o o k .     We w i l l s e e w h e t h e r we h a v e g o t o n e
   w h i c h m i g h t show t h a t a r e a f o r y o u .

            MRS. McBRIEN:             Thank you, sir.

          THE CORONER:         Thank you, O f f i c e r .  PC Br own w i l l
    be b ack p r o b a b ly tomorrow m orning w i t h t h e v i d e o s .

             Next M ichael Layton i f he i s h e r e .                  You a r e s w o r n
    a c t u a l l y , Mr. L a y t o n s o y o u d o n ' t n e e d t o b e s w o r n a g a i n .

            L a d i e s a n d g e n t l e m e n , w i t n e s s e s who h a v e a l r e a d y
    b e e n sworn I c a n s e e no a d v a n t a g e i n r e - s w e a r i n g .           Are
    you h a p p y w i t h t h a t o r d i d y o u w i s h t o h e a r h i m s w o r n ?
    I c a n n o t s e e any p o i n t i n i t .

                               MICHAEL LAYTON C a l l e d

                                    By THE CORONER:

             THE WITNESS:             S i r , M ichael         L ayton, D e te c tiv e
    I n s p e c t o r , c o l l a r number 9364 o f            t h e West M id lan d s
    Police.

Q. Now y o u h a v e p r e p a r e d a s umma ry o n v i d e o a n d p h o t o g r a p h i c
   e v i d e n c e ? - A. T h a t i s c o r r e c t , s i r .

Q. Wo ul d y o u p l e a s e g i v e i t t o me? I t w i l l b e p e r f e c t l y i n
   o r d e r f o r y o u t o r e a d i t t o me b e c a u s e I d o n ' t e x p e c t y o u
   t o r e m e m b e r i t . - A. Y e s , s i r .         S i r , fo llo w in g the
   H i l l s b o r o u g h d i s a s t e r , a v id e o and p h o t o g r a p h i c s e c t i o n
   was f o r m e d a s p a r t o f t h e m a in i n q u i r y team t o l o o k a t
   a l l a s p e c t s of v i s u a l e v i d e n c e a v a i l a b l e from v a r i o u s
   sources.

     As s u c h , b e t w e e n t h e 1 9 t h o f A p r i l , 1 9 8 9 a n d t h e 9 t h o f
     May, 1 9 9 0 , I was r e s p o n s i b l e on a f u l l - t i m e b a s i s f o r t h e
     s u p e r v i s i o n of t h i s p a r t i c u l a r team o f o f f i c e r s .

     Our p r i m a r y f u n c t i o n was t h e c o l l a t i o n and e x a m i n a t i o n o f
     s u c h m a t e r i a l i n i t i a ’ l y f o r t h e j u d i c i a l ' i n q u i r y and
     l a t t e r l y fo r the C o ro n e r's in q u e s ts .

     V ideo r e c o r d i n g s , b o t h p r i o r t o t h e e v e n t , d u r i n g and
     u l t i m a t e l y showing t h e a f t e r m a t h w ere o b t a i n e d from a
                                                                                                         64



                                                                    M.   LAYTON




     number o f a g e n c i e s .          T h is m a t e r i a l which v a r i e d b o th in
     c o n t e n t , q u a l i t y o f p i c t u r e a n d e v i d e n t i a l v a l u e was
     v ie w e d by members o f t h e te a m , c o p i e d and s c h e d u l e d .
     E a c h f i l m a n d p h o t o g r a p h werfe g i v e n a u n i q u e r e f e r e n c e
     number.           The s c h e d u l e s p r e p a r e d w ere i n th e m s e l v e s a
     p r e c i s o f t h e e v e n t s s h ow n on f i l m .

     U l t i m a t e l y , s i r , a c o m p o s i t e f i l m was p r e p a r e d i n
     c o n ju n c tio n w ith the T reasury S o l i c i t o r ' s D epartm ent,
     w h i c h w a s s hown a t L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r ' s I n q u i r y .  This
     f i l m was d e s i g n e d t o show w h a t was f e l t t o b e t h e m o s t
     im p o r ta n t sce n e s and seq u e n c e of e v e n t s .

     S ir,    that    f i l m was g i v e n t h e r e f e r e n c e n u m b e r MRE.2.

Q.   I s t h a t th e one t h a t        I...     - A. T h a t i s       the com posite
     film , s i r .

Q. T h e c o m p i l a t i o n ?   - A. T h e c o m p i l a t i o n ,    sir,    yes.
                                                             u

Q. I t h i n k i t i s r i g h t - y o u h a v e , s a i d i t b u t I j u s t w a n t
   you t o c o n f i r m i t - t h i s w a s n ' t p r e p a r e d s o l e l y by t h e
   West M i d l a n d s , i t was d o n e i n c o n j u n c t i o n w i t h t h e
   T r e a s u r y S o l i c i t o r s ? - A. T h a t i s a b s o l u t e l y c o r r e c t ,
   sir.

Q. T h e y h a d s o m e b o d y t h e r e who w as l o o k i n g ?         - A. P h y s i c a l l y
   p re se n t, yes, s i r .

      L i k e w i s e p h o t o g r a p h i c m a t e r i a l was o b t a i n e d fr o m v a r i o u s
      s o u r c e s w h i c h was e x a m i n e d a n d s c h e d u l e d i n t h e same
      m anner.          C ontinuity in re sp e c t of a l l th is m a te ria l is
      n o t n e c e s s a r ily com plete s in c e th e person handing over
      th e m a te r ia l to the p o lic e i s not n e c e s s a r ily th e person
      o rig in atin g that m aterial.




                           In an e f f o r t     to a n a ly se ..
n/|kL*J'r.
I                                                                               65

             A


                                                                      - M LAYTON

                 In an effort to analyse the contents of the visual evidence
             B   for the purposes of- the Inquest some of the material has
                 been grouped into a number of key areas. As such the
                 sequence of events as referred to here in this statement do
                 not run in strictly chronological form, rather it deals
                 with a number of specific points.

                    First of all, sir, having regard to the movements of
                 people at the Leppings Lane end of the ground I can make
                 the following observations with regard to the visual
             C   evidence. On a video film reference TB2 which was filmed
                 on the South Yorkshire Police CCTV system using an operator
                 set database, in other words, this shows the date and time
                 on which the film was recorded, this camera has pan
                 facilities.
                    It should be noted that videos RJH1 and RJH2 have no
                 such time clock and these relate to Sheffield Wednesday
                 Football Club's own video system."' In order to try to
                 establish the times of events shown on these tapes a
             D   comparison was made from events that occurred on the RJH2
                 tape which are also shown on the video referenced TB2 taken
                 from almost identical positions and which show almost
                 identical footage.

                    To be specific at 14:47:38 hours on the tape referenced
                 TB2 a youth is seen to jump from the roof of Turnstiles A
                 to G into the concourse area. This same scene can be seen
                 on the tape referenced RJH2. On the tape referenced TB2
             £   again at 14:52:30 hours a youth is seen standing against a
                 wall near to Gate C with his arm raised and an identical
                 scene is shown on the tape reference RJH2. The timings of
                 other events as they appear on RJH2 can then be calculated
                 using what is called a real time counter on a video player
                 from either side of these fixed points.

                    THE CORONER:   Just pause for a minute.     (To the Jury)
                 Have you understood what he is saying?
             F
                 Q. What you are saying is that two of these tapes did not
                 have a time clock on them? - A. That is right, yes.

                 Q. An operator one?   -   A.   Yes, that is right.

                 Q. Then you try to match scenes which were identical and
                    once you had got a time for that scene you could
                    calculate backwards and forwards? - A. Yes, that
                    is right, sir, using a real time counter.

                 Q. Please carry on? - A. By using this method of
                    calculation it is estimated that the tape, referenced
                                                         M LAYTON

  RJH2, would have been switched on at about 12:56
  hours. The same will apply for all the tapes given
  the reference RJH because I understand they were all
  switched on at the same time by PC 1421 Guest of the
  South Yorkshire Police who I believe has since
  retired.
      On a video tape referenced TB2 at 12:00:48 hours,
  supporters are shown arriving in a slow trickle and
  entering the ground at the Leppings Lane end. At
  13:40 hours on the same video a steady flow of
  supporters are seen entering the ground and at
  13:56:33 hours on the same tape the volume of
  supporters has increased. At 14:35:30 hours there is
  a very dense crowd in the courtyard and the perimeter
  gate area. A view of the courtyard is also shown on
  the BBC tape which has been given the reference
  number Map 9. This is a digital reference of 0602
  and the estimated time of that is at 14:35 hours.

Q. Can you just pause there for a moment?   -   A.   Yes.
   THE CORONER:  Members of the Jury, are you happy with
that? I just wanted to be sure that we know what we are
talking about.
Q. I want to turn to the digital reference now?      -   A.
   Yes, sir.
Q. The advantage of having the digital reference is that
   you can find the frame, the scene on the tape, but it
   does not tell you anything about times, is that
   right?
A. At a period of time which in fact I have covered at
   the bottom of this page but it does not show an
   actual time.
Q. Carry on? - A. Again on Map 9, digital reference
   0842 a crowd is gathered.in the Leppings Lane end and
   the courtyard is full. At a digital reference of
   0906 Superintendent Marshall is shown amongst the
   crowd. At a digital reference of 1034 youths are
   shown climbing over a metal ribbed gate on to the
   roof of Turnstile 16. Between a digital reference of
   1212 and 1239 Superintendent Marshall is shown
   outside the gates in Leppings Lane, the whole area of
   which is heavily congested. With regard to the tape
   reference Map 9, as I have said, there is an operator
   set digital database on the film. In the initial
   stages only an estimated time can be worked out on
   the basis that the BBC cameraman, Ian Young, states
                                                 M LAYTON

that filming took place outside the ground at the
Leppings Lane end between 14:35 hours and 14:50 hours
and indeed there are also apparent breaks- in the
filming. In respect of subsequent filming inside the
ground it is accurately timed and time based between
15:03:30 and 15:16:58.

    On a video tape referenced RJH2 at an estimated
time of 14:46 hours a number of youths are seen to
climb on to the roofs of Turnstiles A to G from
outside prior to dropping into the stadium. On a
video tape TB2 at 14:55:21, supporters are shown in
the concourse area moving towards the tunnel. A
number of these changed direction towards a gap in
the wall which gives access to the north side of the
ground.
    On video tape RJH2 which.gives an estimated time
of 15:05 hours, the turnstile area and outside
courtyards are clear of incoming supporters. An
Officer in a flat cap and two Police Constables are
seen to run from outside Gate C along the perimeter
drive towards the south stand. Seconds afterwards a
Police Constable runs through Gate C towards the west
stand closely followed from all the Officers in the
turnstile area.
    Sir, in respect of vehicle movement at 14:08:20
hours on a video tape reference TB1, a South
Yorkshire Police video, traffic flowed quite freely
and continued to do so until 14:33:08 where it can be
seen that no traffic is able to flow due to
pedestrian congestion in Leppings Lane. At 14:33:27
on the tape TB1 a bus and two cars are seen moving
slowly through the crowd in the roadway.

     At 14:35:56 hours on TB2 another bus moves
through the crowd and at 14:36:24 a car. At 14:41:15
a coach moves through the crowd and at 14:45:01 what
looks like a white roofed vehicle is seen arriving in
Leppings Lane immediately behind a bus from the
direction of Penistone Road. At 14:45:03 this bus
passes another one coming in the opposite direction
but the white roofed vehicle remains stationary in
the crowd. Sir, from research of the written
evidence I believe in fact this vehicle was a Police
Landrover being driven by PC 1863 Buxton of the South
Yorkshire Police.
        THE CORONER:   He will be called in due course.
                                                  M LAYTON



Please continue. - A. No further vehicles apart
from this one are seen until at 14:55:35 hours a bus
and a car are seen and a further vehicle at 14:57:25
hours. These latter two vehicles come to a halt in
Lepping>9- Lane and remain stationary. In thp tape
RJH2 the vehicle believed to be the Police Landrover
drove through the courtyard area passed Gate C on the
perimeter drive at an estimated time of 15:06:49
hours.
     In relation to the perimeter gate which
separates the turnstile area from Leppings Lane I can
make the following observation with regard to the
visual evidence. At 14:35:22 hours on a video tape
referenced TB2 the perimeter gates are open giving
access to turnstiles and the area near to Gate C.
Can you point to which perimeter gates we are talking
about on the screen? Can you find the overhead and
put that up too? - A. Yes.      At 14:40:26 hours on
the same video all the perimeter gates appear closed.
At 14:52:57 on TB2 people can be seen to be climbing
over the closed perimeter gates. At 14:53:40 hours
this second gate from the left as you look at the
screen opens and supporters enter the turnstile area
in front of Turnstiles A to G.
I realise this is not the video you are referring to
as this is a still but is that the gate we are
talking about can you remember? - A. Yes, looking
at it from the opposite direction the video camera is
there.
From the inside out and so it is the one that is on
the right on this photograph? — A. That is right,
sir, yes.
You heard the question from Mrs. McBrien about the
sterile area, is that the area where the van is
parked? - A. I believe it is slightly further in
than where the van is parked.
Further in towards the ground are you saying? - A.
(to the Court- Officer) If you could just perhaps
indicate Gate C for me I believe that the sterile
area was more or less to the far side of that gate.

     MR. HALE:   It is clear on the model, sir.
                                                                          69

    A


                                                                 M LAYTON

            Q.        THE CORONER:   Could you please continue? I am
    B            sorry to have interrupted you. - A. At 14:53:44
                 hours the left hand perimeter gates are open. At
                 14:55:17 hours the right hand perimeter gates can be
                 seen open. At 14:56:32 hours the area in front of A
                 to G up to the perimeter gates appear clearer and
                 Police Officers can be seen holding the crowd back to
                 the roadside of the perimeter gates. At 15:02:11
                 hours there is a close up view of the perimeter gate
                 area which shows that they are open and relatively
                 clear with supporters entering the ground.
                      Four photographs taken by Michael Warburton Lee
                 of the South Yorkshire Police show some damage to a
                 retaining bolt of the second set of perimeter gates
                 as you look from the groundside towards Leppings
                 Lane. These photographs are referenced as DPP190.
                 There is no acetate available at the moment for you
                 to view.
    D                 In respect of visual evidence relating to
                 mounted Officers at the Leppings Lane end of the
                 ground the video tapes that cover this area are South
                 Yorkshire Police CCTV and on tape referenced TB2,
                 also Sheffield Wednesday Football Club's CCTV on a
                 tape referenced RJH2 and a BBC TV outside broadcast
                 on a tape referenced Map 9.
                      At a digital reference of 0602, estimated time
                 14:35 on video Map 9, two mounted Officers can be
                 seen directly in front of Turnstiles A to G near to
\                Gate B.
            Q. Pause again. Have we got the acetate plan of the
               ground and if so put it up please? Carry on reading
               but start again with "mounted Officers"? - A. At a
               digital reference of 0602, estimated time 14:35 on
               video Map 9, two mounted Officers can be seen
               directly in front of Turnstiles A to G near to Gate
               B. At 14:35:22 hours on video reference TB2 two
               mounted Officers can be seen apparently talking to
               supporters in front of Turnstiles A to G.
                       Between digital references 0839 to 0847 on a
                  video Map 9, nine mounted Officers can.be seen in the
                  courtyard area from the outer perimeter gates to the
                  Turnstiles A to G. At 14:38:08 on video reference
                  TB2 a mounted Officer can be seen attempting to ease
                  the crowd back from Turnstiles and Gate C. At an
                  estimated time of 14:48:23 on video reference RJH2 a
                  mounted Officer can be seen blocking the entry of




        H
                                                M LAYTON

supporters through Gate C. This can also be seen at
14:48:26 hours on vide reference TB2.
     At 14:49 hours on video referenced TB2 a mounted
officer can be seen outside Gate C controlling the
crowd* At 14:51:50 hours, four ,mounted Officers can
be seen outside Gate C. At 14:53 hours four mounted
Officers can be seen controlling the crowd in the
area of Gate C. At 14:53:32 hours two mounted
Officers can be seen supervising the flow of
supporters through Gate C.
     In order to try and analyse the visual evidence
available in respect of the opening of the concertina
gates referred to as A, B and C, it is necessary to
refer to three video tapes. Video tapes referenced
RJH2 and RJH1 are black and white video, of poor
quality and with no sound. RJR2 refers to a fixed
site camera which overlooks the rear of Turnstiles A
to G and the concourse area. ' RJHl is also part of
the system and covers the area of Gate A and the
concourse area. The particular reference to the
concertina Gate C, sir, it is apparent from visual
evidence on the day in question it was regularly
being used as an entrance and exit point for a number
of reasons i.e. the ejection of supports and the
movement of Police-personnel.
     Being more specific on a tape referenced TB2
timed at 14:39:31 hours a boy is carried through Gate
C by Police Officers. The gate appears to be closed
at 14:40:45 hours. On a video tape referenced RJH2
with an estimated time of 14:48:04 hours Gate C was
opened to eject a support.




                        /At this stage
                                                           71




At this stage a lar-ce number of supporters      rushed
‘hrough the gate into the concourse area.

On the same tape, at an estimated time of 14:48:31
nours Gate C is .closed.   On the same tape at an
estimated time of 14:52:06 hours Gate C is again
 • :'oned, and a large number of supporters entered
through it int'-; th? ground.  At 14:57:40 hours, as
shown on the tape referenced T B 2 , Gate C is closed.

On a vid^o ta >e referenced RJH2 at an estimated time of
14:."9:12 hours Gite C is again onened, with supporters
ent~ri-ig tno ground.    In respect of Gate A on a video
tape referenced Tl32 it is apparently open at 14:58:09 '
hours witn su ;port ;rs entering via it.   At a time
estimated at 14:5i> t."ie same -cene is siown on tne video
tape referenc    itJHl.   On video tape referenced TB2 at
14:58:23 a line of Police are shown supervising the
supporters trirougn Gate A.

T.iere is no clear evidence, sir, of openings in
relation to G3te B.   Tne video tape from the camera
that covers tnis area is one of two that .vere found to
be missing wnen they were originally taken possession
of.

Sir, I feel it is important to point out in respect of
all t ie estirmted timings, civen that where seconds are
indicated tn~re are always likely to be slight
variations and t.nese are dependent on the individual's
interpretation of a particular sequence of film.

T.e events that occurred inside the ground leading up
to kick-off and until the football matcn was stopped,
«ere recorded by BBC television and a main recording,-
t >getner with individual recordings from separate
camera angles, «as sup>lied to the Inquirv, as
previously referred to.

Having vie .c*' th? main recording, reference-' Ma'> 1,
‘••hich is a BSC tipe, and in particular the movements of
sj,>pirt•:rs in Enclosures 3 and 4 of the Leppings Lane
end, I an atle to make tne following observations.        At
■U : 3 -|"+ ' tT*re is a strong surce of people along the
  *vir.ing i enze between Enclosures 3 and 4.     At i4:40:09
a y o u t r : irs a   tc.j is seen standing on top of a
carrier in Enclosure 3.        At the same time a beacn ball
is bei g pjsfri *’ arou d by the crowd in tne same
enclosure.

At 1*: 40:1 • n :urs tn?re is a furtner sur.:e of people in
E n c l o s u r e ^ tLong tie ividing fence with Enclosure 3.
At 1«:40:34 n^urs a youth in a blue to.) is seen on top
of a harrier in Lnclosure 3, near to tne dividing fence
of Encioijr.          . At 1^:45:41 nours a you t.n in a whits
top is .'een cancing on a barrier in Enclosure 3.
                                                                 72




At 1A :A G :2 9 hours Jo in Motson, a. BBC commentator, makes
a remark about the-emptiness of Enclosure G. At
1A:A7:33 hour.s a youth in abrown too is seen standing
on a barrier in Enclosure 3        and the youth in the white
top, as previou-ly referred        to, is pulled off at
1 A :A 7:AG n o u r s .

At 1A :A 9:53 hours a hole develops in the crowd in
Enclosure 3 and people appear to be looking down at ‘.ne
floor.    Three-rrren; wiio had' faTl'fen over are seen to get
up.   At 1A:50:26 hours t.nere is considerable crowd^
movement in Enclosure 3 but still no apparent problems
at tne i'ront of the enclosure.          At 1A:55:A9 nours a
str.mg sjr.e from t-ne direction of the tunnel, into
Enclosures 3 and A, takes place.           In respect of
Enclosure 3 the s u r e is along the dividing fence, and
in -.ne case of Enclosure A the surge is down and to the
right as you look at the screen.

      At 15:07:.)9 hours    ....

      TH,-: CO RO N E R : You are talking about the video, of
cdu.-se.    Can you just turn round, and when you say to
tne right, I think on the plan it would be towards the
1'.t, would that be right, in Enclosure A? - A. As you
loo.< at it, sir, it would be to the ri~ht.       It is to
 ne 1-. ft on tne I’lan, yes, but to the right as you look
on tne screen.

Ye^, tnat is right.     The cameras are looking at it from
 .ne o.ner end. - A. At 15:07:09 hours supporters are
sn v.;n bei ig pulle^ up from thz- rear of Enclosures 3 and
A into tne seated area above.      At 15:^7:15 nours a
l^r~e s :r-e takes place in Enclosure 3, from the left
of -.entire to tne rignt front as viewed on tne screen-,
a id tne video tape referenced TB1, w.nich is again Soutn
Yorrcsmre Police CCTV, at 1A:59:0A nours, Cate A can be
seen open, and at 14:59:2.* hours Gate 3 can be seen
•pen.

At lA:5v:5l hours G3te 1 was opened to allow supporters
;rom •„ ie trnck area into tie enclosure.

Fr.»r c ph;to^ra:;n taken by Soutn Yorkshire Police at a
time sTown at 15:03 Giie 3 can be seen open.
Pnoto^rapn referenc d PR1/1 A specifically r e f e r s At
a time snown as 15:0‘ A nours Gate A can still be seen
open and pnoto^raoh referenced PtU/22A specifically
refers, again taken by South Yorkshire .Poiice.

I have been u.inole to establish, sir, anv visual
ey, en;e to oug'est that tnese perimeter gates were
   o s *~ u        tn':'se Prirticul^r time.-. It should oe
, yt ;d that t >e t i n t s s lown on fsese p:io:os?/:?Dns was sot
D;. t i m d i v i d u -i camera operator by reference to his
own     atch.    Tney were not s / nc i ronis=d, nor were tnev
                                                                       73




   verified. In other worcis, the photograph referenced
  'PR1/1A sht>‘
              ./s a time of 15:01, whilst a clock on the
   photograph in the grou :d shows 15:00 so there is a
   . <riation, sir.

0. So tnat could mean that either ha is a minuto fast or
     ie clock is a minute slow, or :oth of tnem could be
   wrong? ~ A. That is ri.-^ht, sir.  Having viewed the main
   v’irleo recording referenced Map 1 I am able to sive tne
   following infornation in relotion to events o n ’the
    dtch.

0. \,Tir> re-ar i to th? BBC filns, th-? Ma > Is and 9s, I
    th: nk ■;ne computer set tne times, is that right? - A.
   That is r :.c;ht, si-, excent for th* outside.    We are
   S:tisfied that toe l i a s inside would have been
   correct.

0. T h . timi gs we are now getting to, on Map 1, 'these
   would be accu-ate as far as you can tell? - A. Yes,
   si-.    At 14:51:0 ; th-i Liverpool team was announced,
   foil ’..ed at 14:51:47 by the Nottingham Forest tea~.
   Th se annou c ments caused obvious excitement amongst
   : ie -u p u r t e r s . Tne Liverpool team came onto tne pitch
   a: 14:54:0< hour.-, followed by tne Nottingham Forest
   team at 14:55:22.         The two teams were joined on tie
   p;ten at 14:57:25 nours by tne referee and linesmen.
   Tie toss-up took .lace at a time snown as 14:57:^rf
   h >ur • and it shjul-: be note'1 at this point, sir, that
   *. le  -tnbase actually stopped counting for a short
   perio . I do'i't know wiat the explanation for that is
   but it re-tarted again at 14:58:43 iiours, and tne match
   kic'<e off at 14:59:30.

   At l-:00:32 a cornc-r ki:k to Nottingham Forest w?.s
   :i.*-<r ed at. the north west corner of the pitch.      At
   1 :00:41 hours a lsrge grou.) of supporters are seen
   being led by Police .’rom tie direction of Enclosures 3
   and 4 t -v/arns tne Nortn Stand.        At 15:00:43 hours
    •up porters are seen climbing over t ne perimeter fence
   f.-om Enel os ire 4 to th ■ pitch side.      At 15:00:50 nours
   t e corner kick to Nottingham Forest was taken r'rom tne
   n ''“t ‘ we = t corner.    At l:-:04:09 hours Gate 3 is open,
   S,jpf ^ >rters .-*re s lown climbing from Enclosure 3 into
   Erie:os^re 4 via tu- dividing feicc, and people leaning
   :n -vsr tie pe *i ter fente in an appirent effort to
   reatn pco le i tno eric3os :res.

   P ay -on-.i'uad and at 1 5 : 0 4 : r>2 nours a Peter iie.-.rdslev
   sh t hit th:- crnss -ar of tne N o t t i n g h a m ‘Forest goal.
   Sh rtly a ter.: rds, at 15:05:24 nours, Superintendent
   Creenwoo* ran ont    tn - pitch tDv;ar*s th? referee and
     •e natch .as  topped.

   On v .'i ‘o tape referenced ila ■> 5, w;ii„n is agair; BBC TV
   -ove "a^e, out from a sep-.r.nte canera an-.le,
                                                              74




  Su ^er ntend nt Murray can be seen on the football
  pitch, gesturing to Liverpool supporters at a time
  referenced 15:05:35 hours.

  With regard to tno rescue operation, visually on a Map
  1 BBC tape at 15:07:09 nours supporters can be seen
  b-?.i :■ pulled from th--: rear of Enclosures 3 and 4 into
  i ie seated area.    At 15:08:54 hours Police Officers can
  b:- seen at tne perimeter fence motioning towards people
  in Enclosure 3 to move back from the fence.       At
  1 “ :0 •:51 hours is seen the first sighting of a casualty
  and tnis sho-.’s hirn being taken towards t ie Spion Kop on
  an ambul nc     stretcher.

  At 1 : :1>':03 nours on Ma.> 9 a South Yorkshire Police
  Ins > cior is seen and heard to request a serial of
  Police Officers.      At tnis point he is on the perimeter
  tr-^ck near to Enclosure 2.     At 15:10:24 hours, Map 7,
  whi n is also a 3BC tape, shows Police Officers placing
  a Lad.er against tne perimeter fence at the Leppings
  Lani end.      At 1 :12:lo hours on Map 1 Chief
  S ’perintencent Ne^bit is snown on the perimeter track
  n.-a.r t..- Enclosure 3.  At 15:12:50 hours on Map 7
  supporters are shown sitting and lying on the pitch at
  t is Lepp ngs Lane end of tne ground receiving
  attention.

  Th  fi-st si ;hting of a casualty leaving thi stadium is
  snown at an estimated time of 15:15:40 hours and is^
  sh-wn on tne tape referenc'd RJ112, when a casualty is
  zarried inrough Gate C by supporters to an ambulance.

   At 1 : 1 4 : 5 1 hours on Map 1 Superintendent Greenwood can
   be jeen on tne oitch using his personal radio.

   At 1' :1 : 11 hours on Ma> 1 a casualty is seen being
   :nr.*i:-d from Enclosure 3 into the tunnel by a Police
   Officer and a s ’pport-r.   At 15:15:33 hours on flap 9 a
   St. John's ambulance is seen arriving on the pitch and
   b i g driven towards th= Leppings Lane terraces.

Q. Is that 9, nr Map 1? - A. Sorrv, that is Map 1.         At
   1 :1 :0 • hours on Mao 7 a group of supportc-rs can be
   ;een pulling down tie perir.ter fence at tne front of
   Enclosure 4.    At 1 :1 :12 hours on Map 1 a large n.rnber
   of Police Officers move from tne Kop end of tie ground
   t   rus t'.e L e o p n g s La ie end. On Map 7 .at 15:19:24
   '.p nrters are snown at Gate 3 being carried out of tne
   enciosjre by Police Officer .

   On a vi';eo referenced TB2 at 15:19:5S hours
   Superintend nt Gree vood is seen at th-a perimeter fence
   of l le Leppings Lane terrace, apparently using a
   lou nailer to corimu icate with supporters in Enclosure
   3.    A second ambulance arrives at tne l\op end, this
   b:-i ig a Soucn Yorkshire Metropolitan ambulnnce, which
                                                                                            75



        is shown at 15:20:41 hours on a video referenced flap 1.
        Evid?nc  of the rescue operation, sir, continues for
        3ome time and,_is snown on video and photogoraphic
        foo ane.

        Vid:o ev dcnce was also obtained from the FA Cu ) semi-
    B   ti.^ils neld at Hillsborough in 1981 and 198''.                          With
        regard to tne 1 ‘J8 semi-.‘inn 1, this match was filme-"1 by
        Yorkshire TV.           Tiere is no database on the recording.
        Ho.v~ver, at a comme.,tar\' time, 15:11 p.m., tns
        c o n n e n : t o r remarks., about supporters being on the pitch
        be ai r,d tne goal at the Leppings Lane end, and
        supporters can be seen climbing tne perimeter fence
        onto the pitch.           Thu-re tnen follows views of supporters
        sittin: on           ie tOi. icnline b e h i nd t n e g o a l , m a r s h a l l e d by
        t It: Police.

\       At haif-time tn.-.‘ supporters on the pitch ran up the
         itch towards the Spion Kop.      Tne Police cordon is
        sob eque .tly pl.-ice-’ arouid the pitch and there are no
        L'ur. :er points of interest.

        Wit1 , re.’a,* t? th*" s emi-!'iaa 1. held on 9th April 1938,
        • '.ere is video -vi.;ence available from the South
    D   Yor :snire Police CCTV r e f e r e n c e TB5/2 and TB5/3, and
         ■Iso BBC television referenced JG1 and JC2.         The video
        ta.)-"S are available and show extensive cover-jge of the
        bui -:-up and match coverage.         As a comparison exercise,
        a composite video tape w^s prepare • wnich shows crowd
        ■'c .93 at m e Lepoings Lane end outside the ground
        bc-tw -e • 14:00 and 15:02 hours on boti 9tn April, 1983
        •and i5th A sri 1, 1981;. This, sir, has been :;iven tne
        re rere.ic n:j;nbor SDB1.

        fr >m tnis v duo it car. be seeo that at 14:00 nours in
        1988 ,.ie pe -i.;eter gat-^s nearest c:ie River Don are
        clos.f   creating a s t e r l e area along tnc side of the
        tur ~iiles A-G, t •..v.rds Gate C, wnereas in 1989 t lase
        gates are open a.id people can be seen moving freely in
        t lis area.     At 14:16 nours in 1988 there is a build up
        of support rs i *. front of turnstile~ A-G, and bac'*:
        •.ilong Lepoings Lane.     In 1989 the build up is more
        s.-'ere and t i_- area near to Gate C has become ver;
        crow ed.     In 1938 at 14:29 -tours the road.;ay in
        Lepp ngs Lan.. remai s rel tivelv clear, a! tn-iugh
        crow        w'.eraas at 14:3-J lours in 193V tie Lep ings
        La.n: 3rea :;as be^r.ie ver.- congests*, with snoport :r~
        soilling into tne centre of Leppings Lane and blocking
        t     road.

        At 14:4 5 h->urs i : 1933 , although it is verv crowded,
        traffic is -till able to ,>ass and tne perimeter gates
        a-e s*.ill clos-j-u, whereas at 14:43 nours in 1939 t n a
        .irea in ‘ront of the turnstiles and Lepoings Lane is
        t tal 1 v bio ; ;;e :.
                                                               76




At 14:52 hours i ; 1 88 tn- area adjacent remains
sterile, whereas at 14:52 hours in 1989 the concertina
£ a t e C was opened to allow supporters into the ground.
At 15:01 iiours in :.)oth 198S and 1989 the crowd in
Leppings Lane is v e r •• similar in size and under
control.

Sir, daring th; course of the preliminary inquests I
?.ave vi-'.ence in res')-ec t of locations at which it was
bol.eved that th? deceased were either alive or dead or
Soth. in Enclosures 3 and 4.      Plans were produced in
respect of individual deceased.       Subsequently composite
 <l*tns were prepared of some of t.iese locations, based
o:i my evidenc , by Miss Da.-.’n Goodall, senior plan
d.*awer of the West Ni -lands Police.     Because of tie
problems associated wit-a tr>’i g to put all locations of
  eceasec on t iese two 'Ians, tney actually only s tow
tne l a s ' position establish vi alive, and th» first
w lere believed - eceased.

Sir, I produce a composite plan referenced DilG9 in
res _ct of tie 1 n a t i o n of the positions of deceased
alive, and a composite plan refere .ce^ D.iGlO w h e r e t h e y
were believed to be      eceased in ’the enclosures.  Sir,
there are over eads 3 vai*able of those two plans.




   /0. Yes. - A. Tnere is one joint
                                                           77

                                             M ■ LAYTON


  Sir, there are overheads available of these two plans. There
 /is one point which I need to raise in respect of one of the
  plans, sir. Since the limited Inquests, Mrs. Traynor, mother
  of two of the deceased, has viewed visual evidence again. At
  the limited Inquest a plan was produced which showed
  Christopher in enclosure No. 3 at 14:45, and that location is
  reproduced on the plan DRG.9.  Since that time Mrs. Traynor
  has found Christopher alive at 14:45 outside the ground. So
  in fact I would ask you to disregard the one location in
  relation to the deceased No. 60 as shown on that plan.

Q. What time was he shown on the plan? Would you repeat the
   time? - A. 14:52 outside the ground, sir, and 14:45 was the
   original identification by Mrs. Traynor inside the ground.

Q. So what you are saying is Mrs. Traynor has now reidentified
   him but alive at an earlier time than she originally thought?
   - A. In fact alive at a later time.  So in fact, the point I
   am making is on the plan DRG.9 we should disregard the
   location shown for that particular location.

Q. We will deal with this again.
                                     u

          THE CORONER:   This, Mr..King, is a typical example of
     the corrections one would wish to make with regard to the
     summaries.  I did not know what Inspector Layton has just told
     me. but it is clear it needs amendment, and obviously we would
     want to get that right.

            THE WITNESS:   I can tell you the original plan which
     was produced at the limited Inquest was given the reference
     No. C.140.

       THE CORONER:   Before you put that up can we number that
     plan of the ground C.274.  The plan of the ground is C.274.
     Can you put the next one up:

Q. Inspector Layton, which one is this? - A. If we go
   chronologically as far as the statement is concerned it should
   be the other way round.  I don't think it matters as such.

Q. You mean the deceased first? - A, I am sorry, is this the
   first one, sir? This is the deceased alive.

Q.   I think we will   have the people alive first. - A. This plan
     is DRG.9.

Q.   That is C.275.   These are the people last seen alive as far as
     you can establish based upon the evidence which you gave at
     the interim Inquests? - A. That is correct, sir. and it is
     this plan which bears the identification which I have just
     referred to in respect of Christopher Traynor.

Q. I don’t suppose you know where he is? - A. It is to the top.
   just near to the top.  (Indicated on plan)

Q. Can we get Miss Goodhall to delete it? - A. We can do. sir.
                                                                  78

                                                   M. LAYTON

               ,                                                          •
               j                      _
Q./And we will then reproduce it as an amended version.  It gives
   you a visual impression of where the people were when last
   seen alive on the visual evidence.  Put the other one up now,
   please.   - A. This plan is DRG.10.

Q. That will be C.276.
           THE CORONER:    Members of the Jury, the purpose of this
     is, just to ;give you an impression where the people were to
     save you looking at 95 individual plans:

Q. That is     right, is not it? - A. Thatis right.

Q. It does   not have 95 spots on it because we did not find^
   everybody on the visual evidence? - A. That is right, sir.
   Finally, as I have already stated, the events outlined in this
   statement are not actually in chronological order. and to
   assist with this particular aspect a schedule has been
   prepared which has been referenced SB.l, which seeks to place
   some of the events into chronological order.    I produce that
   schedule.
Q. Have we got that on an overhead as well, perchance? - A. I
   understand the quality is not....

Q. It is too difficult to read.           C.277.

           MR. KING:      Would it be possible to have photocopies of
     it?
          THE CORONER:       We will do that.      Tomorrow morning you
     will have them.
           THE WITNESS:      Sir, that completes my evidence.

Q.        THE CORONER:   What we are trying to do with that
     schedule is to pick out some of the major events.    You havt.
     given us an awful lot of detail which is useful, but that
     picks out some of the major events in chronological order as
     to the outside of the ground and to the inside? - A. That is
     right, sir, and where there is an ”E ” , that is estimated time,
     sir.
          THE CORONER:    It is supposed to be an aide memoire so if
     somebody savs. "Wnat time aid that gate open?", we can tell.
     It is difficult to follow because there are so many numbers,
     but basically he was telling us events which he and his team
     found either on photographs or videos, and relating to various
     things.  When you see the schedule it will be shorter. We
     will have tness available tomorrow morning.

           Any questions of Inspector Layton?
                                                                    79


                                                     M. LAYTON


                            Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:
          /


     Q. You referred at a point about quarter-of-the-way through your
        evidence,.to a photograph taken by a photographer called
        Warburton Lee.  I just did not get the reference. - A. The
JJ      reference given is DPP.190

     Q. What was that of? - A. It is in relation to damage to a
        retaining bolt of the second set of perimeter gates as you
        look from the ground side towards Leppings Lane.

     Q.            THE CORONER:   Can you point? - A. It is the second set
              of perimeter gates as you look from the ground side towards
              Leppings Lane.

     Q. We will put the overhead on. Show us which one it is?
        (Indicated) - A. That is right, sir, the second set of
        perimeter gates from the ground side towards Leppings Lane.
        Exactly where Mr. Brown is pointing.

     Q. That is C.254

                             Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS:

     Q. Mr. Layton, could you help me with just a number of matters.
        How many   people in your team? - A. It varied initially from at
        its height I think 12 to as a norm        an average of 6.

     Q. Let us put to one side for a moment the accumulation of the
        evidence.   I am only concerned with the looking at the
        evidence, particularly of the video evidence, and you have
        told us something of your observations, and when 1 say "you" I
        mean you and your team, of, for example, outside and then
        inside the ground of certain parts of different videos. Could
        you help   me with this against that     background. Taking,for
        example,   what was seen on the videos inside the ground, for
        example, the BBC film that was being taken, in order to
        produce the observations which you have produced how long
        approximately would the film have been looked at for? I don't
        want it 5 minutes, 10 minutes.   How many hours? - A.
        Countless.   The process was never ending.  I think it would be
        fair to say every time you view a video you see something
        else, because there are so many images on the screen that it
        is not possible to take them all in at one viewing.    It was a
        continual process right up to the time of the limited
        Inquests.   Indeed, I have no doubt since then it has continued
        as well, albeit on a more limited scale.

     0. So could you help us. have you done any of the watching
        yourself? - A. I have done some of it, yes.

     Q. But are we talking about a video, for example, inside the
        ground where you tell us that certain things were taking
        place, being watched over.20 hours or a0 hours or luO hours or
        more than that? - A. It would be impossible to put a figure on
        it. As I said at the beginning, the initial process after
        retrieving the original video tapes, was to copy them.



H
                                            M . LAYTON


  Once they were copied the copies were viewed and a
 /Schedule, which is a precis of events shown on the film,
  was prepared. From that schedule really the continual
  process then was, as part of our brief, to try to locate
  the deceased either outside or inside the ground, and as
  part of that process we were continually viewing.
Q. To see what events were occurring, any incidents that occurred
   and the like? - A. Primarily our brief was, having scheduled
   the tapes, to locate the deceased for the Inquests. There
   were other specific areas which were dealt with as the inquiry
   progressed, but because of our brief to locate deceased it was
   a continuing process.
Q.    But as you were saying, as well as doing that you would see -
     when I say "you" - you and your team would see different
     incidents taking place on virtually each and every occasion
     you were looking at the tape? - A. That is right. One seen
     on one video could show numerous people..-
Q.    Asopposed to, for example, someone who was looking at that
     scene as part and parcel of the .events of the day which would
     be quite different? - A. I am not sure I follow you.

Q.    Let me indicate exactly what I mean. We have on the one hand
     Police Officers for the purposes of Lord Justice Taylor's
     Inquiry and for the purposes of this Inquest looking over and
     over and over again videos taken of for example a certain
     section of the ground, whether it be outside or inside, and
     seeing something different perhaps or something else in
     addition? - A. Yes.
Q. On each viewing, and then we have an individual who may be
   looking at the Leppings Lane end for a fraction of a second as
   part of the day’s events? - A. Yes, I accept your point.
   There is a difference between our brief, which was to view the
   videos to either obtain evidence or to schedule them so as *>
   become a sequence of events as to what to what took place,
   there is a difference between that and purely viewing it
   perhaps on a monitor.
Q. And it required from your point of view repeated lookings at,
   if I can use an inelegant phrase, in order to get a complete
   picture? - A. Depending on what we were seeking to establish.
   Certainly in relation to the deceased, yes.

Q. Thank you very much.
                      Cross-Examined bv MR. KING:

Q. Arising out of that last question, if one is looking for
   precise details, a particular individual, you need to look at
   a video over and over again? - A. Exactly, yes, sir.
 0. If you are looking for a general impression, a build'up of
    fans, emptiness of a pen, the fullness of a pen. the first
    time is sufficient for that, is not it? - A. Yes. sir.
                                             M-   LAYTON




               Cross-Examined by MRS. M c B R I E N :

I would like to go back to the point where the fans entered
the ground at 2:48 p.m.  Could you read that part out, please?
- A. Yes, if you can just bear with me a second, please.   Did
you want the whole section again?

The wording you used? - A. Page 10, I think, sir.          On a video
tape reference RJH.2 at an estimated time of 14:48:04, Gate C
was opened to eject a s u p p o r t e r . Is that the bit?

Yes.   - A. Do you want me   to go further?

Yes. just a little. - A. At this stage alarge number  of
supporters rushed through the gate into the concourse area.

Yes. thank you.     It is the part that they rushed in. and it
w a s 'established at the preliminary Inquest that the fans were
actually allowed in at that time, as Police Officers there
mistakenly thought that Gate C had been opened in response to
Superintendent M a r s h a l l ’s request.

     THE CORONER:      Mrs. McBrien,    I will phrase your question
for you:

M r s . McBrien is asking you whether this was the incident or
the timing as far as you can establish from the video
evidence, where the gate was opened as a result of an order as
opposed to not? - A. No, that is not that particular opening
of     the gate, not the    one  you refer to.

         MRS. M c B R I E N : The transcript of Superintendent
M a r s h a l l ’s evidence at the Taylor I n q u i r y ....

       THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien,    I am sorry:

Inspector Layton, read the whole section through again, or if-
you like specify the openings, because it may assist you.

       THE CORONER:     I think you may have your timings wrong.

      MRS. McBRIEN:   We brought this point   out at the
 Preliminary Inquest, and it was altered in  the Preliminary
 Inquest.  It was altered to ’’allowed", "they were allowed".
 "They were allowed i n " .

      THE WITNESS:   The timing you are referring to is the
 occasion on which a person was ejected from the concourse
 area via Gate C and out.  Certainly it'is apparent when you
 view the video, and that is why I have differentiated with, as
 it were, the official opening when people walked through, it
 is certainly apparent on the video for this earlier opening
 they did not go in in the same fashion.

      THE'CORONER:   This was a t . 15:52. was not it?           So 14:48
 was one opening? - A. That is right, sir.
                                                                        81 A

                                                      M.    LAYTON




    Q. What time was it closed then? - A. At 14:48:31.

    Q. How long was it open?   It was only open for 27 seconds? - A.
       That is right, sir, yes.
B   Q. And then -it was reopened at 14:52.          Is that right? - A. That
       is right, sir.

    Q* And, ,
            then, it stayed, o.pe:n for how long? - A. At 14:57:40 the
       gate is shown closed.

    Q. That is about 5 minutes? - A. Yes            We are talking about two
       distinct openings there.

    Q.        MRS. M c B R I E N : I was firmly under the impression that
         fans were encouraged through that gate at that particular
         time.

              THE CORONER:   We will be hearing evidence.       Inspector
         Layton has told you what he has seen on the visual evidence.
         He can't say any more than that.. It may be - it may be;       I
         say no more - that some of the other witnesses might be able
         to give you some more help o n !t h i s . I don't think Inspector
         Layton can.

              MRS. M c B R I E N :   Thank you very much.

              THE CORONER:   When you say, Mrs. McBrien, there was a
         correction made at the interim Inquest, are you talking about
         the interim Inquest relating to your son?

              MRS. M c B R I E N :   Yes.

                  THE CORONER;     I will have a look at it.  I will check it
         .and see what is actually said, but not how because I have not
          got it here.       Any other questions arising out of Inspector
         L a y t o n ’s evidence?

              Tomorrow we will give you a copy of the abbreviated
         schedule, and I think everybody will find it is a lot easier
         once we have that to look at:

    Q.   Inspector Layton, as always I am exceedingly grateful to you.
         Thank you for your help.            The only thing I would ask you is if
         you could arrange to have that plan redrawn with the
         a m e n d m e n t s . and also let me have a short statement regarding
         this matter, and we will either deal with it by way of
         documentary evidence or I will have to bring you back,
         depending on what I think.            It is a point that has got to be
         corrected. - A . . I think P.C. Brown should be able to assist,
         sir.

              THE CORONER:      Ladies and gentlemen, we are aiming
         timewise to start at 10. rise about q u a rt e r - t o - 1 . 1 o ’clock.
         Obviously we c a n ’t be absolutely sure.   We know that from
         experience already.     Start again about 2.     It depends what




H
                                                                       82


                                                         M.   LAYTON


     time we rise for lunch.         Then aim to finish about A, and again
    'there will be a little bit of flexibility.           You may think that
     is not too bad, but you will find it is quite sufficient if
     you said and listen to evidence for five hours.           Inspector
     L a y t o n ’s evidence is interesting but jolly difficult to
B    follow, not because he is difficult but because of the numbers
     and maps and goodness knows what.           A lot of the other evidence
     which you will hear will be easier to follow because they will
     be ordinary people.        I d o n ’t mean he is an extraordinary
     person - he may be - but it will be just people telling us
     about things.

         Now, it is qu a r t e r - t o - A . I d o n ’t think we will start
    with anything further tonight as far as you are concerned, and
    I also have some more legal submissions to deal with we did
    not quite finish.    So I am going to rise.             You can leave.
    Please be here on time so we can get cracking at 10 tomorrow
    morning.   What we will do tomorrow in the morning is we will
    look at the videos, this compilation tape, which is about two
    hours.   So we will watch for an hour and then stop and have
    coffee and watch the other h a l f . Then we have two short
    videos.   One has two screens.           It compares 1988 with 1989 as
    best one can, and then I have had another short compilation
    made of 1981 and 1988, I think, which shows the events.                We
    thought if we' did the words today you would follow the videos
    that much better tomorrow.            Is that satisfactory to you?      In
    the afternoon we are starting with some real live witnesses.

          Can we rise for five minutes or so.

                            (Short A d j o u r n m e n t )




H
                                                             83




/


                  (In the absence of the .jury)

       THE CORONER:   Yes, Mr. Isaacs?

       MR. ISAACS:        Sir, before ray learned friend Mr. King
makes such submissions he wishes to make in relation
submission that I made this morning, may I just take this
onr)'ffrtunitrvirto*'      feor youxt ia.ttieBit.3*on the city
ofP?he Star.          If I han5 my copy in - you, sir have no had
the benefit of going out to the local news vendors.            If
could be handed another copy.
     First of all I would ask you to read it.        of all
against the background of the submission that I made this
morning my argument is this that nothing could be more
designed to add fuel to the submission I made than what,
sir, you will now read.
     THE CORONER:    Well, Mr. Isaacs, I have to agree ^ h
you that it was an unwise - if the quotation is correct an ,
of course, I can ’t say whether it is or whether             l
think it was an unwise comment, bearing in m i n d that we are
sub iudice here and it is a matter for this.court.^orjny
jury, it you like, to take decisions on what will happen.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, that is another a s p e c t o f '
                                                        the /matter
which perhaps I can refer to in a moment and which I snow
others will refer to and that is the question as to whether
The Star, rightly or wrongly, have been party to an attempt
to influence the jury to bring in a certain verdict,
is certainly one aspect of the matter.

          The aspect I would seek to address you upon in relation
 to the contents of this article is this, that clearly,
 however you see these inquests, and, of course, you are in
 control, those who represent...       I put it another way. The
 families quite clearly see these inquests as a n evidence
 gathering exercise in order to produce fresh evidence which
 S i l l , they hope, enable them to persuade or enable the
 Director to take the view that criminal charges should be
 preferred.
         In my submission, so far as Chief Superintendent
    Duckenfield is concerned he should not be put in a position
    - should not even be put into the witness box where he could
    be put in a position where, by asking him questions which
    would then be disallowed, then be disallowed, then b e
    disallowed in the manner that I referred to this morning, s
    as to increase the possibility, probability, what you will,
    of the jury returning a verdict of unlawful killing.

         In my submission, sir, this article and the contents of
    it do add a great deal of fuel to the submission I made and
the dangers inherent in calling Mr. Duckenfield to give
evidence.
     THE CORONER:    Thank you.     Mr. King,   I will listen to
you now.
     MR. KING:   I understood, sir, that those acting on
behalf of Officer Greenwood still had submissions to make to
you, sir.
     THE CORONER:    You are quite right.       Thank you for
reminding me.
     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, happily in supporting my learned
friend Mr. Isaacs I need not rehearse his very articulate
submission and exposition of the rule.     a op
exposition of the rule without gloss.

     As far as Superintendent Greenwood is concarned, there
are four areas from which further action mighty come, from
which he requires protection against any conceivable self-
incrimination which might flow from his giving evidence.

     If I can list them briefly, it is further a c t i o n ^ y   the
Director.   Second, a judicial review of the Director s
decision.   Third, a private prosecution.   Fourth,
disciplinary proceedings.

     Sir, the depth and the strength of the feelings of the
families of the bereaved was perhaps spoken in words louder
and better than I can select when my learned f ^ n d Mr.
Isaacs outlined what was the nub of his submission, an   y
will remember the reaction that that took.   We now have
the front page of the newspaper what is a transparent use,
or intended use, of these inquests before you.

      As far as disciplinary proceedings are concerned, I
prefer to dwell on that to the exclusion of the others
because my learned friend Mr. Isaacs has mentioned the
 position of the Director.     It is, of course, sanction which
could lead to the dismissal    of long-standing officers,
 including Superintendent Greenwood, whom I represent.         bir,
 you may well be familiar with some of the P ^ U c l t y J-het
 surrounded the application to the Police Authority for funds
 for not only Superintendent Greenwood but the other senior
 officers concerned and that has been prompted by the fear
 there being no funds for such proceedings as the
 disciplinary proceedings.     It is not merely an empty
 threat.  These proceedings are on foot and what happens to
 them will, to an extent, be coloured by what happens within
•these four walls over the coming weeks.

      Sir, it is important perhaps also to envisage the wide
 scope of the offences and they are offences under the Police
                                                                                                        85



A

        Discipline Regulations 1985                      that c o n s t U u ^ t h ^             ^
        disciplinary                            nature 0 f the complaints that have

        been made°against SuP“ i" t^ den?d° ” t h r s c o p e CofSthet'offence
B       submission they show i     ‘h^ e ? v e q S e s a S S s t h e answers
        ‘
        t S V h t c h v i l l ^ o t tend to _incriminate Superintendent
        Greenwood o.r anyone else in a simila p

                Thp alleeations of complaint come from two
        l e t t e r s H a n ^ o t h e r b d o c u m e n t s ^ u ^ b e f o r e you t h i ^ S o r n i n g ,    are


        SHs-sss-1^s.lsss
        allegations which constitute
        Superintendent Greenwood and
                                         « - p l . i n t^Jg.in.t
                                       say flt the outset
                                                                        5“ “ -

        allegations which are, and will be,
        Superintendent Greenwood:
                 "a     You failed to carry out your assigned duty by


                sSrsais i-^ss -
                 aware of the dangerous situation and controlled your
                 officers accordingly.
                 R Vnn failed to eive instructions to your officers to
                 monitor the pens I ^ o v e r - c r o w d i n g in relation to the
                 crowd safety at your briefings.

                 C You were totally ineffective in mounting a rescue.
                 That is  you made no attempt to organise the P°
                 officers in a way which would have helped to b n g
                 about a successful rescue operation.

                  D. You failed to send officers to the rear of pens 3
                  and 4 to relieve pressure when you were in control
                  the area.   This was when you knew that gate C was
                  being opened to allow supporters in.

              Sir, Mr. Trevor Hicks, who a l s o instructs ." L k e f ^ e e
         friend Mr. King, is the other complainant.      He makes three,
         perhaps broader, allegations in his complaint.

                   "1. You failed to prevent a dangerous build-up of
                   supporters outside the gates.

                   2. You failed to control the movement of supporters
                   subsequent to the opening of gate C.

                   3. You failed to respond to the developing tragedy and
                   were slow to effect a rescue operation.

                T cav asain the totality of each of those allegations
           is refuted, but they do serve to show the wide nature of t e




    H
>
 1                                                                       86




     A

          position of Superintendent Greenwood and the way in which
          his position will have to be protected should he give _
          evidence.   I just invite you to consider the prejudicial
          effect that the constant challenging of questions asked and
     ■R   the jury being told that the o f f i c e r n e e d not answer them,
          if matters are dealt with on a question at a time basis.

               Alternatively, if there is dispute about whether the
          answer to a particular question might tend to^incriminate
          Superintendent Greenwood when such argument, if there i,s, to
          be such argument, takes place in the absence of the jury,
          the effect and the impression that that will have upon the
          members of the jury.
               In those circumstances I invite you to adopt the course
          that has been suggested by Mr. Isaacs, that these officers,
          certainly Superintendent Greenwood, should not be asked to
          give evidence at all because of the prejudicial effect of
          having to deal with each question on its merits and in
          circumstances where it is difficult to conceive any question
          which will not produce that response.




                                 MR. KING:    Sir,   the families,




     E
  THE CORONER:      Yes, Mr. King.

   MR. KING:    The families would have liked e ach of the
senior Officers to have come to give evidence here
voluntarily.   That is what they would have liked.   They would
have wished that the truth of the events which led to these
deaths could have come from their lips voluntarily so that
the Jury,could Hear it.   The families are mindful of the law
as much as anybody else and I have advised them what the law
is.   They know and appreciate that it is within the right of
any of those senior Officers that if any question is asked
tending to incriminate that he can refuse to give it.     To
this extent they are in a dilemma because what they want, and
have always wanted, is for this Jury to hear the whole of the
facts.   It would be a very unreal world which this Jury would
be living in if they did not hear in some way from the
principal players in these events, by which I mean the senior
Officers.
     One could make trite examples.. The one going through my
m ind was hearing Julius Caesar but we did not hear from
Brutus and the whole of the Senate.   That is not meant to be
trivial because these are vital witnesses.

      A few weeks ago, sir, I submitted to you matters relating
to the Taylor Inquiry Report and the transcripts.             You know
if agreement were possible the families would wis h that the
whole of the Taylor Report and the whole of the transcripts
should be before the Jury.    Indeed, they would wish they
would go there without agreement but again they accept
advice, as they must, that that is not possible without
agreement.    If my learned friend on behalf of Mr. Duckenfield
is saying to this Inquiry he will agree and consent to the
whole of the transcript of Mr. Duckenfield's evidence being
read out aloud to the Jury so that they can hear it and
assess it then that in fact from the f a m i l i e s ’ p o i n t of view,
m uc h as they would like Mr. Duckenfield in the witness box to
be cross-examined, will be far better in the effort they
generally have, not in making noises to the outside world, in
bringing the facts to the attention of this Jury.

     Sir, if that is the position, then much as they would
 like Mr. Duckenfield here, and much as I would say to you
 that he ought to come into the witness box and be heard to
 say, "I will not answer", if there is that alternative
 genuinely being put forward', then I would say on behalf of
 the families I represent that that is a course which is, in
 fact, preferable as the lesser of two evils from their point
 of view.  I say that not in any way reflecting on the right
 of Mr. Duckenfield to take the stance he has but from the
 point of view to prejudice of all the matters being before
 the Jury.
                                                                88




    I do not know, sir, what the p o s i t i o n is w i t h regard to
the other Officers, that is to say Mr. Murray, Mr. Greenwood
and Mr. Marshall.  I do not know whether I have the agreement
of those who represent those Officers to the transcripts of
their evidence being read aloud to the Jury.          If I do have
that, sir, then my position will be different than if I do
not and it might be helpful from my point of v i e w if an
indication could be given in that respect.

   THE CORONER:   Mr. Hale is not here and so he cannot
respond.  Do you wish to respond or take instructions on
that?
     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, for my part I would like to take
instructions and perhaps I could do so overnight.

   MR. KING:   In those circumstances, sir, perhaps it might
be better if I postpone my final words until I hear what
those instructions are.

    THE CORONER:      I would prefer to conclude this now.       You
h ave he a r d what Mr. Isaacs says:  If he says no and Mr.
Isaacs says yes, perhaps I may think again but assume for the
mome n t that everyone will fall in line behind M r . I s a a c s .

   MR. KING:   If everybody falls in line b e hind Mr. Isaacs,
as I say, sir, much as I would prefer a different course ~ it
almost sounds like a bargain but it is not meant to be - if
that is the means by which the families can get facts before
the Jury it is the means they would adopt.

     MR. ISAACS:   I wish to make one thing very clear, sir, so
 that there is no misunderstanding.    The offer that I make i*^
 this; that the transcript of Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d 1s evidence both
 in chief as it were and in cross-examination before Lord
 Justice Taylor can be read to this Jury as being a report of
 that evidence he gave on that occasion.         So far as my learned
 friend is concerned he understood me correctly and I just
 w ant to ensure, sir, that you understood me correctly as
 well.

      THE CORONER:   What you are trying to say is that you are
 not putting it forward as evidence of the truth of it but
 p u rely of what was said?

       MR. ISAACS:      That is what was said because that is
 e x a c t l y the point you were making this morning, as it were,
 w it h a Criminal Justice Act statement when, of course, the
 witness would be asked, "Is that the statement you have
 made?"        On this occasion he would not be asked this b u t it
 w o u l d be said on his behalf or by you, sir, by agreement,
 "This was the evidence that he gave before Lor d Justice
 Taylor".
   MR. KING:   I understand the point my learned friend is
saying on behalf of Mr. Duckenfield as to the quality of that
evidence but it is certainly evidence which can go before a
Jury otherwise we would have no function, sir.  I am not sure
now if I understand the distinction being made.

   THE CORONER:   This is the problem.   Mr. Payne.

   MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I was rising to make the point which was
mentioned by Mr. Isaacs simply as a matter of clarification.
If this Inquest is to proceed, as has been suggested, then it
should be on the basis that the evidence, and we are only
speaking for the moment about Mr. Duckenfield, that he should
not in fact give evidence but there should be read out at the
Inquest what he said at the Taylor Inquiry, not as his
evidence before you but as a report of what in fact he ^said
on that previous occasion.  That is what Mr. Isaacs said to
you just now and I was rising to ensure that that was what
was being agreed.

   THE CORONER:   I have not agreed to anything yet, Mr.
Payne.

   MR. KING:    So far so good.  The next question was the
purpose for which the Jury could use that evidence and
certainly, sir, as I understand it, it should be capable of
being used as evidence of that which is stated in it, in
other words not as evidence to you, sir, but as evidence of
what was said on previous occasions.   Otherwise it would have
no value.   I am not sure if my learned friend is trying to
say, "It can go before the Jury but the Jury mus t be told
that they cannot put any truth on that which is being
asserted".

    MR. PAYNE:   I think Mr. King can be helped by the fact
that the ordinary rules of evidence as we tend to know them
do not apply in these proceedings and certainly for our part
w e can see no objection to the Jury being informed that what
was read out was a true report of what was said before the
Taylor Inquiry and the Jury could take it into account in
that context.

    THE CORONER:   Can I just put this to you because I think
 I can understand the problem but you will appreciate that if
 you say to the Jury, "here is a statement which has now been
 read.  It may or may not be true because .we have not asked
 Mr. Duckenfield but it is true that he said that because it
 is a report of what he said.  You, ladies and gentlemen, must
 decide whether you believe it or whether you do not".   Are
 you in effect inviting me to view that statement in that
 form?  Have I understood you correctly?
   MR. PAYNE:   Yes, I think that- is right. Wha t is being
said is that the statement can be read out as a true account
of what was said at the Taylor Inquiry and the Jury can take
it into account and make what use of it they wish.

   MR. KING:   On that basis I am content as long as my
learned friend realises the import of what is being said.  It
is not simply a record.  It_is being put to the Jury as,
material which they can assess and use and, it necessary and
they think fit, accept as truthT

   THE CORONER:   I take it what you are saying is that
because this statement is in the public domain, so to speak,
because it has already been given - whether it has been given
on Oath or not is neither here nor there - it is there for
anybody who wishes to get the transcripts out.  That is
really what you are saying, is it not?

   MR. ISAACS:        That is certainly right and in making that
concession I did it so not because I felt there was any
weakness in the submission I originally made to you but in an
attempt to be helpful to meet the demands of you, sir, and
the Jury and perhaps the legitimate demands of my learned
friend's clients.       If I could put it this way, if the offer
which is made is unacceptable then it can be withdrawn and I
rest on the submission that I have made which is still a
strong one, in my submission, but I hope to try and assist
the Court by saying that here at least is an account which
has bee n given by Mr. Duckenfield, in the circumstances it
was given, first of all, in chief and then under cross-
examination for a number of days.       That to some degree will^
assist the Jury in determining in this p a r t icular instance in
this Inquest where the truth lies, that is, h o w the deceased
met their d e a t h s .

   MR. KING:   On that basis I am content and would be
content in respect of any other senior Officer who allows his
transcript to go forward in that way.

     MR. MANNING:   I have been able to use the intervening
p e riod to talk to Superintendent Murray who instructs me on
the same basis as that put forward by my learned friend, Mr.
Isaacs, on the part of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, that
so far as his evidence to the Taylor Inquiry is concerned it
may be used in exactly the same way.     It was evidence that
was received.     He answered questions in chief and in cross-
examination in detail.     There it is.  It will be received and
read in that way and on the same basis under the same caveat.

    THE CORONER:   May I put in my v iew for what it is worth?
 I had listened with considerable interest to your submission
 and I have to agree with you because this is a regular
 occurrence in Inquests that whenever you get the situation
                                                                   91


A


    where a person is potentially liable to be charged with some
    criminal offence, be it careless driving or even speeding, it
    does not matter what, it is next to impossible to construct a
    question which is not incriminatory.     That has been my
B   experience and in a sense I am encouraged that that seems to
    be your experience as well.     I thought it was just my failure
    in constructing questions.     So far as that goes, I agree it
    is vexceedingly ..difficult to formulate qijestions which
    actually advance the matter if a person is in a situation
    where an answer may incriminate him.

            Secondly, because I realise that that is so, my practice
    has always been to call the driver, or the person whose
    conduct is being called in question, to ask him things like,
    "What is your name?" (which is not I think incriminatory) and
    then to pause.         If questions are asked and if they are
    incriminatory that is pointed out straight away and my
    experience generally speaking is that the matter draws to a
    close very quickly because people realise there is no point
    in proceeding.         It does have the advantage that the witness
    who is a player in whatever it is one is enquiring into is
    there, is seen to be there and is also given the opportunity
D   of saying something if he wishes to say something whereas if
    you do not call him you do not give the witness that
    op p o r t u n i t y .

         Now, of course, you might say to me, "I am telling you
    that we do not want that opportunity, thank you very much".

       MR. ISAACS:   That is exactly what I am telling you for
    the purposes of this submission.

         THE CORONER:       The fact that somebody does not give
    evidence is also prejudicial.        In a sense the problem has
    been made more difficult from the decision point of view
    because of the exchange that has just taken place as to what
    is to happen with regard to the transcripts of Lord Justice
    T a y l o r ’s Report and Mr. King, who has the pri ma r y interest of
    a good number of the bereaved, feels that this might be a
    b e tt e r bet than having somebody say, "I am not answering
    questions" and you obviously feel that as well.

         I am a little bit concerned about it, in fact, because
    quite a bit of the evidence of Chief Superintendent
    Duckenfield, and we think about him simply because you took
    the lead in this matter but it applies to others as well I am
    sure, there is quite a lot of his evidence which is not
    germane to an Inquest.  It will be ever so interesting but it
    is not germane to an Inquest.  I could allow it if you, as
    his representative, say, "I do not mind, let us read it all
    and have done with it".  I am a little bit concerned about
    that aspect of the matter.




H
   MR. ISAACS:   There are two ways of looking at it, with
respect.  First of all, it can be edited by agreement and
indeed on your direction because you will have read his
evidence that he gave some time ago now to Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry. Alternatively it can go before the Jury
and you can give directions as to those parts which are
germane to the Jury’s task in this particular Inquiry.   I
should point out, sir, that the offer I made was made on the
basis that he was not called.  I think my learned friend
understood that and it was not in the way of holding a gun to
your head at all. It was a view to being helpful.

   THE CORONER:    Mr. Isaacs, may I ask you this because it
seems to me that it might be possible to achieve the best of
all worlds in this situation bearing in mind the point which
you have made and the acceptance of the issue? It is my
reluctance in a sense to make a ruling that we were not
calling him because I am a little bit reluctant, despite the
very persuasiveness of a lot of what you said to me, but it
seems to me that your client would not be in any particular
dang-er of prejudice if the solicitors, Mr. King in
particular, were to agree that if we were to put Mr.
Duckenfield in the witness box having either read his
transcript either in toto or edited by agreement, that he
would agree not to pursue questions which clearly were
incriminatory because that would then give the advantage of
having Mr. Duckenfield here and yet without having the thing
which I perceive to be your main fear is that he will have to
answer hundreds of questions all of which he will answer by
saying, "I am not answering that question because it is
prejudicial". What do you feel about that?

   MR. ISAACS:   What will happen is this, let us say it is
my learned friend and he will ask a question which he
believes does not have the tendency to incriminate. Either
yourself or Mr. Duckenfield or myself will say, "We take the
view that it is". The Jury will go out. There will be some
legal argument. There will be some reference perhaps to some
parts of the evidence he has given. That matter having been
resolved the Jury will come back in. The next question will
be asked and exactly the same thing will happen.   I can
foresee unfortunately that one will have a morning, a day,
two days or three days and after every question that is asked
the Jury will go out, there will be legal argument and so it
will go on.




                       /With respect, sir
                                                                                                  93




    W i t h r e s p e c t , sir, t h a t c a n n o t b e r i g h t , a n d h o w e v e r m u c h
    y o u , s i r , w o u l d l i k e t o s e e h i m n e r e , u n f o_r t u n a t e l y t h e
    v e r y n a t u r e o f t h e d i f f i c u l t y t h a t h e is in, a n d I s t r e s s
B   a g a i n s t t h e u-:c'-:i:roand t h a t he d o e s n o t a c c e p t t n a t h e h a s
    c o m m i t t e d anv wrong -doing, but that oth er s may ta^e a
    d i f f e r e n t view,        t h a t in t h o s e c i r c u m s t a n c e s , a n d 1 s a y
     this a dv i s e d l v ,      th e c o m p r o m i s e t h a t s e e m s to h a v e b e e n
     acc.ept.c2 d is o n e w h i c h s h o u l d c o m m e n d i t s e l f to y ou , a n d
     o v e r c o m e w h a t I a p p r e c i a t e to b e y o u r n a r t u r a l ^ r e l u c t a n c e
     n o t to c a l l , e v e n to say, " w h a t is y o u r n a m e . , a c h i e f
     player.          S ir, t h a t is th-e o n l y w a y t h a t I c a n p u t it, but
     I d o h o p e t n a t p e r h a p s s o t n m y s e l f a n d hr. K i n g c a n m a n a g e ,
     in t h e e v e n t to p e r s u a d e y o u to t a k e t h e c o u r s e w n i c n is
     n o w b ein '’ ou t f o r w a r d , o o t n of us n o d o u b t f o r d i r t e r e n t
     r e a s o n s b ut, h a v i n g s a i d t n a t , r e a s o n s t n a t a r e to e a c h
     o'..ner r e a s o n a b l y c o g e n t .
             Ttl.. C O N N E R :         Did you want        to s a y a n y t h i n g m o r e ,   Mr.
     King!
             M R. K I N G :        Ho.
D
          TUP. COiU'WER:                 Did you want        to s a y a n y t h i n g ,   Mrs.
     McBrien?
               MRS. U c B R I E N :      I tnin'c it w o u l d b e u s e f u l to u s e th e
     t r a n s c r i p t s f r o m th e T a y l o r I n q u i r y b u t w e a l l k n o w t n a t
     t n e T a y l o r I n q u i r y w a s n e v e r to b l a m e a n y b o d y , it w a s a
     d i f f e r e n t s o r t o f i n q u i r y to t h i s o n e , b u t it w o u l d be
     bette r tnan nothing, I think.                       R a t h e r t h a n h a v e n o t h i n g at
     a l l I w o u l d b e h'ippy w i t h t h a t .
                Til:' COxONF.ii:       Y o u a r e g o i n g a l o n g w i t h w.iat is b e i n g
      p r o p o s e d as t h e b e s t ?
                MR 3. licuAIEU:           Y e s , b u t I r e a U v w o u l d p r e f e r Mr.
      D w c k e n f i e l d to a p p e a r in p e r s o n so t h a t I c o u l d p u t
      q u e - t i o n s to h i m , * n o t in a n i n c r i m i n a t o r y w a y , j u s t to
      s p e a k to him.
                Tli.-. C O -'M'iEri:      I t h i n k I o u ~ n t to s a y t h a t I k n o w
      Lord J          • ic e T a y l o r s a i d t n a t h e w a s n o t g o i n g to b l a m e
      a n ,D.jdy. In f a c t , it is o n l y f a i r to s a y t n a t a n i n q u e s t
      is in e x a c t i v t ' e s a m e s i t u a t i o n .         W e a r e n o t n e r e to
      b l a m e p e o p l e ’ w e a r e h . r e to e n q u i r e i n t o h o w a d e c e a s e
      p e r s o n d i e d a n d , in f a c t , t i e r u l e s I h a v e a l r e a d y
      r e f e r r e d to e x p r e s s l y s a y t h a t y o u m u i t n o t g i v e a v e r d i c t
      w n i c n in a.'v .;av b l a m e s s o m e b o d v , a n d I w o u l d f o l l o w t h a t
      r u l .ng        xc ;e ingl y s c r i c t l v , , I c a n a s s u r e y o u of t n a t .        I
      a p p r e c i a t e t h a t y o u m a y ..nnt to a s k t n e q u e s t i o n s as
      g e n t l y as p o s s i b l e bu t- n-a-t- is     __ n o t ,, in f a c t ,. t h e i s s u.e .
      T i e i s s u e is n o t - l e t n e r y o u «ire a s k i n ’ a q u e s t i o n n i c e l y
      o r n a s t i li.,y , bu w ia; is t n e c o n t e n t of t h e q u e s t i o n , a n d
      a o ? s it t e n d         o i n c r e a s e t n e risk e v e n by a l ittle bit
       t na t    a   p e r s o n rr.izht   be p r o s e c u t e d .    m a t is t h e p o i n t .    It


H
                                                                                                         94




    is            now you ask   le q u e s t i o n , w n i c h I a n s u r e y o u w i l l
    do           i ladvlike manne      b u t t h a t is n o t r e a l l y t he is su e,

B        MRS. McBiUEN:              I t h i n k t h a t h e w o u l d b e a b l e to g i v e
    us far m or e i n f o r m a t i o n abo ut that day than a n y b o d y else
    as ie ';as tn e p r i m e a c t o r .

              THil C0:10HH                 Y e s , b u t M r s . rlcBr-en, 1 tn i n < it is
                                                                                            i s , in
    o n l y f a i r to sav, as I h a v e a l r e a d y i n d i c a t e d , it
    f a c t , p r a c t i c l l v i m p o s s i b l e to f r a m e a q u e s t i o n , to p u t
    \ >e q u e s t i o n w i e ; e a p e r s o n is in t n e p o s i t i o n or C n i e t
    Su > e r i n t v n d - : n t D u c k e n f ielci, w h i c h is n o t i n c r i m i n a t i n g .
    It m a y ..ot be i n c r i m i . m t i n g b u t it is a l m o s t i m p o s s i b l e
    f'-ame it a n d th e p o i n t is t h a t h e d o e s n o t h a v e to ansue..
    that question.                 W n e t i e r it is i n c r i m i n a t o r y o r n ot , y o u
    c - -not dra./ a c o n c l u s i o n f r o m it.                 If I a s s a d^iye^.,
    " W e r e y o u d o i n g 4 0 m i l e s a n h o u r in a 3 0 m i l e s an n o u r
     a r e a ? " , h: c a n say, " T h i s is a n i n c r i m i n a t o r y ' q u e s t i o n , I
     a n .ot ;.:swering i t".                    Y o u c a n n o t i;raw fi e c o n c l u s i o n t n a t
     n w'j.s d o i n g 4 0 m i l e s a n h o u r f r o m t h a t .              He m i g h t nave
     be (in b u t -\e m i g h t n ot .             H e mi g ht " j u s t n o t w a n t to a n s w e r
     t i e q u e s t i o n a n d f i e r e is n o W a y o f f i n d i n g o u t , n o - in
     t h i s C o u r t , a n d t h a t is t i e d i f f i c u l t y in t h i s s i t u a t i o n .
     It is a d i f f i c u l t / w i i c h is a l m o s t i n s o l u b l e I thin,-:.

                !:?»S. Mcii.’IEN:      If I f o r m e d s o m e q u e s t i o n s a n d han-'ed
     tim        t M y o u f o r y o u to l o o k at ...?
               . :'E CO.;.)<<ER:      Y o u c o u l d d o it b u t it w o n ' t m a k e ^ ny
     d i f f e r e n c . 'i o u w o u l d be a ver.' c l e v e r l a d y if y o u c o u l d
     ttv .ik of a q u e s t i o n w h i c h a c t u a l l y g a v e y o u a n a n s w e r .
                                              I w o u l d n o t be recriminatory'.

                   .-.E CO?*                T h a n k you, Mrs.           McBrien.

                Y o u w i l l n a v e g u e s s - d t h a t m y i n c l i n a t i o n h a d b e e n to
      t u r n y o u r r e q u e s t d o w n f r o m w h a t I n a v e s a i d , b u t o n fi e
      o 1 •2 r h a n d I h a v e to t a k e i n t o accou.it w h a t Mr. K i n g n a s
      s a i r , a n d I n a v e h e a r d , of c o u r s e , w h a t M r s . . i c B n e n n a s
      s a i d a.ia 1 h a v e to t a k e t h a t i n t o a c c o u n t as _w e l l , _ taou.;n
      it is c l e a r , I a:r. s u r e , to y o u t h a t m y e \ p e r i e n c e is
      simi.-.r t v o u r s , t a a t it is e x c e e i n g l v t ii ff i c ; l t fj
       ■ c f j i l l y f o r m u :te t ’e q u e s t i o n s in a me.i.'.ingrul s o r t of
      w y.
                   I k n o ’ y o u w o ■ t be h e r e t o m o r r o w •b ut I a m s t i l l
          o 'n ^ to          :: er a - c c i s i o n fo r a d a y o r two.                       We a r e n o t in
         a n ;rr         ih           S-..1.S3 t h a t h- is c o m i n g t o m o r r o w .               It w i l l
         r-e,    I   a n   aL:r a i d ,   seve:":l
                                          s e v e r -:!   w
                                                          •
                                                          . e e k s   b e f o r e   w e   act.  jal ly   ^et lO
         tMi     c r u c i a    s i t u   tio.i     b u t   I   w i l l   t h i -.’;  a b ^ u t  it  c u i t r har'
           ..: 3 J ? e -)bvio :slv if it is a c c e p t a b l e to e v e r y b o d y _ t h e n
         t h a t m a y w 11 be t-v. m o s t c o n v e n i e n t w->y i r r e s p e c t i v e o.
         m v -:rm 1               c' :e.          I a p p r e c i a t e it is a l i t t l e ui t _
         i c r.ve ’ :e t fo r y o u bu t I d o n ’t thin-: I c a n d o a n y t h i n g


H
                                                                                             95




     b o u t it.      I d o t h i n k it is s o m e t h i n g t h a t I n e e d to
    c.'i.sid cr •
            Mil. M A N N I N G :     P e r tans j u s t to f o l l o w f r o m t h a t , y o u
B    n     ' te t h a t y o u w i l l ;;ive t h e d e c i s i o n w i e n y o u f e e l
    a-?le't-.' d o so.          Can I ask a b a c kw ar ds way rou nd assurance,
    it as .” "t m y i n t e n t i o n to c o m e t o m o r r o w m o r n i n g b e c a u s e
    tn--; v •d i o s a r e s o m e t h i g wrtir w h i c h I a m ^ f a m i l i a r .    Could
    I :>e a s s u r e d by y o u t h a t y o u w o u l d n o t ; i v e t h a t
        ju-' ' ~~ tio : a t 10 o ' c l o c k t o m o r r o w m o r n : n g , it w o u l d oe 4
    o V cl 'ck?
          T i.. CO    lOUEil:          Y o u c a n b e a s s u r e d o!if t h a t a n d , in
    f ct, if it        w i l l n e l p y o u I ..ill s a y t h a t I w o n ’t n v e a
    d cisior. at       a l l -and t a a t I w i l l le t y o u r i n s t r u c t i n g
    so l       :rs    of t'-’e Of: c e r s i n v o l v e d 'enow w i e n I a m r e a d y
    t m a k e a >.    a i n o u : e m e n t , so t n a t y o u r i n s t r u c t i n g
    sol    . t or s   a n d o t n e r s c a n be n e r e .
              MA. I S A A C S :       I a m v e r : g r * t e r ul, s i r , b e c a u - e I w a s
    j ;; t o i n g io a s k if y o u c o u L d g i v e us -.otice t h e n
    c r t n i ly s o m e a r r a n g e m e n t w o u l d b e m a d e to e n s u r e t h a t
    y o u r .'.cision on t n i s m a t t e r w i l l b e .neard b y s o m e b o d y
    r e p r e s e n t i n g Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d .   I a lso ask this, that I
    a s s u m e -..nerefure t h a t y o u » i l l n e a r n o f u r t n e r s u b m i s s i o n s
    o. t .is p;irt:cul r m a t t : r w i t h o u t s o m e b o d y b e i n g in
    attendance.             I a s s u m e f i e r e w i l l b e n o m o r e in a n y e v e n t
    n j ..?
               T:i;l C O .10N EK :       Th-i o n l y s u b m i s s i o n , if y o u l i k e , t h a t
     I w o u l d i ike to n e a r , a n d I d o n ’ t t h i n k t h i s w i l l
     p r e j u d i c e y o u r c l i e n t , w i l l b e f r o m th e r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s of
        ,e o_ ier p e o p l e w n o a r e in t n e s a m e b o a t , s h a l l w e s a > ,
     as t w n e t h c r o r n o r t h e y w o u l d g o a L o g w i t n the
     prc,)Os..ls w n i c h h a v e b e e n m a d e .

               MK. I S A A S:       C l e a r l y t h a t c a n n o t a f f e c t Mr.
     Du;kenfield.             I was only c o n c e r n e d that you may near -^and
     I t iou h; y o u w oul ' n o - , b u t m a y n e a r s u b m i s s i o n s a b o u t m y
       p p l ' - n t i o n in m y a b s e n c e or in t n e a b s e n c e of a n y c t i e r
     r e p r e s e n t s t 've o f Mr. D u c k e n f i e l •.
               ,■ E C~! ; -HR:   No, t h a t w o u l d n o t be m v i n t e n t i o n
            .u e I qtii-.e u d rsts.nd t n i s is a n e x c e ’. inglv
      im    .r:ant .'natter f o r y o u a n d f o r t ~e ” t nor O f f : c e r s .

            M-:. I SA AC :' :  E f f e c t ; v-el. s-.ibmissions o n t n i s [joint
        m   o w ’)e r     ;r-ed a s c l o s e d u n t i l y o u m a k e y o u r
      a cisior.?
                     r \, >
                     L<>it    - v   J •
                                    »v•   .Yes., t n a t is r:..ht.

             M.-l. -'A.iiE:          I w o n e r if I m i g h t j.:st m e n t i o n t h a t
      t .c-re is a.i:.'t“ =r pcter.tiai pn ss e .i ge r in th~: b o a t w n c n a s
         t b e ; n ; ~ e n z i .n e d so f a r a n d t h a t is A s s i s t a n t C n i e r
      C o i'.rr-le J a . : s o n .     I j u ; t me.it ion t h i s so t h a t v o j .;nc.;

H
                                                                                             96




t h a t - e may be ad ed t o t he g r o u p whose s u b m i s s i o n * you
w 11 b' c - n s i H r ng in due courr- e, wnen t n e d e . i s i o n i s
i m - e ■ hout r-.-se p o s i t i o n o f Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d .
      TM:’. COilONERs       Can we ju t m a k e sur e t hat we k n o w w h o
 e -i-e ■ lkin-^ a b o u t .      I :now Mr. H.ile i s n t iere b u t tae
p.^tia       p e o p l e w. a r e t a l k i n g a b o u t is Mr. M a r s h a l l , is
that rignt?
       M . ' . P - Y E:    Y e s , t a = 1 i s is As s.is t a n t C h i e f
C    ;-u±)le_J ck.s.u-i, S u p e r i n t e n l e n t g r e e n w o o d ,
                        MuitJtl Su.jcr :r.tind            t , I believe, ..arsnall .
    u       ^   11 •   *               1 |       .     r   •   1   J                     '

.an-i, of c o u r s e , M r . D j c k e n f l e l d .
           jii.           :   A n d y o u w o u l d w a n t to a d d               lr.
 :ic;m i n g s .crth a n d Mr. S m i t h , I t a k e it?

                iiISS ADDLEMAIi:             T n a t is ri;;ht.

                ..iE COU'.Ju'ER:             what about you?
         i-i? C. \TCHt5.',LE:           S i: , a s " I s a i d b e f o r e , a t t n e m o m e n t
   U i - a n s a y , .sir,...i5 -thaC.w.e w o u l c T I i k e to r e s e r v e o u r
 p J si ion. I t m a y w e l l b e t h a t f o r th e p u r p o s e s o f             *** •
 VsirF a n d        i.ie f a m i l i e s it w o u l d b e b e t t e r a l l r o u n d if a
 t ^ " s t a t e m e n t s w : a t in f r o m t n e p r i n c i p a l p l a y e r s b u .
 ne -)d to ’- I k to o u r c l i e n t s d i r e c t a n d a l s o „o h a v e
 dissuasion between ourselves.
            T V . CO-tOUEK:            Y o u w i l l a > p r e : i a t e t h a t in r e s p e c t of
    c u te a *° w of t ^ e nasnes t h a t h a v e b e e n m e n t i o n e d t a e r e
    a-e ver/ comprehensive PACE statement^ wnicn,                                     c °u ‘* s »
        11       t->e r e a d -inyvav, w h a t e v e r w e d o a b o u t it.          What d y
    s a v t t n a t , Mr. K i n g ?           S u p p o s e for a m i n u t e that all
     • ie:-e - o l l e a ? u e s o f y o u r s s a i d , y e s , t h e y t n i r u it i»
    si>lendi~ id a of your.; a n d Mr. I s a a c s , w e w i l l a p p l y
     oil of ’em.             W o u l d y o u a c c e p t it.
               M : K I G:        S i -, m y p o s i t i o n is         I w o u l d h a v e l i k e d to
        h v e r e a d o u t t le w h o l e of t n e T a y l o r         R e p o r t and the w n o l e
        of t - . 2 tr a s z r .pt a n d j u : t s u b m i t t e d      to I n * o n y o u , s o to
        that e x t e n t , sir, I w o u l d not o b j e c t            to t h a t c o u r s e .

                 T;..: C-j .'- 'NZR:          T h a n - -, y o u .
                  MR. - C A T C H P O L E :   T a e r e w a s o n e p o i n t y o u mentia.-.ed
        t -at t * r e w o u l • be s o m e l i v e e v i d e n c e t o m o r r o w .       Tnat
        a e r t a . n l y t o o k m e s o n e w h a t b y ^ s u r p r i s e a n d I t m n k t.aose
        a * o u d n e as w 11.              I w o n d e r if y o u ....
                .;iE        -i.ER:      S o r r y a b o u t tnat. W: \en I - i c i i e d to
        s r r p, if t n a t is tn e r i t h t w o r a , t n s u m m a r i e s , o r t h e
        s p e -* s or w h a t e v e r y o u l i k e to c a l l tne~., I t a o u g h t w e
        voul     h a e a b i t of t i m e , s o w e a r e g o i n g to t a < e tn e
        f i ■i t f o u r p e o p l e o n tne l i s t f o r Wear, a s d a y m o r n i n g a n d
        t a: w i l l g . v e u- a slU'ntl.- e a s i e r d a y o n W e d n e s d a y , a n d
                                                                                   97




 ;e h a v e >ut it u p a t t n e h a c k a c t u a l l y .   It is t h e r e .
T h a t is w h e r e w o a r e g o i n g to p u t th p l i s t . _ W e i n t e n d             o
o u t ti e list u p a t tn e b ? c k s o t h a t it is v i s i b l e .

        So t-ir pl-in t o m o r r o w is m o r n i n g , v i d e o s , a f t e r n o o n ,
f o u r - it c s s s s w n o s e na.ics I c a n ' t q u i t e r e n e m n e r a t th e
moment.
       MR. K I N G :         T n s f o u r w i t n e s s e s at t h e t o p o f t h e l i s t
fo r W e d n e s d a y ,   sir?
         T.     C O >-i;r i*      Y e - , I t h i - U so.  C e r t a i n l y t n r e e of
     em hut     ,.e m a y h a v e h a d to s h i f t tn e f i f t h a n d t h e f o u r t h
 a - o u d.     It is t-v:- t o n e n d o f tn=> W e d n e s d a y l i s t .

         I i-i = t .ant to c'v>dc o n e o t h e r t h i n g .               You remember          I
 m e tior.l ■ t-ie t r a n s c r ’p t - to y o u a t t h - b u s i n e s s m e e t l            .
 W e h a v e ne rd J r o m : n ; e e f i r m s . O n e s a i d t h e y d i d r u t
 w it or.*, t w o s a i d th:-y d i d . _ Is t h a t c o r r e c t .                          °
 ■1 -,e t u r n i n g u » t o m o r r o w m o r n i n g a n d s a y i n ; , / _ s , l Qiv.
 w ht a tr n s c r :p t" .            As I e x o l . i n e - t • y o u , it is e n t i r e l y
 u p to y o u .       It d o =s -iot m a k e          ny d i f f e r e n c e to m e w n e t h -
 y o u h a v e t h _ w or no .
      H I S S HAiiPT  I thin                      w= would be a thi*'               firm taa.
 would require a t*3nsccipt.
        TilC0,;ONLil:         Than'< you.            Ladie ? and gentlemen,
  th'-nk yo u v e r y /such i n d e e d .      I t h a s b e e n qui..e a o n 0 a»,
  as Mr. I s a a - ^ s a i d - i n t e r e s t i n g , in m a n / r e s p e c t s . We
   : 11 a d j o u r n •. .en.
   (lie Inque st s were a d j o u r n e d u n t i l           tie f o l l o w i n g T u r n i n g )
