                                                                                            M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and tim e raised                                        Num ber

        "3-<2>ST
     <de source and any document number i f relevant)
                                                                        Cl- Q>ci—                        ^
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                           Receiver




                                                                                                                           Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                       Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                           Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                          SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                       Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master N um ber Form
   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)



         INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                  STADIUM DISASTER

              ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



             INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                SARAH LOUISE HICKS




                        Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B .M E D .S c i , B M , B S , MRCGP

               (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                           At

             The Medico-Legal Centre,
                  Watery Street,
                    Sheffield.

                           On

                   2^th April 1990




             TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




      From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
           Official Shorthand Writers,
       55, Queen Street,- Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors’ Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                                 INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                    B
                                                                        Page



                        OPENING BY THE CORONER                             1.

                    C   DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER Called

                           By THE CORONER                                  2.

                        DETECTIVE SERGEANT BRIAN JOHN McCOMBIE Called

                           By THE CORONER                                  6.
                           Cross-Examined by     MR. FRASER                8.
                    D      Cross -Examined by    MR.CATCHPOLE              9.

                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                           By THE CORONER                                 12.
                           Cro ss -Examined by   MR. FRASER               15.


                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        Tuesday,   24th April,   1990


                                        THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                                                 SARAH LOUISE HICKS
                    B
                                MR. FRASER:   Sir, the first summary you will hear
                           presented this afternoon relates to Sarah Hicks.     Her
                           parents are behind me.     I represent them on a personal
                           basis and also through   the agency ofthe steering
                           committee.

                                THE CORONER:   Good afternoon, Mr. and Mrs. Hicks.
                           You probably know what   the format is likely to be, but
                           just to make sure you know   the way we normally deal
                           with it I will just outline it to you.

                                 I read the evidence which was taken at the
                            opening, which was last April and then if there are any
                            amendments which need to be made because one or two of
                    D      the openings had mistakes, we correct them so we have
                            got the record right.    Then I mention whatever the
                            blood alcohol level was which you of course know
                            because you were here on the first day, but I want to
                            record it in the transcript.    Then we listen to the
                            pathologist who tells us what he can and then we listen
                            to the Presenting Officers who present their summaries.
                            We normally rise in between inquests just for a minute
                    E      or two.    Although, of course, we will be dealing with
                            your two daughters I still intend to rise between each
                            one.

                                If we had used our wits about us we would, have
                           listed the cases the other way round and taken Victoria
                           first and Sarah secondly, but we didn't and so we are
                           going to start with Sarah because we have the
                           pathologist here at the moment.   That is the only
                           reason why we cannot take the other one.   I don't
                           think it makes very much difference but it might have
                           been easier to do it that way.

                                One other thing I want to say.   You will hear
                           during the evidence a lot of references to photographs
                           and plans.   Try not to allow those to distract you.
                           We need the references so we can locate them if we
                           should need to refer to them again.   It is a bit
                           distracting, I know that, but it is unavoidable.    Try
                           not to allow that to throw you, so to speak.




                H                                    -   l   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
     This is a resumed inquest whi ch was opened on the
18th April, 1989. • On that occasion Neil Anthony
Parkin, acting Coroner's Officer said:

     "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
     been identified to PC 86 Mounsey of the South
     Yorkshire Police as that of Sarah Louise Hicks, by
     Trevor Hicks, her father.

     "She was 19 years of age having been born in the
     10th of April 1970 at Middlesborough.

     She was a single woman and she lived at
                             Pinner, Middlesex.

     She was a student by occupation.

     She died at Hillsbo ro ug h football ground following
     an incident there on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.
     PC Mounsey caused the body to be moved to the
     Medico Legal Centre and there he identified it to
     Detective Constable Simon We igold who subsequently
     identified the same body to Dr. Slater.

     It is the family wish that the body should be
     buried."

     Then as was my practice with everybody I wrote to
check the details and you, Mr. Hicks, on the 27th April
signed the form I sent to you.    The only amendment you
made was to change the place of birth to Teesside
North.    In fact you gave me the registration figures
as well but we don't  need these for this purpose.

     We had on our form the university where she was
studying but we will just describe her as a student, I
think.    It was Liverpool University, in fact.

     Blood alcohols were me asured by Dr. Forrest and in
the case of Sarah the result was negative.

     Now Dr. Slater.     As you know, Mr. Hicks, we have
sworn people, and Dr.   Slater has been sworn.

            DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER Called

                   By THE C O R O N E R :

     THE WITNESS:   My name is Dr. David Neil Slater
and I am a consultant h i s t o p a t h o l o g i s t .

Dr. Slater, we are dealing wit h the case a young lady
who was identified to you as Sarah Louise Hicks, is
that right? - A. That is correct, sir.
As far as you were concerned it was Inspector Timms who
did the identification? - A. Yes.

You also have an identification number, number 64, is
that the number? - A. Yes, sir.        The body was clearly
labelled Sarah Louise Hicks but in fact the leg
actually had a "question mark number 64" next to the
Hil ls bo ro ug h identification number, but the name was
a c t u a l l y ...

On it? - A. Yes.

You were quite satisfied that the post mortem results
which you are about to give to me relate to this young
lady? - A. Sir, I am confident, yes.

If you would be good enough to tell me what your post
mortem findings are and the basis on which you arrived
at those? - A. My examination of Sarah showed extensive
blueness to the face.     In addition there was extensive
hemorrhages into the eyes.    Also there was evidence of
hemorrhage on to the surface of the lungs.     All these
findings were indicative of an asphyxial type of death.
In addition, my autopsy showed pallor to the central
part of the face, especially over the nose.    This was
combined w it h a small scratch over the right cheek and
also a more substantial, approximately 3", bruise and
scratch over the Adam's apple.     In addition there was
evidence of bruising to the lungs.

All these   findings in my opinion were consistent with
traumatic   compression of the face, neck and possibly
chest and   accordingly I felt that this death was a
traumatic   asphyxial type.

My autopsy showed that Sarah was normally developed and
hea lthy and with no evidence of any natural disease
which could have contributed towards death.    It was my
opinion that Sarah would have had a normal life
expectancy.

I submitted my cause of death,    sir,   as 1(a)   traumatic
asphyxia.

If I can just pick up two points.   You noticed that
she had some cerebellar coning, which is a very serious
finding? - A. In asphyxial deaths the brain becomes
swollen and this increases the rapidity of death, sir.

I know one of the things that has concerned Mr. and
Mrs. Hicks is when they came to see Sarah and in effect
Victoria at about 9.30, Sarah appeared warmer than
Victoria.   Can you help us a little bit about body
cooling? - A. There are many factors which could affect
                        the cooling of the body.       Having been present at the
                        Hill sb or ou gh ground I would suggest that possibly the
                        most relevant one on that day was h ow quickly the body
                        was covered up or placed in one of the special recovery
                        bags.      That is one factor.

                        The mode of death can also be signi ficant to the way in
                        wh ich a body cools.     For example, some modes of death,
                    B   and I add here asphyxial death, can in fact generate
                        heat within the body, whereas other types of deaths,
                        such as hemorr ha gi c deaths with the blood loss, cooling
                        can be more rapid.     There are then other factors which
                        are significant to the cooling of a body, in this case
                        especially how quickly a body is re frigerated,
                        Normally you are talking of perhaps one to two degrees
                        Fahrenheit per hour, sir.

                        So in fact over six hours you wo ul d expect a drop of
                        about twelve degrees, which would not be stone cold at
                        that time? - A. That is right, sir.     It is difficult
                        to be exact scientifically, because it is a very
                        inaccurate science, but certainly the body would still
                        feel war m to touch, sir.
                    D
                        One of the things that concerns Mr. and Mrs. Hicks was
                        that there was a difference.    No w you were not of
                        course there and you had nothing to do with Victoria,
                        but it is possible that Victoria may have been
                        refrigerated at the Northern General.    Would that have
                        made any pe rceptible difference if you touched the two
                        bodies? - A. Oh, yes, a substantial difference.      That
                    E   would have ac celerated cooling dramatically, yes.

                             THE CORONER:   Mr. Fraser, I am putting one or two
                        points which I know concern Mr. and Mrs. Hicks and then
                        you can supplement anything you feel needs to be put as
                        far as it is relevant and as far as it is answerable:

                        You have already alluded to post mortem photographs and
                        one of the things that has concerned Mr. and Mrs. Hicks
                        is that when Sarah came home her hands from the wrist
                        down were a bl ui sh /p urp le/ blac kis h colour.   They want
                        to know how that could have happ en ed and in particular
                        could it have occurred because Victoria, that is the
                        other sister, was trying to hold her up during the
                        episode?    Can you help us on that? - A. I could
                        comment that certainly at the time of autopsy Sarah's
                        hands and limbs were of relatively normal colour.
                        They were certainly not blue/black.           This is clearly
                        doc umented in the autopsy photo album which I did on
                        the day, sir.     This, I would suspect, is a post mortem
                        artifact.   When people have passed away over the course
                        of hours or days in fact oxygen does go from the blood
                        and this can cause darkening.          In fact to me this is a
                H                              -   4   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
post mortem artifact and not relevant to any ante
mortem findings, sir.

You say certainly in the mortuary here her hands were
still, for all practical purposes, normal colour? - A.
Absolutely normal colour, sir.

Nothing for the Hicks to worry about, the fact that the
colour of her hands changed? - A. That is nothing to
worry about at all, sir.

The other thing is, and we have dealt with it on
several occasions, but could you repeat for me (a) the
length of time whic h in your opinion it takes a person
to become unconscious when they are in a traumatic
asphyxia situation and (b) how long it takes, on
average, for a person to die if they are in that state?
- A. Sir, this is very general, but one normally
believes that in traumatic asphyxial deaths
unconsciousness occurs rapidly, usually within a few
seconds.   I would suggest perhaps between five and
fifteen seconds.    Unconsciousness normally continues
and the individual then un fortunately passes away after
a further, say, three to five minutes, sir, when the
brain is affected.

Will it make any difference if you apply pressure
intermittently?   When I say "pressure" I mean
asphyxial. - A. What time are you suggesting that the
intermittence occurs after the initial event?

It is difficult.    I am just going to hypothesise at
this stage, but supposing you are applying pressure for
eight or ten seconds at a time and then relaxing it for
maybe half a minute and then re-applying it, would it
make any difference? - A. Even there my feelings are an
opinion that probably the unconsciousness would still
be the major factor, but I do have to admit that it is
possible that somebody could recover to a certain
extent mentally, perhaps not fully, and then succumb
again to further pressure.

Woul d I be right in thinking that if for instance a
person has been pressured for a time which is not
sufficient to kill them and may be not even sufficient
to render them unconscious, the pressure relaxes and
then is re-applied fairly quickly after that.        Unless
the oxygen reserves have been reconstituted, the
supervening unconsciousness would be that much quicker?
Is that a reasonable unde rs ta nd in g of the pathological
process? - A. Yes, it is a very accurate understanding,
sir, yes.

     THE CORONER:    Mr.   Fraser?
     MR. FRASER:   No, sir.   Mr. and Mrs. Hicks are
most grateful for that explanation.   Thank you very
much, doctor.

     THE CORONER:     Have you got any questions?   (No)

     Dr. Slater I am very grateful to you.

   DETECTIVE SERGEANT BRIAN JOHN McCOMBIE Called

                    By THE C O R O N E R :

     THE WITNESS:   I am Brian John McCombie, a
Detective Sergeant in the West Midlands Police.      I
have already been sworn, sir.

Yes.   If you would take me through the summary as it
relates to Sarah. - A. Sir, on Saturday, 15th April,
1989, Mr. Trevor Hicks, his wife Jennifer and their two
daughters, Sarah Louise Hicks and Victoria Jane Hicks,
travelled by car from their house in Pinner in
Middlesex.

They travelled to Sheffield in order to watch the FA
Cup semi final being played at Hillsbor ou gh football
ground that afternoon.    Mr. Hicks was in possession
of one seat ticket for the North Stand and three
standing tickets for the Leppings Lane terracing.      It
was mutually agreed that Mrs. Hicks should have the
seat and that Mr. Hicks, Vicky and Sarah would go on to
the terracing.

Upon their arrival in Sheffield at about 1245 hours and
following a picnic lunch the family walked to the
Leppings Lane end of the stadium where Mrs. Hicks
separated from the other three members of the family.

At approximately 1355 hours Mr. Hicks and his daughters
entered the stadium via the Leppings Lane turnstiles.
Sarah and Vi ctoria were seen to go through the tunnel
leading into the Leppings Lane West Stand terracing
area, whilst Mr. Hicks went to a nearby refreshment
kiosk before taking up a position in the terraced area
near to the Police Control Box.

I am informed by Mr. Hicks that from this position he
was able to see his daughters and look after their well
being whilst giving them the independence that they
enjoyed.

Mr. Shaun Michael Fortune was a spectator in enclosure
3 of the Leppings Lane terraces and at about 1445 hours
he was standing near to the two Hicks girls.   He noted
that Victoria was crying and appeared in some distress.
                        A cco rd in g to Mr. Jeffrey Rex, another spectator, who
                        was also in enclosure 3, by 1455 hours the crush in
                        that pen was so severe he was unable to move at all.
                        He says he saw the two girls and could see that Sarah
                        was ho lding up Victoria who appeared unconscious.

                        Mr. Leslie Tudor was standing in enclosure 3 and saw
                        Victoria and Sarah some two feet in front of him.    He
                    B   says that after the two teams came on to the pitch
                        there was pressure from the crowd behind which caused
                        him to be pushed forwards.   He then realised that
                        Vicky and Sarah were now positioned some three or four
                        people behind him.   Mr. Tudor describes ho w the
                        crushing continued in enclosure 3.

                    C   Mr. Paul McCaffrey was also subjected to crushing in
                        enclosure 3, having entered there at about 1450.     He
                        says he heard a crack which he believes was a crush
                        bar rier snapping and then saw people falling over.
                        Once he was in a position to do so Mr. McCaffrey began
                        to assist   people out of the enclosure.   He says he saw
                        a girl he now knows to be Sarah lying in pen 3 on her
                        back.
                    D
                        Sarah was carried out of the enclosure by Police
                        Constable Alan Marshall via a hole in the perimeter
                        fence where she was handed to two off-duty Lincolnshire
                        Police Officers.   These were Detective Constable James
                        Greaves and Detective Constable Fred Maddox.

                        Sarah was   placed on the pitch where DC Greaves
                    E   commenced mouth to mouth resuscitation   whilst DC Maddox
                        carried out heart massage.

                        These two officers were joined in their resuscitation
                        attempts by firstly an off-duty ambulance man, Mr.
                        A n dr ew Lawson and secondly, Dr. Colin Flenley, who was
                        also a spectator at the ground.       Mr. Hicks also
                        fought desperately to revive Sarah but by now had to
                    F   make a critical decision.      He knew that Sarah was
                        receiving treatment from a group of people, of which
                        one in particular was competent.      Mr. Hicks now knows
                        this man to be Dr. Flenley.      Mr. Hicks went in the
                        ambulance with Vicky, as you will hear shortly.

                        At approximately 1538 Sarah was placed on a temporary
                        stretcher and carried across the pitch by Detective
                    G   Constables Greaves and Maddox and other persons to the
                        entrance of the gymnas iu m where a temporary mortuary
                        had been set up.   There the officers continued in
                        their attempt to resuscitate Sarah.     They were then
                        joined by an as yet unidentified member of a medical
                        team who stated that the girl was beyond help.

                    H                         -   7   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             At 1550 hours Police Constable Stephen Mounsey assumed
                             responsibility for Sarah's body in the temporary
                             mortuary.

                             At 1620 Dr. Ma tt hew Bull examined Sarah in the
                             temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

                             At 2135 hours Mr. Trevor Hicks identified the body of
                    B        Sarah to Police Constable Mounsey in the temporary
                             mortuary at the gymnasium.

                             PC Mounsey later escorted Sarah's body to the Medico
                             Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
                             Detective Inspector Timms.   This identification was
                             subsequently confirmed to Detective Constable Weigold,
                             by DI Timms.

                             On Sunday, 16th April, 1989, following identification
                             by DC Weigold, Dr. David Slater carried out an autopsy
                             and submitted a report giving cause of death.

                        Q. Dr. Slater referred to his identifier     as Detective
                           Inspector Timms.   I think I am right     in saying as far
                    D      as we can ascertain both DI Timms and     Simon Weigold
                           were present at the identification? -     A. That is
                           correct, sir.

                        Q. We have had a few problems with sorting that out?     - A.
                           Yes, sir.

                                         Cross-Examined by MR.   FRASER:
                    E
                        Q. Sergeant, in relation to the time that Sarah spent in
                           the temporary mortuary at the gymnasium, Detective
                           Constables Greaves and Maddox say they were told by
                           somebody who was apparently part of a medical team that
                           Sarah was beyond help.   Are they able to tell you how
                           they know that that was somebody who was part of a
                           medical team?   Did they identify themselves by
                           profession? - A. I think it was an announcement made to
                           them, sir, but the person still remains unidentified.
                           It could well be that he may be identified tomorrow,
                           next week, or in twelve months time.   As a result of
                           publicity he may well come forward or, of course, they
                           might show up on the video at some stage.   The video
                           evidence is still being looked at.

                        Q*        THE CORONER:   Can I just help with this matter?
                             Can you turn to page 97?   This is the evidence of
                             Colin Flenley, who we know to be a doctor and who was
                             attempting to resuscitate Sarah on the pitch? - A. Yes,
                             sir.


                H                                  - 8 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
That was before she was in the gymnasium,     presumably?    -
A. Yes, sir.

If you look at page 97, I will read you what he says
because  this might help a little bit:

     "I looked at     Sarah's eyes.  The pupils were fixed
     and dilated.      That is a sign of brain death.
     Then myself,    Trevor Hicks and an off-duty police
     officer were    all attempting to revive her but to
     no avail and     after about ten minutes we gave up."

That is   what he says? - A. That is correct.

     THE CORONER:   That is really just to help you
from a doctor who had seen her and we know what his
opinion was.

     MR. FRASER:      Is that incident   timed at all?

     THE CORONER:      He goes on to say:

     "I remember seeing both Sarah and Victoria being
     carried away."

He says both dead:

     "But I now know that Sarah was taken to the
     gymnasium and Victoria was taken to the hospital
     before she was pronounced dead."

So it must have been around, or shortly after, the time
when Mr. Hicks left with the ambulance, but it is not
timed, not in the statement.

     MR. FRASER:      I am grateful,   sir.   I hav e no
further questions.

           Cro ss -Examined by MR.   CATCHPOLE:

Sergeant, I rise, I hope, to try and sort out a
confusion that may have arisen, certainly in my mind.
It relates to the evidence - you have summarised Mr.
Paul McCaffrey gave evidence at the Public Inquiry to
Lord Justice Taylor and whilst I realise I cannot
realistically ask you detailed questions about what he
has told you, because that is all you can say,exactly
what he says, I would like to see whether my
unde rs ta nd in g of what he said at the Inquiry is the
same as he says in the statement to you.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, I am not going to go through
it in any detail.   It is an important matter because
the timings are different.
                             THE CORONER:     What is the question?

                             MR. CATCHPOLE:        Well,    sir,   if I can move on to
                        that:

                        You start by saying Mr. McCaffrey entered pen 3 at
                        1450.   I wonder wh ether the statement you have follows
                        this sequence:  Mr. McCaffrey entered the ground
                    B   through gate C? - A. Can I answer that, sir?

                             THE CORONER:     What was       the question?

                             MR. CATCHPOLE:        That he entered the ground
                        through gate C.

                             THE CORONER:   Entered the ground through ga te C?
                        I don't think that is relevant at this stage, I m
                        sorry.  Ask the next question, please.

                             MR. CATCHPOLE:   It may well be relevant because
                        it leads on to the very important matter which does
                        touch on a contentious issue.   All I am trying to do,
                        sir, is indicate whether there is a substantial dispute
                    D   between what Mr. McCaffrey may have said, or may have
                        had summarised, and what he said at the Inquiry.

                             THE CORONER:   What I would   like you to do, if you
                        would, because as you know we are not going to go into
                        contentious matters, I want you to tell me what the
                        substance of your question is.   Then if it is in the
                        statement and it is possible to deal with it we will,
                    E   but what I am not going to do is ask this officer who
                        was not at the Public Inquiry, who has not got the
                        transcript in front of him, and who is not in a
                        position to answer that.

                             MR. CATCHPOLE:   I understand.    I am not
                        intending to ask him those questions.   All I was          trying
                        to find out was whether the statement has been
                        accurately summarised in this summary.

                              THE CORONER:    What I cannot quite understand
                        is...    Read me the paragraph with regard to McCaffrey
                        again so we can see where your concern is.     I have no
                        objection to hel pi ng you with legitimate concerns.

                             MR. CATCHPOLE:   The evidence was that he entered
                        pen 3 at about 1450 and that he heard a crack, whi ch he
                        believes was a crush barrier snapping.   Now those are
                        obviously both very relevant matters.   I would like to
                        know if possible to assist both yourself and the Jury,
                        what exactly Mr. McCaffrey was saying and whether there
                        is a conflict so I can I indicate whether there would
                        be an objection on the club's behalf and I believe also
                H                              -   10   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             maybe from my friend on my left, and that evidence
                             would have to be called at a later stage on this
                             particu la r point.

                                  THE CORONER:   Let me help you with regard to what
                             he says with regard to the barrier, wh ic h is probably
                             the thing you are really interested in.     I can only
                             tell you what is in the statement.
                    B
                                  MR. CATCHPOLE:      I am interested in the barrier,
                             but obviously wh et he r he entered through gate C would
                             give us some accurate     timing because the time given in
                             this summary does not     accord with that he gave to the
                             Taylor Inquiry.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:       I see. I think if     you look    at
                             page 48, Officer, line 4, it says:

                                  "Myself and Terry Weaver made our way..."

                             - A. This   is a supplementary statement,     sir:

                                  "Myself and Terry Weaver made our way into the
                    D             pen.   The time must have been about 1450."

                        Q.   That is right.       I think it is page... - A. Page 44.

                        Q.   Yes, I think it is     page 44. - A.   It is about half   way
                             down, sir.

                        Q. That is right.  Tell us what he says         there about
                    E      entering. - A. He says:

                                  "When I got near the turnstiles which I could see
                                  through the fence I saw there was a gate open and
                                  I could see people walking through into the
                                  ground.   They weren't pouring through.   They were
                                  walking through as though there was somebody
                                  official on the other side."

                                  THE CORONER:   That is sufficient because that
                             tells you that he came through that gate.   That is
                             what you wanted to know, isn t it?

                                  MR. CATCHPOLE:   Yes, sir, and then the evidence
                             relating to the cracking of the barrier.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   Can you turn to page 49.         It is an
                             important point, I do fully appreciate that.         It says:

                                  "I can give no time..."




                    H                                -   11   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                          - A. Yes:

                               "I can give no times whatsoever.   I was aware
                               that the match had kicked off by this time but had
                               not seen it.  Somewhere along the line I recollect
                               that there were people underfoot being trampled
                               on.   I heard a loud crack and something hit me on
                               my left leg.  There was an instant surge of people
                    B          and although I was moved forward it not by a great
                               deal because of the volume of people in front."

                               MR. CATCHPOLE:   I am very grateful for that.         I
                          hope you don't think I was causing unnecessary
                          problems, but it was an important point.   I don't
                          think the summary properly covered it.   I am very
                          grateful.

                                THE CORONER:        That is perfectly all right.   Have
                           we dealt with it?

                                MR.   CATCHPOLE:         Yes,     certainly.

                                THE CORONER:   I was just concerned that I did not
                    D      want to bring the Public Inquiry evidence in because it
                           is not in front of the Officer.   Mr. Fraser anything
                           else arising out of that?

                                MR. FRASER:     Nothing directly, sir.   I too was
                           concerned that we may have been appearing to stray
                           outside the strict parameters you laid down.      I
                           underst an d the reason why the question was put.    It
                    E      was to clear up an apparent misundersta nd ing and I
                           think in the circumstances...

                                THE CORONER:   I think we dealt with it within the
                           ambit of the inquest at this stage.   I hope so-,
                           anyway.   Any questions?   (No)   What about you, Mr.
                           Fraser?

                                MR. FRASER:        No,    sir.

                                THE CORONER:        Thank you, Officer.

                                DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MI CHAEL LAYTON Called

                                               By THE C O R O N E R :

                                THE WITNESS:   Sir, I am Michael Layton, a
                           Detective Inspector in the West Midlands Police.

                        Q. Yes, officer. - A. Sir, an examination has been made of
                           the visual evidence in respect of Sarah and she has
                           been identified alive in enclosure number 3 on a BBC

                    H                                -   12   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
video tape and also subsequently being carried across
the pitch.

Sir, in respect of the identification in enclosure
number 3, that is referred to on a tape which has been
given the reference number MAP.l, 1438.45.14.   In fact
at that particular time she is together with Victoria.
They are side by side.

Police Constable Marshall has identified himself in the
process of removing Sarah from enclosure number 3 and
again that is shown on BBC video, reference M A P . 7,
timed at 1521.48.22.

The officer has signed a plan of the terraces
indicating the approximate location at which he found
Sarah and that plan is referenced AM.l.

On photographs referenced NGN . 1/62 and LPE.4/25, Sarah
is shown being carried across the pitch on a ho arding
and DC Greaves, as you have already heard, has
confirmed that he is shown on these photographs.

The stretcher party is also shown on a further BBC
video which has been given the reference M A P . 2, timed
at 1539.27.00.

Sir, both Mr. and Mrs. Hicks have seen visual evidence
and they have been able to assist us in confirming the
identifications made.

It should be noted in respect of the statement by DC
Greaves that he refers to Victoria Hicks and clearly
that should be Sarah.

There is one other point, sir.       In respect of. the
point raised by Mr. Fraser, in respect of the time
Sarah was taken from the pitch, whether that time in
relation to the video M A P . 2 helps.   There is a
slightly earlier reference on a further South Yorkshire
Police tape.    On a tape TB.3, that is timed at
1538.41, slightly earlier than the time of M A P . 2
1539.27.   No w that shows the stretcher party basically
in the process of being about to leave the Leppings
Lane end, so that may assist in relation to Mr.
Fraser's question.

Yes, it is about a minute's difference or so? - A.     that
is right, sir, yes.

Sir, can I refer you to a plan which has been given the
reference number MWJL.86?
                        Q. That will be C.78. - A. Yes, sir.   That plan is of the
                           terraces.   It shows the earlier video identification
                           on the terraces and also refers to two unconfirmed
                           identifications that Mr. Hicks made to us in the
                           process of viewing visual evidence.    We have not been
                           able to satisfy ourselves totally - it is not
                           conclusive, but they are possible identifications.
                    B   Q. Yes, it is very difficult. - A. Sir, a further plan
                           referenced MWJL.87, wh ic h is a plan of the pitch.

                        Q. That will be C.79.   That is a plan...? - A. Of the
                           pitch area.   It shows basically the route by which
                           Sarah was taken across the pitch to the Spion Kop end.

                        Q. Yes, if you could, in the usual way, show us? - A. If
                           we can deal with the plan referenced MWJL.86, this is
                           enclosure number 3 and first of all in relation to the
                           video reference, MAP.l, which is the one timed at 1348,
                           we believe Sarah is shown about this location h e r e .

                        Q. Now that is a positive identification? - A. It is,       sir.
                           Sir, shall I deal with the two possible
                    D      identifications?

                        Q. Just show them. - A. There are two photographs which
                           are in this area here, one here and then one further
                           down h e r e . Thou gh they are not timed photographs,
                           sir, they were obviously taken at some stage later to
                           that identification, the video identification.

                    E      Sir, in respect of the plan, MWJL.87, there are a
                           series of marks on that plan.      The first one I have
                           already referred to.      It refers in fact to TB.3, the
                           video identification of the stretcher party starting to
                           leave the Leppings Lane end and that, sir, is indicated
                           approximately t h e r e . Then, sir, there is another five
                           references made on that plan.      Do you want me to go
                           through each one individually?

                        Q. No, I think it is sufficient...          These are just
                           locations where you have picked out Sarah being taken
                           across the pitch.        If you just point to them. - A. The
                           next one is h e r e , sir.    There is a further video
                           identification h e r e .    A photogr ap h h e r e . A further
                           pho to gr ap h there and a further video identification
                           t h e r e , which indicates the flow across to the Spion
                           Kop.

                        Q. Yes.   In this pa rt icular case we happen to have a lot
                           of video evidence.     Was it this morning that we had
                           one where there was none?     It is a coincidence in that
                           sense.

                    H                              -   14   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
    THE CORONER:       Mr.   Fraser?

              Cro ss -Examined by MR.   FRASER:

     MR. FRASER:   A question for the officer,     sir,
relating to the photographs:

Officer, I think it is right that one of the major
difficulties in identifying Sarah from the photograph
is in fact she is believed to have had her back to the
barrier at the time that ph ot ograph was taken? - A. I
understand that to be so, sir, yes.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Fraser, no blame whatever - you
know, nobody need worry about not having identified...
I am amazed people have identified anybody quite often,
so please Mr. Hicks don't worry.   The Officer was
right to say we are not 100% sure, but there is no way
should you think, "Oh, dear, I should have been able to
do it."

     MR. FRASER:   No, that was not the suggestion at
all, sir.   It was just that for the avoidance of all
doubt the problem was in fact they were not facing the
camera.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I understand.   I am very
anxious that they should not think that I think you can
do the impossible because I don't.

     MRS. NORCLIFFE:   I wonder, sir, in view of the
fact that the only positive identification is at 1438,
if whether the plan AM.l prepared by Constable Marshall
as to where this young girl was found, could possibly
be given a "C" number and also identified for us on the
terraces.

     THE CORONER:       Whic h plan is that, Officer?   - A.   I
have it, sir.

Could I just have a look at it? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   I don't object to this plan being
produced.  We will give it a "C" reference:

This is a recollection, isn't it? - A. That is right,
sir.   It also indicates that that is a plan where it
is believed that death had occurred, or certainly that
the events had already taken place.

It is C.80.      What is the reference on the plan?     - A.
AM.l.
Could you just show us that over there? - A. Yes.
Sir, again this is the plan referred to by PC Marshall.
He actually locates Sarah in this area here, again in
enclosure number 3.

     THE CORONER:      Yes,    thank you.     Anything else?

     MRS. NORCLIFFE:     No,    thank you,    sir.

     MR. FRASER:    I have no questions,        sir.

     THE CORONER:    I just want to go back to one
matter because I don't want you to feel that we have
not dealt with this quite adequately, and that was your
query about what happe ne d at the temporary mortuary.
I found the relevant bit of James Russell Greaves.     I
want to just tell you what he actually says because it
may hel p a little bit.

     I am going to pick this up while he is still on
the pitch, so to speak.   He says:

     "We were then joined by a man approximately 45
     years of a g e . .."

Then he describes him.        He then says:

     "He informed us he was a doctor, asked us our
     first names and said we would stick together as a
     medical team.  We continued mouth to mouth with
     the girl."

Then he describes that activity was taking place and
there was an ambulance and that it stopped and he goes
on to say:

     "I believe her sister was put in the ambulance.
     We decided to put our girl in the ambulance..."

but it drove off before they could do it.   Of course
you weren't there and this is the relevant bit:

     "We then got a piece of wooden hoarding, placed
     the girl on it and ran with her across the pitch
     to the entrance to the gym because we thought more
     ambulances were there.  There were no ambulances
     so we put the girl down and continued mouth to
     mouth for several minutes.  We were then
     approached by a medical team who examined the girl
     and told us she was dead and beyond help.   We left
     the girl outside the gym and myself, DC Maddox and
     the doctor ran back down the pit ch to the centre
     section behind the goal."
                        I think the inference is that Dr. Flenley was actually
                        there at the time, but, of course, I have not
                        identified the team.

                             Does that he lp you at all?

                             MR. FRASER:    Yes,    sir,   it does,   very much,
                        Thank you.
                    B
                             THE CORONER:   We are going to pause.         This    is all
                        we are going to deal with with Sarah.

                          (The inquest on SARAH LOUISE HICKS was adjourned
                                       to a date to be fixed-)




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H                             -17   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
