                                                                                          M I R . 15


                                                                                                                     i '3»
   OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised                                  Number


   Tijle                              ^    Q a—                                          V\ C ^ W O O t ■                       ID
   {Inch/de source and any document number i f relevant)
r c* 1
 V . Receiver's instructions —urgent action — Yes/No ___
                                                                                                                    Receiver




                                                                                                                    Indexer
   Document registered/indexed as indicated

   No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                Statement Reader
   Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                    Indexer
   Indexed as indicated       S   i              c a r v ^   •



   No(s) of actions raised

   Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                  SIO




   Further action No(s)                                                                                             Indexer


   When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
  HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      (WEST D I S T R I C T )



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                  STADIUM DISASTER

               ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



              INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                       ALAN McGLONE




                         Bef ore

DR. S.L.    POPPER,   LL.B,    B.MED.Sci,   B M . B S , MRCGP

               (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                              At

              The Medico-Legal Centre,
                   Watery S t r e e t ,
                     Sheff i e l d .

                              On

                      4th M ay 1990




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street. Shef field SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough S o l i c i t o r s ’ Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,       South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                     A
                                             INDEX

                                                               Page


             OPE-        NG BY THE CORONER                       1.

             PROFESSOR ALAN USHER Called

                         By THE CORONER

             DETECTIVE CONSTABLE PETER GADSBY Called

                     c   By THE CORONER

             DETEC TIV E INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                         By THE CORONER

             DETEC T I V E INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Recalled

                     D   By THE CORONER




                     E




                     F




                     G




                     H


J. L. H arpham Ltd
                         Friday.   4th Hay,   1990


                                         THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                                                     ALAN McGlone


                                 MR. FRASER:   The first evidence you are going to
                            hear relates to Alan McGlone.   Alan's wife, Irene, is
                            in court, with her mum and sister and a social worker.
                     B      Sir, the practice which represents Mrs. McGlone is a
                            member of my group and I therefore appear as their
                            agent in the usual way as a member of the steering
                            committee.

                                 THE CORONER:     Mrs. McGlone, good morning.   Can
                            I explain to you briefly what we are going to do this
                            morning so you can follow it more easily?    In a moment
                            I am going to to read to you the evidence which was
                            given on the 19th of April, 1989.    That was done in
                            this very room and that was done so I could release the
                            body of Alan so you could have the funeral whenever it
                            was convenient.    Then I am going to tell you what the
                            blood alcohol level was and also deal with any
                            corrections.   We are then going to turn to the
                            pathologist, Professor Usher.
                     D
                                 When he has given his evidence West Midlands
                            Police Officers will give their evidence in two parts.
                            The first part relates to a summarising of the relevant
                            parts from various statements.   The second part deals
                            with the visual evidence which is done by Inspector
                            Layton.   He will describe the visual evidence first in
                            words, which when you hear that you may be a bit
                     E      confused but do not be too concerned because he then
                            walks round and on these big plans here he shows us
                            what he has been talking about and it then becomes very
                            much easier to understand.   When that has been
                            completed we conclude the inquest at this stage.

                                 This then is a resumed inquest which was opened on
                            the 19th April, 1989.   On that occasion Neil Anthony
                            Parkin, acting Coroner's Officer said:

                                   "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
                                   been identified to PC 2750 Lally of the South
                                   Yorkshire Police as that of Alan McGlone by David
                                   Roberts his friend.

                     G             He was 28 years of age having been born on the
                                   13th September, 1960 at Liverpool.   He was a


                                                      -   1   -




                 H


J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                married man and he lived at
                                           Kirby.

                                He was a factory worker by occupation.   He died
                                at Hillsborough football ground following an
                                incident there on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.    PC
                                Lally caused the body to be moved to the Medico
                     B          Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                                Detective Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently
                                identified the same body to Professor Usher.

                                It is the family wish that the body should be
                                cremated."

                           The next thing I did was I wrote to you, Mrs. McGlone.
                           On the 27th of April you signed this form and you told
                           us we had spelled Kirkby wrong and the address is
                           __________________________ the other information date of
                           birth and place of birth was correct and occupation as
                           well.

                                Dr. Forrest estimated the alcohol level and he
                     D     gave the evidence regarding this on the first day when
                           we resumed these inquests.   The level he measured was
                           75 mg/100 ml.

                                        PROFESSOR ALAN USHER Called

                                              By THE C O R O N E R :

                     E   Q. It is Alan Usher, Professor of Forensic Medicine and
                            Home Office Pathologist? - A. Yes.   The body which was
                            identified to me as being that of Alan McGlone was
                            numbered 70 in a series.   The body was that of a
                            heavily built young white male of 65 cm in height and
                            weighed 69 kg, just under 11 stones.

                            The external and internal signs of traumatic asphyxia
                            were present.   There were two small bite marks in the
                            tongue,




                     G
                                                                             I found
                            no natural disease which could have caused or
                            contributed to his death.

                            In the course of his chest being compressed one rib had
                            been broken.   He died because he could not move his
                            chest in or out because of the pressure upon it, but
                     H
                                                 -   2   -


J. L. H arpham Ltd
     mercifully when that happens once the chest is fixed
     like that the victim loses consciousness in a matter of
     seconds - some time between 10 and 20 seconds.
     Subsequent to that he would feel nothing of what was
     happening to him.   He would die in between four and
     six minutes.

     I give the cause of death formally as traumatic
     asphyxia.

     Thank you, Professor Usher.




          Mr. Fraser?

          MR. FRASER:      No questions,    sir.

          MR. LIMB:     No questions,   sir.

          MR. CATCHPOLE:      No questions,    sir.

Q.        THE CORONER:    Professor Usher, I will let you
     go, but I take if a particular family wants to speak to
     you privately you would be happy to do so? - A. Of
     course, sir.

           DETECTIVE CONSTABLE PETER GADS BY Called

                           By THE CORONER

          THE WITNESS:   I am Peter Gadsby,        Detective
     Constable of the West Midlands Police,        sir.

Q. Yes, Officer. - A. The circumstances in this particular
   case are that on Saturday, 15th April, 1989, Alan
   McGlone travelled by private car to Sheffield with
   David Roberts, Stephen Clark and Jose ph Clark.   In
   fact Joseph Clark also died that day at Hillsborough.


                             - 3 -
                         They intended to watch the FA Cup semi-final football
                         match which was to be played at the Hillsborough
                         stadium that day.    Stephen Clark was in possession of
                         a ticket for the West Stand area of the ground.   The
                         other three men each had a ticket for the Leppings Lane
                         terraced area.    They entered the stadium at about 1415
                         hours via the Leppings Lane turnstile where Stephen
                     B   Clark separated from the party.    The other three men
                         then went down the tunnel and eventually into enclosure
                         3 where they stood together.

                         As the crowd increased in the enclosure they were
                         slowly pushed forward to about 6' from the front
                         perimeter fence.   During the pressure Mr. Roberts
                         became separated from the other two men.   He is unable
                     C   to say what happened to Alan McGlone and did not see
                         him again.

                         Shortly after 1505 hours - it may have been some time
                         after that, I would estimate probably nearer ten
                         minutes past three, following the severe crushing in
                         the West Stand terracing, Police Sergeant 1855 Adrian
                         Brazener and Police Constable 887 Nicholas Philip Hoad
                     D   assisted to carry a man, now believed to be Alan, on a
                         temporary stretcher to the rear of the North Stand near
                         the gymnasium.

                         The officers cannot recall specific details of this
                         action, nor where the man had actually been found on
                         the pitch.    The officers identified themselves on
                     E   photographs, but did not know the identity of the man
                         they carried.     Police Constable Hoad was sure the man
                         was dead.   The officers then left this man to assist
                         other people.

                         At 1540 hours Police Constable 2750 Simon Lally and
                         Police Constable 1791 Charles Wilmott saw Alan lying
                         unattended near to the gymnasium.   The officers
                     F   checked for vital signs of life but without success and
                         carried Alan into the gymnasium where a temporary
                         mortuary had been set up.

                         At 1558 hours Dr. Andr ew Byrne examined Alan in the
                         temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.   At 2340
                         hours David Roberts identified the body of his friend
                         Alan to Police Constable Lally in the temporary
                     G   mortuary.   Police Constable Lally later escorted the
                         body of Alan to the Medico Legal Centre and confirmed
                         the identification to Detective Constable Weigold.

                         At 1300 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 1989, Mr. Anthony
                         McGlone identified the body of his brother Alan to
                         Police Constable 1269 Glave.

                 H
                                              _   4   _



J. L. H arpham Ltd
                              On Sunday, the 16th of April, 1989, following
                              identification by Detective Constable Weigold,
                              Professor Alan Usher carried out an autopsy and
                              submitted a report giving the cause of death.

                              Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                              blood sample from the deceased where the presence of
                     B        ethanol was detected.   The witnesses proving
                              continuity of the blood sample are Dennis Chambers,
                              Detective Sergeant John Turner and Detective Sergeant
                              James Fletcher.   Dr. Alexander Robert Forrest carried
                              out the analysis.

                              There is some visual evidence,    sir.

                          . I think a ticket counterfoil was found, is that right,
                            in his possession? - A. I cannot confirm that in this
                            summary.

                         3.   Paragraph 11.    Is it there? - A. No,    sir.

                         5.   We will check that in a moment.
                     D             THE CORONER:   What we will do, Mr. Fraser, when
                              the officer sits down we will   just look that up and
                              double check and make sure ithas not slipped    into our
                              copy in error:

                          . I just wanted to check because I  think Mr. Hoad says he
                            cannot remember specific details - this is paragraph 3
                     E      of the summary - of the action and then later on he
                            says he was sure that the man  was dead, but I think
                            what Mr. Hoad was saying was that he remembered
                            carrying three people? - A. A number of casualties,
                            three in a l l ...

                         Q. Who were dead but he did not know which one was which?
                            - A. Quite right, sir.

                         Q. Until he looked at some photographs?       - A. That is
                            right.

                         Q. Officer, could you turn to page 38, ninth line from the
                            bottom? - A. This is when the officer obtains property,
                            I t hink...

                         Q. Yes, that is right.   He lists all the property found
                            and he lists one match ticket for the Leppings Lane end
                            of the ground. - A. He had got one.    I am a little
                            concerned now, sir, about Mr. Layton's evidence because
                            there does not appear to be a paragraph 12.   Perhaps I
                            ought to have a copy so that Mr. Layton is not left in
                            the same position.

                     H
                                                    - 5 -


J. L. H arpham Ltd
     THE CORONER:      Yes, Mr. Layton?

     DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                    By THE C O R O N E R :

     THE WITNESS:   Sir, I am Michael Layton,             Detective
Inspector of the West Midlands Police.

Yes, Officer? - A. Sir, an examination has been made of
video film and photographic evidence and Alan has been
identified alive in enclosure number 3 and also
subsequently being carried across the pitch.    Mr.
David Roberts has viewed visual evidence and he has
identified Alan on the video and photographic prints
alive in enclosure number 3.   On a BBC video,
referenced MAP.l and timed at 1450.26.02, Mr. Roberts
is shown together with Joseph Clark who, as you have
already heard, also died, sir, and Alan.   At that
point they are all alive in enclosure number 3.

Sir, on a photograph referenced D B . 16/29, Alan McGlone
is shown near to the perimeter fencing in enclosure
number 3 and that photograph is timed at 1445.

On a photograph referenced P R . 7/2, Sergeant Brazener
and PC Hoad are shown assisting to carry Alan across
the pitch and the officers have confirmed this
identification.

Sir, that photograph is timed at 1534.   Although we
are not able to tell from the photograph what part of
the pitch is shown at that particular point - there
aren t any indicators to help with that - it does
perhaps clarify a point which was raised earlier in
relation to the timings of the officers' first
involvement with Alan.   Sir, that photograph is timed
at 1534, sir.

Mrs. Irene McGlone, Alan's wife, has viewed visual
evidence and she has assisted us in confirming the
identifications which have been made.

Sir, may I refer you to a plan MWJL.44?

That will be C.240. - A. I think,            sir,   that is the only
plan   torefer to in this case.

Sir,   in relation to the terrace plan then the first
identification - this is in enclosure number 3 - and
the first identification refers to photograph D B . 16/29.
That   is the photograph timed at 1445 and alocation
shown there for Alan is at this point here
approximately in enclosure number 3.
In respect of the video identification on the BBC tape
MAP.l, that is a later timing, he is shown in this
position here approximately, again in enclosure number
3.   This point here is actually gate number 3.

     MR. FRASER:      No questions,   sir.

     MR. LIMB:     No thank you,   sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:      No thank you, sir.

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, the family have asked me, in
anticipation of what you are about to say because they
are aware of the way you have conducted the previous
inquests and this is perhaps the most opportune point
for me to say it, sir, that they want to thank you and
the officers they have dealt with for the obvious
genuine sentiment which you have expressed and the way
the officers have dealt with them.    It would have been
so easy, they feel, for these inquests to have been
regarded as a matter of course.    The evidence is that
that has not been the case and they are impressed by
the genuine sympathetic way in which they have been
dealt with as a family, sir.

        THE CORONER:  How kind and generous of you.  I
do appreciate it.    I have tried to make each
individual inquest individual to each person and I know
the officers, of course, have also tried very hard
because a lot of them have met you and so they know you
as individual people and thank you very much for saying
th a t .
       With regard to Alan, you have already said through
  Mr. Fraser such very kind words and it is very
  difficult for me really to follow those, but I want you
  to know that just as I have tried to say to others,
  that in this inquest I am not thinking of anybody else.
  We are now thinking of your husband and your relation
  and all the people who loved him and cared for him, how
  very, very sorry I am that you have lost him.   I wish
  we did not have to meet here like we have done today.
  There is nothing I can do about it.   I cannot undo the
  event because none of us can do that, but at least you
  can know that all of us feel for you.

        (Subsequently further evidence was given as
   follows:

        THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, I think there is a
   small point we need to correct on Alan?

        MR. FRASER:   I understand there is a slight
   correction for the purpose of the transcript, sir.

       DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Recalled

                       By THE C O R O N E R :

        THE WITNESS:   Sir, I am Michael Layton,   Detective
   Inspector of the West Midlands Police.

Q. Yes, Inspector? - A. This refers to paragraph 13.
   Quite rightly it has been pointed out to me that where
   we have used the phrase, "shows Alan McGlone near the
   perimeter fencing in enclosure 3", I think to be more
   accurate that should be near the radial fencing.

Q. Is it this spot over h e r e ? Would you show us so that
   everybody can see? - A. It is actually this location
   here, which is more accurately the radial fencing as
   opposed to the perimeter fencing.

        THE CORONER:      Yes,    thank you.

        (The Inquest into the death of ALAN McGLONE
            was adjourned to a date to be fi xed)
