HER MAJ ES T Y’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)
                                               49
     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL,    1989




                  Before

S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

         (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                    At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheff ield.

                    On

           13th February,   1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




 From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, L t d .,
      Official Shorthand Writers,
  55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                      INDEX TO T R A N S C R I P T
                                                     Page

B RIAN LESLEY SKARRATT
     By THE CORONER                                     1
                                                       11
                                                         ..
     Cross-Examined   by MR. PAYNE
     Cross-Examined   by MR. KING                      12
                                                       15.
                                                          .
     Cross-Examined   by MRS. MCBRIEN
     Cross-Examined   by MISS ADDLEMAN                 15.
     Cross-Examined   by MR. RUSSELL                   18.
     Further by THE   CORONER                          20   .
SHAUN PATRICK TERENCE SVJEENEY

     By THE CORONER                                    21
                                                       29.
                                                            .
     Cross-Examined   by   MR. PAYNE
     Cross-Examined   by   MR. KING                    30.
     Cross-Examined   by   MRS. MCBRIEN                31.
     Cross-Examined   by   MR. RUSSELL                 31.

BRIAN JOSEPH DOYLE Recalled

     By THE CORONER                                    32.
     Cross-Examined   by MISS ADDLEMAN                 33.
     Further by THE   CORONER                          41.
     Cross-Examined   by MR. RUSSELL                   43.
     Cross-Examined   by MR. KING                      44.

PAUL EDUARDS

     By THE CORONER                                    45.
     Cross-Examined   by MR. PAYNE                     52.
     Cross-Examined   by MR. KING                      52.
     Cross-Examined   by MR. CATCHPOLE                 55.
     Cross-Examined   by MRS. MCBRIEN                  55.
     Cross-Examined   by MR. RUSSELL                   55.
     Further by THE   CORONER                          56.

IAN JOHN FEARNS

     By THE CORONER                                    57.
     Cross-Examined by MR. KING                        66   .
     Cross-Examined by MRS. tiCBRIEN                   67.
     Further Cross-Examined by HR. KING                69.
TERRY ALAN COOPER

     By THE CORONER                         70.
     Cross-Examined by MR. ICING            75.
     Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN         76.
     Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN        76.
     Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL          77.
     Further by THE CORONER                 78.
     Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE        79.
     Further by THE CORONER                 79.
     Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING     81.

ALBERT ATKIN

     By THE CORONER                         81.
     Cross-Examined   by   MR. PAYNE        39.
     Cross-Examined   by   MR. KING         89.
     Cross-Examined   by   MRS. MCBRIEN     89.
     Cross-Examined   by   MR. CATCHPOLE    90.

SHANE ANDREW TRACEY

     By THE CORONER                         91.
     Cross-Examined   by   MR. PAYNE        99.
     Cross-Examined   by   MR. KING        101.
     Cross-Examined   by   MR. CATCHPOLE   101.
     Cross-Examined   by   MRS. MCBRIEN    101.

LEGAL DISCUSSION                           103.
                FORTY NINTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                WEDNESDAY,   13th FEBRUARY 1991

      THE CORONER: I think we have not met you, have we,
I can't remember? Just give us your name so we know who
you are?

      MRS. HODGSON:  My name is Jane Hodgson.         I appear
in place of Mr. Isaacs today.

      THE CORONER:    Yes, pleased to see you.


                BRIAN LESLEY SKARRATT Affirmed

                       By THE CORONER:

Good morning.    It is Brian Lesley Skarratt.       Is that right?
- A. Yes.

Is it still                                        Liverpool?
- A. Yes.

In fact you are a Fireman.      Is that right? - A. Yes.

Still are? - A. Yes, still am.

Mr. Skarratt, you did not come in your capacity as a Fireman
but as a Liverpool supporter to the match on the 15th April
1989.  That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

I think you came by coach, Amberline it was.         Is that
right? - A. Yes.

Is it right that you left at about 10.30? - A. Yes, about
half-10, yes.

I think there was quite a bit of traffic and you did not
get to Sheffield until 2.  Is that right? - A. The motorways
were pretty packed.

The coach did not stop en route at services? - A. Not at
any services, no.

Was the coach stopped by the Police for inspection? - A.
Yes, they had a check on one of the roundabouts just on
the motorway, yes.

What did they check for, do you remember? - A. Well they
checked for drink.

And   I take it they did not find any? - A.       They found a bit
but   they took it off.

Did they check whether the people had tickets.   Can you
remember? - A. No, nothing like that,   no, just drink.
                                                            2


                                              B.L. SKARRATT



Q. I think you parked somewhere near an Industrial Estate, at
   least the coach did.  Right? - A. Yes, just by a brewery,
   it was I think. I don't know the name of the brewery.

Q.   And then you had a walk down the hill towards   the ground.
     Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. In fact you saw quite a number of Police people around on
   the way down I think, is that right, and no doubt lots of
   fans as well? - A. A lot of Police, yes.

Q.   Were you checked at any point by them as far as you remember?
     - A. No, no checks.  Not for tickets.

Q. No, I did not ask that.  Were people stopped and told to
   deposit cans or anything like that? - A. Not that I can
   remember.

Q. You can't remember? - A. No.

Q. You yourself weren't stopped? - A. We weren't stopped, no.

Q. How many were there in your group? - A. There was four of
   us that went to the match on that coach.

Q. So there were four of you who were going down together? -
   A. On that coach but we did meet people later on and we lost
   two later on.

Q. So you picked some up and lost some? - A. Yes, that is
   right.

Q. And I take it you and your friends had tickets.      Is that
   right? - A. We all had tickets.

Q.    Now we don't want to spend too much time on the walk down
     and in fact we don't want to spend too much time outside
     the turnstile area because we have heard quite a bit about
     that, but did you actually enter through a turnstile? -
     A. Yes.

Q.   Can you say about what time it was that you entered?
     - A. It was virtually bang on three.

Q.   Now did you look at your watch, or what makes you say
     it was 3 o'clock? - A. Well as we were going in it was
     getting close to kick-off so people were getting a bit
     anxious they would not get in and then one of the mounted
     Police fellows he said:  "It has been delayed, the kick-off
     has been delayed" so that eased the crush a bit you see
     to get through the turnstiles.  Then when the other gates
     opened I knew from later it was a minute-past-3, Peter
     Beardsley hit the bar.
                                    B.L. SKARRATT


So when you say it was "about 3" you worked it backwards
from the time that you thought Peter Beardsley hit the
cross bar? - A. Yes.

So if I tell you that Peter Beardsley hit the cross bar
at 5-rainutes-past-3 you would have to work your time ....
- A. If it was 5-past-3 I would have to work it but it
was a minute-past-3, but we knew it was roughly 3 because
we heard the roar for the kick-off as well, that is un­
mistakable that, so we knew within 30 seconds of the time.

What I am trying to find out is how accurate your time is.
That is all.  If the sole evidence is that calculation on
when Peter Beardsley hit the cross bar .... A. No, that
is not just the sole one, that is part of it.

Can you tell the difference between the roar of kick-off
and the roar of the players coming on to the pitch pre­
kick-off? - A. Yes.

You can? - A. We are not usually there then you see.

You mean you usually arrive at kick-off time? - A. Yes,
we try to, yes.

Anyway, it was around you think 3 o'clock you went in?
- A. Yes, 3 o'clock.

Were there still a lot of people going in at that time?
- A. There was this time, yes, a lot of people.

And having entered you got into the concourse area, a
biggish area just inside the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Did you go to the loo or not or did you go straight down
towards .... A. No, we didn't go to the toilet, we went
straight in. We mingled first to see if we could see the
other lads but we could not find them so we just went
straight in.

And you went down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Now it is possible to see the pitch from the entry into
the tunnel.  Did you by any chance look? - A. Well you
can see the pitch.  You can see the green of the grass.

Did you see the players on the pitch? - A. I can't remember.
I might have.

As you went down the tunnel what was the tunnel like? -
A. When we started to go down it was full of people,
there was a lot of people there and it was starting to get
a bit, you were just getting carried around with the
crush you see, but I was not alarmed at that time.
                                     B.L. SKARRATT



Were you able to walk normally down the tunnel or were
you forced along, were you shuffling, were you walking
on your own? - A. You were forced.

You were forced down at the point where you went through?
- A. Yes.

I think you heard another roar at that point as you were
going down the tunnel.  Is that right? - A. Yes, just as
we were getting into it, yes.

Of course you don't know what that was at the time? - A.
Not at the time.  You could tell it was something to do
with the match but that was all.

So based on roars what you are saying is that you had not
entered the terrace pre-kick-off.  Is that right? - A.
No, we weren't there for the kick-off, no.

You are saying you were being carried along.  Describe a
little bit more about what your experience was in that
tunnel? - A. In the tunnel itself?

Yes? - A. There was a lot of people there.  It was wall-
to-wall people.  You could not walk along with hands in
pockets but like any football match I was not that alarmed
It was just the urgency to get in to see the game.  It was
not that bad at all.

Forgive me for asking this rather crude question.  Did
you see people along the side walls weeing.  Can you
remember? - A. Yes.

There were some people in the tunnel? - A. Oh in the
tunnel, no.  There was no room at all for anything like
that.  You could only walk.  You were just carried through
You could not stop or anything.

When you heard the roar in the tunnel, you said you
heard another roar, whatever that might have signified,
did anything happen within the tunnel as far as the move­
ment of the crowd was concerned? - A. Just a little bit
more urgency you see. What I am trying to say is as well,
when you come through the turnstiles, you see, there was
a lot of people,   a big mass of people there and of course
that   is the only thing. As you said yourself you could
see the pitch.   You automatically go straight that way,
you see, so instead of everyone fanning out the whole
mass sort of went that way, if you see what I mean.

I am   only trying to find out your experience? - A. Well
I am   just saying that is why it was like that.  With the
roar as well it just stepped up a touch.
                                                       5

                                       B.L. SKARRATT



Q. Now when you got to the end of the tunnel, obviously there
   is a beginning of it and then there is an end, did you
   hit a row or group of people which formed a barrier on to
   the terracing? - A. As you got in it was not very compacted
   but if you wanted to get down to the middle you would have
   to start pushing past people to get in.

Q. You did in fact manage to get just into Pen 3 I think, that
   is the right end one.  Is that right? - A. Well when we got
   in there was like a metal partition and some people were
   actually getting thrown into that.  One of the lads he got
   caught on that.  He did not hurt himself but we just managed
   to get to the right-hand side so you get swept into that.




                          Q. How far
                                          B. L. SKARRATT


How far down the terracing did you actually get? - A.
We always like to go in the middle, for the atmosphere,
but we got down about ten steps and I don't know why,
we just decided that was it and we started coming back
a touch.

You started coming backwards? - A. Yes, we started
coming back against the flow.

How far back did you manage to get? - A. We got right
back to the back wall.  As you come through the tunnel
there is like a little wall, about four foot high.  We
started to get a bit concerned so we managed to get
behind that wall.  We were like,....

Sheltered in the lee of it? - A. Sheltered, yes.

At that point, when you first exited onto the terrace,
making your way down and back, can you remember whether
play was still in progress? - A. As we got in there was
but after that we didn't look at the game. We weren't
looking at the pitch at all.

There is no doubt whatever that you remember play in
progress when you got onto the terracing? - A. Yes,
when we got there, when we got onto the terracing, play
was in progress.

I am distinguishing between play and the players being
on the pitch? - A. No, there was play.

How would you describe the situation where you were
when you had gone, I think you said ten paces down,
before you, turned and retreated?  How was that
situation? Are you a regular match attender? - A. Yes,
I am.

How was that situation? - A. It was strange.   It wasn't
like a normal match.  As we were going in the people at
the back, they just wanted to see the game, but as you
got in and you sensed what was going on, there wasn't
the match roar or anything, there wasn't a crowd's
roar.  There was people starting to scream at the
bottom and other people trying to tell people coming in
to go back, but obviously with them coming in they were
fresh, they didn't know what was going on so they just
came in.  After a bit a lot of people started to
scream, to say, "Get back", so we went back and as that
happened a lot of people started to come back.   A lot
of them were frightened, trying to get out of the
terraces, so we were just helping them up into the West
Stand above us. We were just lifting them up, hoisting
them up.  You could definitely tell something was going
on because the crowd reaction was very, very strange.
                                          B. L. SKARRATT


You could tell from where you were that there was
something happening at the front? - A. Oh, definitely,
yes.  People were starting to spill over.

Was that the thing that gave you the clue, the fact
that people were climbing over the fencing and stuff
like that, or was it what you could actually see within
the terrace? - A. It was a combination of everything.
It was the screams and the noise; there was people
trying to get over, and it wasn't just the people who
were standing on the front, it was the way they were
doing it, they were frightened and trying to get over.
You could sense that very much.

Did you see the match finish in the sense, did you see
the players go off? - A. No.  Where we were standing we
were sheltered.  Another friend, Stan, he is a fireman
as well, we seen one lad getting carried out; he was
very cyanose, he was very blue in the face and it was
obvious what had happened to him; he was carried out by
Police.  Stan went back to follow him up to see if
there was anything he could do.

Out through the tunnel? - A. Back through the tunnel.
We stayed where we were, hoisting people up.

That is what I am trying to find out.  You said you saw
a fan being carried out by the Police? - A. Yes.

That must mean that there were Police within the
terracing? - A. No, these Police we saw carrying the
lad out, they came through the tunnel.

Can you tell me when you first saw an Officer or
Officers enter the terracing? When would you say that
happened as far as you can remember? - A. About four to
five minutes after we got sheltered.  It could be
anything, but I think it was three, four, five minutes.
It wasn t that long.

It wasn't long after you had retreated? - A. Yes, after
we sensed what was going on.

I assume you never saw them come in, that what
attracted your attention was them coining out? - A. No,
we seen them go in.

You actually saw them come in? - A. We seen them go in,
ye s.

Do you remember whether one of them was a Sergeant? -
A. No, I can't remember that.
                                         B. L. SKARRATT


Let's try again with regard to what was going on on the
pitch - if you can't help me you can't help me - at the
time when you saw the Officers come in, can you
remember what if anything was still happening on the
pitch? - A. No.  We weren't even looking at the match
or the pitch by this time.

You can't relate it to events on the field? - A. No.

Your impression was that it was not very long, between
three and five minutes, after you had taken your
position in the lee of this little wall? - A. I would
say so because we weren't that long by the wall.  We
followed by the Police out.

I see, your friend did but you stayed ...? - A. We
weren't that very long.  When he came back, you see, he
came back and said, "You can do more help outside", so
we just shot out after him.

Did you see Officers, or indeed fans, on the front
fence signalling people to move back? - A. Yes.  Only
fans, by the way.

You only saw fans? - A. On this side of the fence, on
the terracing side of the fence.

That is where you saw them? - A. Yes, they were just
motioning people not to come in.

So you did not see people on the far side, on the pitch
side of the fence? - A. Not at this time, no.

Did you see them at any time? - A. People started
spilling over just as we were going out.  I seen one
fella, he was shaking the fence as if he was trying to
rip it down himself.  One lad was trying to get over
and there was, I think it was two Policeman standing
up, and they were like pushing him back, back in.

When was that? - A. This was just before we left the
wall - 5-past, 6-minutes-past.

What was he actually doing, this Officer, if anything?
I take it you don't know who it was? - A. No, I have no
idea who it was.  As the fans were trying to get over
the fence, there was one just shaking it as if he was
trying to rip it down; there was a couple trying to get
out, more on the left hand pen.   By this time ....

The left hand pen, not the one you were in? - A. No,
the left hand one.  By this time people were starting
to go on the cinder path, but the Police there, they
were just like, I don't know what they were thinking
                                                             9

                                                 B. L. SKARRATT


   of, I have no idea, but they were just stopping people
   coining over. They obviously thought they were just
   trying to get out onto the pitch.

Q. Did you see the gates open at all? - A. No, I didn't
   see them.

Q. At the front? - A. No.

Q. You told us that you went out once your friend told you
   .... - A. Once Stan came back to tell us, yes.

Q. Did you notice whether anybody else around you was
   exiting through the tunnel, or any other way, apart
   from going forward? - A. There were one or two milling
   out, but by this time people were going up into the
   West Stand, you see.

Q. Can you help me on this because you were obviously
   there and I wasn't, but have you got any explanation
   why people preferred to go up into the West Stand,
   rather than exit out through the tunnel, which was
   quite close to where you were, wasn't it? - A.   Yes. At
   the time, you see, when we were hoisting them up at
   first people were still coming in.  There were still
   people milling in, but I don't know, maybe they just
   still wanted to see the game, they didn't realise the
   severity of what was happening at the time.n There
   wasn't a mass thing back through the tunnel.

Q. There wasn't? - A. Well,   I didn't see it.    If there was
   I didn't see it.

Q. I think you were at the match in 1988 as well, weren't
   you? - A. I was, yes.

Q. Can you remember what time you arrived in 1988? - A.
   Roughly the same time.

Q. Just around kick-off time? - A. Yes.

Q. How did you enter in 1988?  I don't mean the turnstile
   area - did you enter through the tunnel, or not? - A.
   No.  As we came in, I think it was through the same
   turnstiles, as you come through those turnstiles you
   are directly opposite the tunnel, so that is the
   automatic way you go, but at this time there was about
   five or six Policemen and they were just standing
   across it, they wouldn't let you go in.k

Q. So which way did you go in then, in 1988? - A. I can't
   remember if it was left or right, but I didn't go
   through the tunnel.  We wanted to because that was the
                                          B. L. SKARRATT


normal way to go, but they told us to go another way so
we had to.

Tell me, did you see any gates shut when you went
through or was it just Police Officers standing outside
directing, in 1988? - A. Yes, I think there was just
Police barricading it across, there was no gates.

So you could see the tunnel, it was  open, but you were
prevented by Officers standing there? - A. By Police,
ye s.

I assume in 1988 there were fewer people approaching
the tunnel than in 1989, or am I.wrong there? - A.
Because the Police were there people didn't
automatically go through the tunnel, they just went the
ways to get into the match.

Can you show us on a plan where you went down the ten
steps, put a cross and a "1", and then where you
actually took, I use the word shelter.  I take it that
in that position, you yourself were not that distressed
in the second position, would that be right? - A. No,
we went there for the specific thing, to be sheltered,
because the wall was there.




            /Q. That was effective
                                                                    11

                                                       B. L. S KARRATT


    Q. That was effective? - A. Yes.
    o.    Just show us on the plan.   (The witness marked the plan)

B               MR. BEECHEY:   That will be C.460.

                        Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

    0    .Did you arrive in Sheffield at about two o'clock? - A.
          Yes, about two.

    0 . What were you doing between two o'clock and three
        o'clock? - A. We were just milling around.  At first we
        were walking down.   Just generally enjoying the
        atmosphere.

    Q. That is what you did? - A. We enjoyed the atmosphere and
       then we started making our way to the game.

    Q- You walked from where the coach was parked down to the
       game? - A. Ue did.

D   Q. For an hour? - A. Yes. We didn't go straight down to the
       game.   Some people were taking taxis back to Sheffield,
       obviously for a pint, and then coming back on buses and
       what not, but we decided against that.   We just walked
       around and about half past two we found just before the
       ground a pub that was letting people in.   We had a pint
       in there and we walked to the game then.

    0. What time was it you actually made your way to the
       ground? - A. From the pub, it was about twenty to.

    0. Did it take you twenty minutes to get from the pub to the
       ground? - A. No, it didn't take twenty minutes to get to
       the ground.   The pub was virtually on top of it so we
       were there about quarter to.

    Q. How many were in the group you are talking about? -A. At
       that time there were four of us.

    0. Did you approach the ground along Leppings Lane, down the
       length of Leppings Lane? - A. We did, yes.

    0. Did you see a lot of people running down to the ground
       just before kick-off? - A. Not that I can remember, no.

    Q. Did you run down? - A. No.

    Q. Or anyone in your group? - A. No, we just walked down
       there.




H
                                                                  12

                                                   B. L. SKA RR AT T

    Q. When you went through the turnstiles, there was a large
       crowd of people in the concourse, as you have said? - A.
       Yes.

H | 0. Was it that large crowd which swept you into the tunnel?
  '    - A. I would say so, yes.

    Q. Was there a large crowd which swept you in in 1988, or
       was sweeping you anywhere in 1988? - A. No, because it
       was different then.   The tunnel was shut so there wasn't
       the automatic flow of people.   People were going left
       and right, so they were dispersing.    In thai concourse
       as well, you only took two steps and you weren't in the
       flow of people, you see.   You could have gone left and
       right if you had known where they were.

   Q. Were there enough people in 1988 at kick-off to be able
      to sweep you anywhere? - A. I wouldn't say so in the
      concourse.   Because they were going right and left they
      were dissipating quickly.

   0.    Then in the ground    when you were lifting the people up
        into the stand, if the people had wanted to go out
        through the tunnel, would they have been able to go round
        that little wall and then back up the tunnel? - A. After
        people had finally stopped coming in, yes.     You could
        have walked out, as people started to do.

   0.    Did people prefer to go into the stand because at that
        stage they did not know that the game was going to be
        cancelled? - A. They didn't know the severity of the
        circumstances.  Right at the beginning when we got into
        the shelter people were still coining in.   The lads
        didn't know they could get out of the tunnel so their
        place of safety was the stands.

                     Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

   Q. Could I investigate a bit more the difference between
      1988 and 1989.    In 1989, as I understand it, you refer
      to an automatic flow of people making their way to the
      tunnel? - A. Yes.

   Q. You say it was different in 1988 because people
      dispersed... - A. They dissipated quickly.

   Q. Do I take it from that they dispersed almost immediately
      they got on to the concourse? - A. Well, it was either
      standing in the concourse and miss the game or go through
      the gates to see the game, so they went through the gates
      to see the game.   There was no point milling around
      there standing against the tunnel because it was blocked
        off.
                                                                    13
                                                       B. L. SKARRATT

       0. So the effect of the tunnel being blocked off and the
          people coming through was to cause them to dissipate one
          side or the other? - A. Yes.

    U I Q. You used the words "fanning out", that there was no
       1   fanning out in 1989, is that right? - A. No, there was no
           fanning out at all, no.

       0. Can I now investigate a matter which my learned friend
          Mr. Payne has just asked you about?   At the time when
          you were hoisting people up into the West Stand, people
          were still coming in down the tunnel? -A. At the first
          moments, yes.

       Q. It follows from that that it looks as if nothing was
          stopping them coming into the terrace? - A. There was
          nothing at all.

       Q. They were being allowed in, it would appear from that? -
          A. Yes, there was nobody stopping anything.

       0. I want to try and identify that time when people were
          still apparently being allowed on to the terrace and you
          were hoisting people up into the West Stand.   When you
          got on to the terrace, the game had already started? - A.
          Yes.

       0. You are quite confident of that? - A. Yes.

       Q. Because you think you heard a roar before you got on to
          the terrace of the game starting? - A. Well, I did hear a
          roar.

       Q. You told us just as you got on to the terrace you heard
          another roar? - A. Just before we got on to the terrace.

       Q. As if it was an event in the game? - A. Yes, you could
          tell that.   You could tell it was something happening.

       Q. Did you ever discover what that roar was? - A. Yes.  As
          we got in people were shouting back, "Beardsley has just
          hit the bar."

       0. Your evidence is that as you entered the terrace it was
          around about the time that people were telling you that
          somebody had hit the crossbar? - A. Yes.

       0. We know what time that was.    Well, I say I know...

               THE CORONER:   That was five minutes past three,
          plus a few seconds.

               MR. KING:   It was a few minutes into the game,
          certainly, as you entered the terrace? - A. Yes.




H
                                                              14

                                                 B. L. SKARRATT


Q. It follows from that that when you were hoisting people
   up it was a few minutes into the game? - A. Yes.

Q. Because it was the same time, or after, and people were
   still being allowed in? - A. Yes.

Q.   A few minutes after thegame had started? - A. Yes.

Q.    The other piece of evidence I was interested   in was you
     said you could see fans   saying to the people at the back,
     "Go back," and you said   that people who were coming in
     who were fresh didn't know what was going on? - A. No,
     they didn't have a clue.     Nobody would obviously come
     into the tunnel to hurt people.     They just came in.
     They just wanted to see the game.

0. Eventually at some point you saw the Police come down the
   tunnel? - A. Yes, about four or five Policemen ran into
   the tunnel on to the terracing.   They were carrying some
   lad out.




                 Q. I take it this was after
                                             B. L. SKARRATT


I take it this was after you had seen people still
coming in? - A. Yes, yes.

            Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Skarratt, in 1988 you said that people dispersed
and you did not see any huge crowd moving in the
concourse area? - A. No, you see everybody was in
there and just went right and left.  There was no
milling around in 1988.  There was nowhere to go you
see.  The only place you could go was to your
turnstiles to see the game.  It was pointless
standing in the concourse because you weren't going
to get into the tunnel.

Did you see the exit gate being opened to allow entry
of fans in 1989? - A. In 1989 we were actually in the
queue for the turnstiles when the gates got opened
but my immediate thought at the time - because when
we were in there a lot of fans went through the gate
that was opened and I thought for some reason that
somebody had opened them, that it was not the Police
that opened them. We said, "We will still go through
the turnstiles because people are going to be thrown
back out and p[ut into the queues again".  We just
carried on. We stayed in the turnstiles.   We were
nearly there anyway.

So you went in through the turnstile did you see all
these people coming in via the gate? - A. Yes, they
were coming round.

They were coming in, in a very large crowd, all at
once? - A. Yes.

In 1988 did you see anything like that happening? -
A. No, I do not remember any gates opening.

           Cross-Examined bv MISS ADDLEMAN

Can you just help on some timings please? You were
just going on to the terrace when you think Beardsley
hit the crossbar? - A. I think so, yes.

We know what time that occurred, about five past
three.  You have told us that you saw fans this side
of the terrace who were motioning for people to go
back? - A. Yes.

You also mentioned that you saw a Police Officer
standing on the fence, am I correct? - A. I think he
was, yes.  I think he was just standing.  He was not
trying to get over.  I do not know whether there was
some sort of a wall or something but he seemed to be
                                             B. L. SKARRATT


off the ground anyway.  He just seemed to be
motioning or pushing people back.

Motioning or pushing.  So do you mean in this way
(demonstrating). hands forward like that? - A. No, I
think he was touching people.  I think he was
actually physically pushing them back.

There is a difference   between a push and a touch. A
moment ago you said     motioning or pushing? - A. He was
doing both, yes.  You   can push one person with your
right hand and motion   with your left.

Can you give us some idea what time this was? - A. I
was still on the terraces at the time and so anything
up to five minutes after I got in.

Anything up to five minutes.  Could you have a look
at a photograph please? - A. Yes.

    MISS ADDLEMAN:      Sir, I do not think it is a
photograph which is     presently exhibited.  It is
PR2/13.

     THE CORONER:  It is not in that bundle.     In that
case can I just look at it. Miss Addleman?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Yes, sir.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   Sir, he has identified himself
on C.452.

     THE CORONER:  Is that what you were going to do?
Do an identification or was it something else?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:  Sir, it was not.     I will find
that picture and see if it assists.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:  There is a definite
identification now on C.427 and I will put that on
the screen.

     THE CORONER:  We will do that and then come back
to your point.  In the meantime we can get your
acetate.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:  Sir, he has identified himself
as that person there. (indicating)

     THE CORONER:  The one who is prominent in the
white? - A. Yes, I think so.  Could I have another
look at that?  I am not 100 per cent certain now when
it is on a bigger thing.
                                              B. L. SKARRATT


     THE CORONER:  By the way, Mr. King, Beardsley
hit the crossbar at 15:04:54 and not 15.05 but 15.05
is near enough I think.

     MR. KING:   Sir, we are all tired at this time of
the morning!

     MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, did you say that this witness
had identified himself on C.427 as well as C.452?

     THE   CORONER: I could not hear?

     MR. RUSSELL: Did you say that this witness had
identified himself on C.427 as well as C.452?

     THE CORONER:     Apparently.   Which one is he
looking at now?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     C.360.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:  Sir, I do not think it will be
necessary to use another acetate as I can use this
one.

     THE   CORONER: That is fine then,    thank you.

     THE WITNESS: I could not be 100 per cent
certain that that is me.  In fact, I do not think
that is me now.  I do not think I was actually
standing up on that wall.

You think it is not you on reflection? - A. Yes.

You looked at another photograph as well.  Did you
find yourself on another one or not or are you not
sure? - A. No, I am not sure. We have seen
photographs virtually identical where we can make
positive identifications of ourselves and I could not
be 100 per cent certain on these.

     THE CORONER:  You are not using it for
identification. Miss Addleman, are you?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:     No, sir.

     THE WITNESS:   I was wearing a white sweater.
We were around that area.

     THE CORONER:   It was that general area that you
were in though, was it not? - A. Yes.  I think that
is my friend and it does not really help that much.
I thought that was me but I do not think it is me.

     THE CORONER:     Let Miss Addleman press on.
                                                  B. L. SKARRATT



     MISS ADDLEMAN:  If we examine those photographs
 in a little more detail I think the present
 photograph which is up on the screen is C.427 and
 if you look at the acetate in the black folder
 before you then you will see a timing on there of
 15.06. We know that, in fact, is five minutes past
 three.  If you look at that photograph we can see
 that the gate to Pen 3 is open.  Can you tell me if
 you were in a position to see if that gate was open
 from where you were standing? - A. I cannot be sure
 but I know for sure I wasn't looking for any gates
 to be opened at that point in time.

We can see a number of Police Officers and a number
of people have come out of the pen.   If we now turn
to C.452 can you see the timing on there? That is 13
minutes past, considerably later.   In fact, we know
that that is 12 minutes past? - A. Yes.

We see there that there are a number of Officers
standing on the perimeter fence? - A. Yes.

Were you in a position to see that? - A. As I said
before, I might have been in a position but I was not
exactly looking at that t i m e . What we were trying to
do was to either get people or - by that time I might
have even been back through the tunnel myself.

I just wondered if what you were describing before,
Officers standing on the fence, whether in fact... -
A. There did not seem to be that many Policemen there
when I saw it.  There only seemed to be a few going
over the fence at the time I saw them.

We can see in the previous photograph, the one that
we have just seen, that people were in fact getting
over the fence. - A. Yes.

            Cross-Examined bv MR. r u s s e l l

When you entered Pen 3 you will remember, or do you
not remember, a Policeman on the far side of the
fence motioning people to move back or go back? - A.
I remember a Policeman being on the fence.




                     /Q. Can I just ask you to.
                                    B.L. SKARRATT



Can I just ask you to look at a photograph in that big
album which is C328.   That is a photograph taken at
3-minutes-past-3, it may be that you have not arrived
on the terrace by this point but you can see there a
man in black with his arms raised aloft like rugby
posts.   Do you see that, standing on the fence? - A. Yes,
yes.

We have heard from other witnesses that that man was
motioning people to move back.  Is that the position of
the Officer that you remember gesticulating back? - A.
I would say roughly so. Whatever it was was in front
of me and to the left of me.

Now could you please, Sergeant Griffiths, put up C427
again.  This is one of the photographs I understand
in which you believe you have identified yourself.   Is
that correct? - A. My first judgment might be wrong.
I don't think that is me now but I know I am there at
that time because I can see a friend of mine and I went
in with him.

So someone you went in with is in that photograph? - A.
Yes.

That photograph we know is taken at 5-past-3 and I
wonder if you could help us with thiss  can you see the
tunnel, the entrance to the tunnel at the top of the
photograph about a third of the way in from the right?
- A. Yes.

Do you see on the wall at the left-hand wall in Pen 3
there is a small child? In front of the man in a white
shirt there is a small child wearing a blue top? - A. Oh
I see him, yes.

Now when the jury have an opportunity to look at the
video they will see that that small child was sitting
on that wall from just before 10-to-3 until he or she
was lifted up into the West Stand at 8-minutes-past-3,
so she was there for almost 20 minutes throughout the
hurly-burly of the entrance.  Do you remember that
little girl there? - A. No, I can't say I can definitely
remember, no.

And in a further attempt to pinpoint your position
a clear photograph of the relevant part of the Stand is
in C354.  Now if you can take as a reference point
that little girl, small child, do you see him or her
almost in the middle at the top of the photograph so
we know where the wall is coming out of the terrace.
Looking at that can you see yourself or anyone you
came in with in that photograph? - A. No, where I was
the faces are too blurred to see.
                                         B.L. SKARRATT




But where you were, you have identified two positions.
When you came in you were able to move first of all
to the middle of the pen with your companions, is that
right? - A. Not right to the middle.

Well about ten steps down? - A. Yes, well approximately,
yes.

And then you were able to go to the back? - A. Yes, by
that w a l l .

We can see a line of people against the back of the pen,
two people in tam-o'-shanters.  Do you see them? - A. No.

Do you see the little girl? - A. In the blue and white?

Yes? - A. Yes.

And then against the back wall of the pen there is a line
of people in the lee of that wall, the back row of the
pen? - A. I can see that.  I don't know what you are
talking about.

      MR. GRIFFITHS:  Sir, the photograph does not allow
him to see the faces.

      MR. RUSSELL:  Oh I see.  Sergeant Griffiths, do you
have the better copy in your 10 x 8 set?

       MR. GRIFFITHS:     I will check sir.

       MR. RUSSELL:     It is PR1/12A.

Once again do you see the little girl? - A. Yes.

Can you see the back wall of the pen? - A. Yes.

Is that the position to which you moved? - A. Yes.

Within the lee, round the corner from the wall? - A. Yes.

That photograph was taken at 2-minutes-past-3. Do you
believe that you had entered the pen by this time? - A.
If I was there you would be able to see me there.  I was
not there, no.

       MR. RUSSELL:     So you still had not got in.     Thank
you.


                 Further By THE CORONER:

I just want to check one thing which I think I have got
right but I want to be sure about it.  I asked you when
you came down the tunnel you heard a roar.  Do you
remember? - A. Yes.
                                       B.L. SKARRATT


When you were coming down the tunnel.  You obviously could
not see what that roar was connected with because you
were still in the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Is it right that when you got on to the    pen people around
you said:  "Beardsley has hit the cross    bar" or did you
find out about that later? - A. I can't    be 100% certain.
I just heard the roar and I presumed it    was Beardsley.

What I am trying to find out is is this a reconstruction,
I am not complaining if it is, don't get me wrong, but
were you aware of it at the time that that roar was the
Beardsley shot or have you since heard about the Beardsley
shot and put two and two together and said "It must have
been that"? - A. To the best of my knowledge I remember
people saying:  "Beardsley hit the bar" and I would have
to go along with that time.

That is fair enough.   The jury have asked me to ask you
a couple of questions.

      Going back to 1988.  Were your tickets checked
in 1988 on the way to the ground? - A. I seem to remember
halfway down Leppings Lane they were checked by Police.
I think they had crash barriers out so it stopped the
flow of people.  I think you had to zigzag around them
and I seem to remember the Police checking my tickets
then.

How sure are you of that? - A. Pretty sure.

And the other question they want to know is when you
approached the tunnel in 1988 and you saw the Police
Officers outside, did you speak to them at all? - A. Yes,
we made a comment to them.

And what was the substance of your comment? - A. Oh it
was a joke, something light hearted.

Something trivial? - A. Yes.

Nothing to do with why they were there or anything of
that nature? - A. No they just said:  "Come on it is full,
you will have to go in one of the other ones".

      THE CORONER:   I see.    Thank you very much.


          SHAUN PATRICK TERENCE SWEENEY Sworn

                     By THE CORONER:

Good morning. - A. Good morning.

Is it Shaun Patrick Terence Sweeney? - A. Yes, it is.
                                       B.L. SKARRATT



You too are a Liverpool supporter I believe.     Is that
right? - A. I am, yes.

I think you came by train I believe.     Is that right?
- A. Yes, correct.

And you arrived in Sheffield at about 5-past-12.  Would
that be right? - A. Roughly about that time, yes.

Was it just you and a friend Paul Gratton? - A. Yes.

I take it you both had tickets.   Would that be right or
not? - A. Yes, we did.

And having arrived by train you were directed I think to
coaches by Police? - A. Buses.

Buses, I am sorry, to take you to the ground? - A. That
is correct.

I think you had to pay a pound or something? - A. Something
like that.

It is not very important but were you wearing regalia,
did you have a Liverpool scarf? - A. No, nothing at all.
I was wearing blue trousers, shirt and shoes.

How was it that the Police knew that you were supporters
as opposed to just anybody? - A. They didn't.

So what happened? - A. We just told them, you know, we
had come on the ordinary train and the reason for the
special train was taking the supporters with the shirt
and scarves etc. and we told the Police that we were
just walking round the City because I have worked in the
City before, I know my way round a bit and so they let
us through, we did not go on the buses to the ground.

Oh you did not go on the buses? - A. No.

I see, I misunderstood you, sorry.  So as far as they
were concerned you were just passengers? - A. Yes.

And you went into town? - A. Yes, we walked round the
City for a while.




                        Q. In fact you went to the
                                        S. P. T. SWEENEY


In fact, I think you went to the United ground, didn't
you? - A. That is correct, Bramall Lane.

Because you like doing that, you enjoy that? - A. Yes.

In fact, you met up with other people and eventually
they gave you a lift to the ground? - A. Yes, on a
coach.

You got to the turnstiles I think at about 2.40? - A.
Roughly round that time.

It was pretty packed, I think, we don't need to go into
details, but that is right, isn't it? - A. It is, yes.

You entered through a turnstile? - A. Yes.

Do you know what time you entered, have you any idea? -
A. I am not positive but I would say, roughly --
entered the ground?

Yes, through the turnstiles? - A. I would say about
2.48, 2.49.  I am not positive.  Just before 10-to-3.

Did you look at your watch .... - A. No.

Or is that a guess, an estimate? - A. Yes.

You then went towards the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Did you have a free passage down the tunnel? - A. Yes,
it wasn't blocked off, there was not many people in
there.  It was pretty empty.

So as far as you were concerned it was a walking job?.
- A. Yes, because I remember from the year before I
couldn't go in there.  I was told, "It's full".  I had
to walk round the other side.

We will come back to that in a minute.   '89, it was, I
am not saying empty, but it was clear in the sense that
you could get through.  You weren't carried, you
weren't pushed or anything of that sort? - A. Not that
I recall, no.

And you were walking normally? - A. Yes.

Did you by chance look onto the pitch as you entered
the tunnel?  Could you see the pitch, can you remember?
- A. Yes.

You could see the pitch? - A. Yes, I could.
                                       S. P. T. SWEENEY


Do you remember what was happening on the pitch when
you looked down? - A. No.

Having got to the end of the tunnel, exit side, how did
you, get out onto the terracing? - A. Walked out of the
tunnel, walked to my left.

Did you have to go through a wall of people or did you
have relatively clear entry onto the terracing? - A. It
was congested with it being a cup game, because it was
getting close to kick-off, and you expect that at most
big games, but it wasn't -- I could move, but   it was a
bit of a struggle.

You went left? -   A. I did.

I think you made your way down towards the centre    of
the pen? - A. About halfway.

At that point were the players already on the pitch,
can you remember? - A. No.

You had a programme, I think, which you had bought
previously? - A. Yes.

Were you able to read it at that stage? - A. Not read
it, I was glancing through it.

It would be fair to say that at that stage you were not
apprehensive? - A. You mean comfortable?

Uncomfortable, yes. - A. I would say, with being on the
terrace of a match, especially a big game like a semi­
final, you expect to be tight, but I was just as tight
as normal games.

In other words, it was uncomfortable but it was
something you would have expected at that sort of
match? - A. Yes.

At that time? - A. Yes.

Do you remember the players coming onto the pitch? - A.
No.

Did you see the kick-off? - A. Didn't see a ball
kicked.

What happened then as far as you were concerned? - A.
Some sort of ....

What time was this, would you say, that you were in
this position when you were glancing at the programme?
- A. About 2.53, 2.54.
                                        S. P. T. SWEENEY


You didn't look at your watch? - A. No, I didn't.

Did you look at the clocks? - A. Not that I recall.

So the timing is again a guess?  I am not complaining
about it, I am just trying to check. - A. It was
roughly 2.53, 2.54.  I can't be more precise because I
don t recall.

Tell me what happened after that? - A. I remember
reading, well glancing through my programme and talking
to my friend, and then there was just some surge that
came from the back of us and separated us, and I was
forced down, sort of diagonally towards the front of
pen 3, I think.   I was turned round then facing the
people, not the pitch.   I couldn't breathe and I was
just confined, in agony, thought I was going to die at
one stage.  I was just panicking basically, and then I
remember a Police Officer going by and I was screaming
at him for help but he just had his arms behind his
back and just looked at me as though to say, you know,
just to walk past, didn't take any notice.   There was a
whole lot of people trying to attract his attention but
the Police people at this time didn't seem to know what
was going on, in my opinion.   Then after the gates
opened I forced myself up from the barrier facing the
people, the tunnel if you like, and then managed to
elevate myself up onto the barrier.   I was sitting on
the barrier and I had a bird's eye view of people then.
My legs were being crushed then, and then the tunnel
opened - sorry, I meant to say the gate opened, and the
people that were in front of me started to go out, then
I remember getting off the barrier and getting out
through the gate.

When you got out of the gate can you remember whether
the match had finished or whether it was still in play?
- A. I was dazed.  I think it was just approaching the
finish.

But you are not sure? - A. No, because I was in pain.

I can understand that.   I just want to check with you
about your recollection as to the timings because you
gave a statement in December '89.   I just want to show
you a passage in it and see whether that brings
anything back.   As I have said to many witnesses, I
don t mind what you tell me, we are just trying to
establish the best recollection that you have got, all
right? - A. Yes.

I will give you pages 2 and 3, but it is only the first
line on page 3, and if you read more or less the
yellow, marked bit.  Read it to yourself and don't say
                                        S. P. T. SWEENEY


anything until you have finished reading it.   Does that
bring anything back to you?- A. No.

Can I just have it back? Would you say this is
correct, what is written here? - A. No.

You don't think it is right? - A. No.  I think it has
been taken out of context, because I didn't actually
write my statement, a Police Officer did.

You did sign it though, didn't you? - A. I did sign it,
yes.

Do you want to see your original statement? - A. No.
It is just that things I have said in my statement have
been slightly altered.

Let us just take you through this and tell me in what
respect it is not right.  What you said was, "We had a
free passage through the tunnel, there was nothing
untoward" - actually, you didn't read that bit.  It
starts, "At this time it would have been about 5-to3",
which is what you have told me today? - A. Yes.

"We^just stood together in about the centre of the
pen".  You go on to say, "It was quite comfortable at
that time as I recollect reading my programme".  Now
you told me that you remember reading your programme
.... - A. Glancing.

What you are saying is you are not so sure about the
comfort.  It was what you would have expected from a
normal match? - A. A big match, yes.

Then you go on to say, and this is the real point I was
checking,   I also recollect that it was prior to the
players coming out onto the pitch".   That is what you
told me today as well, "but as they came out it became
increasingly packed and there appeared to be a large
surge of people from behind".   Now this is exactly what
you have told me apart from the fact that you say in
this statement that it was connected with the players
coming out.   That is all I am trying to find out:  did
you or did you not see the players come out? - A. Not
that I recall, I don't know.

Then you go on to say, "All I remember as to what was
going on was just momentarily a ball being kicked".
Now, you say you don't remember that now any more? - A.
I don't remember seeing a ball being kicked.
                                        S. P. T. SWEENEY


Show us on the plan where you were, the two places -
the first place where you were looking at your
programme and the second place where you were carried
to when you felt that surge.  (The Witness marked
Exhibit C461) I forgot to ask you about 1988.   In 1988
you came to the same match, right? - A. I did.

But were you in those centre pens? - A. No.

Or were you somewhere different? - A. I was at the
front where the scoreboard is, the right corner.

What time did you get to the ground in 1988? - A. I
don't remember.

You can't remember at all? - A. Roughly about round 2-
ish.

Tell me what happened then?  Did you get down the
tunnel or not? - A. No.  The Police told us there were
too many.

At 2 o'clock? - A. I didn't say 2 o'clock, I said 2
o'clock-ish.  It could have been more or less, I am not
positive.

Yes, but "ish" I would add ten minutes either side,
maybe quarter of an hour either side.   Is that the sort
of "ish" that you are talking about or are you saying
it could have been 2 or it could have been 3? - A. Not
could have been 3 because we wouldn' t miss the start.
 When I say 2-ish I mean from about 2 o'clock to about
 20-to-3, give or take acouple of minutes.

I see, so you are giving it a 40 minute bracket.  Where
were the Police who were telling you that you shouldn't
or couldn't go down the tunnel? - A. You know where the
tunnel was, there was Police - it is hard for me to say
- where the tunnel is, the Police weren't there, they
were at the other side, towards the area in between the
turnstiles.

In the central area? - A. Yes.

What, if anything, did they say to you as far as you
can remember?  It is a long time ago. - A. "The pen's
full".

Pardon? - A. "Then   pens are full".

Where did you go?   Which way did you go? - A.   I went
towards my right then.
                                        S. P. T. SWEENEY


Did you see the tunnel?   Could you see it in 1988? - A.
No.

Well, it was right in front of you.  You were in the
same concourse area. - A. See in the tunnel, you mean?

No, could you see the entrance to the tunnel? - A. Oh,
yes.

I am trying to find out whether or not the gates of the
tunnel were shut, or not, as far as you remember at
that time? - A. I could not honestly say.

One other question with regard to 1988:  when you
approached the Leppings Lane entrances were you stopped
at all anywhere by Police Officers, in 1988? - A. Yes.

What happened? - A. They asked did I have a ticket.

Where was that? - A. Near the ground, not at the
turnstiles, a bit further.

Was it just a number of Policemen standing around
asking, or were they standing in a row, did they have
barriers or did they have horses, or how were they
organised? - A. I think he wasn't on a horse, he was
standing.

Can you remember any barriers? - A. No, it is too long
ago.

You had a ticket, I take it, in 1988? - A. I did.

     THE CORONER:   Before we start the cross-
examination we will pause for a few minutes.

                (Short Adjournment)
                                          S. P. T. SWEENEY


             Cross-Examined by HR. PAYNE:

Is it your evidence that in 1988 you arrived at the
ground some time between two o'clock and quarter to
three? - A. Yes.

At about quarter to three in 1988 outside the ground I
don't suppose you happened to see a person wearing a
steward's jerkin, trying to sell tickets? - A. No.

When you arrived in 1988 - I appreciate we don't know
when it was, but at the time you arrived wer3 there many
people outside the ground? - A. Yes.   When I say many, I
don t mean like it was in 1989, but just for a normal big.
game.

Did you go in through the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

I am trying to see if we can make some useful comparison
from your evidence between your experiences at the two
matches.   In 1939 there were more people there trying to
get in? - A. Yes, definitely.

And more people inside on the concourse? - A. Well, on
the concourse of 1989 I was sort of more...   You see, in
1988 I was told I couldn't go through the tunnel so I had
to go to my right.   I didn t take much in and with it
being nearly three years later I am not going to remember
as much as I remember of 1989.

Did you see in 1989 that the exit gates were open at the
time you were there? - A. No, they weren't open.

They weren't open when you went in? - A. No.

In 1989, between the time you arrived on the railway
train, and tne time at which you went into the ground,
what were you doing during that time? - A. What do you
mean, what was I doing?

You arrived in Sheffield at five past twelve? - A. In
1989?

Yes. - A. Yes.

And went into the ground when? - A. The coach left
Bramall Lane, Sheffield United's ground, at about half
past one.    We arrived about a mile or two miles from the.
ground.   We went past the ground but the Police took us
to another point and we had to walk from this point right
the way up to the other end of the ground because the
Nottingham Forest end was at the Kop.
                                                                  30

                                                    S. P. T. SWEENEY


    Q. Did you have anything to drink while you were waiting? -
       A. Yes, two pints of lager.

    Q. Have we got the time you went into the ground? - A. In
       1989?
B
    0. Yes. - A. I would say roughly - I was on to the concourse
       at about ten to three.   It could have been a couple of
       minutes each way, I am not positive, but roughly ten to
       three.

    Q. Did you approach the ground down the length of Leppings
       Lane? - A. How do you mean?

    0. Look at the model.    Can you see the words "Leppings
       Lane"? -A. Yes.

    Q. Did you come from the top or the bottom, as you
       approached the ground? - A. The top.

    0. Did you see people running down Leppings Lane when you
       approached the ground? - A. No.

                      Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

    0. Mr. Sweeney, in 1939, when you got on to the terrace, it
       was before the players had come out, I think we have
       established that? - A. Yes.

    Q.   We know that the players came out at 14.54 and eight
         seconds, so about six minutes to three, so you were on^
         the terrace before six minutes to three, which would fit
         in with your evidence? - A. Yes.

    Q. Your evidence was at that time before the players came on
       the pitch, although it was what you were expecting for a
       big game, you used the word "congested"? - A. That is
       correct.

    0. I accept you said it was comfortable, you didn't feel any
       panic, but nonetheless at that time it was congested? -
       A. That is correct.

    Q.   It would be fair to say at that time your experience   of
         it, that terrace was packed at that time? - A. Yes.

    Q. That terrace at that time, to you, was full? - A. Yes.

    Q. I appreciate you were comfortable and you weren't in any
       trouble.   Then, of course, after that stage you
       described what happened to you, which seems to be the
       effect of a surge coming from behind you? - A. That's
       correct.
                                           S. P. T. SWEENEY


Was that the impression you got of more people coming in
from behind you? - A. Yes.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN:

You said you didn't remember the players coming out or
the ball being kicked? - A. No.

            Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

You told us when you entered the pen you entered the pen
which for you was in a state of normality for such an
occasion? - A. Technically, yes.

You were reading your programme...   - A. Glancing through
my programme.

...and talking to your friend? - A. I recall saying
something to him, yes, about the atmosphere, the packed
pen.

I am not going to ask you to reproduce the conversation
you had, but you were chatting to your mate. - A. I asked
him a question, I recall.   I don't remember saying
anything else.

Then there came a time when there was a surge from behind
you, pushing you down towards the gate through which you
eventually got out of pen 4? - A. That's correct.

I have got a photograph of that gate and I wonder if you
could have a look at it, C.367.   It is in the big file
in front of you.   Now you have told us, I think, that
after you were forced down you managed to lever yourself
up on to the barrier and you describe yourself as having
a bird's eye view? - A. That's correct.

You told us you saw the gate being opened? - A. No, I
didn't see the gate being opened.   I had my back to it.

You saw it when it was opened? - A. When I came off the
barrier to turn round, there was more room for the people
in front of me.   Then I saw the gate was open.

This photograph was taken at exactly three o'clock.   It
is at gate 4 and one can see in that the person with 14
on his back is someone who has given evidence and whose
distinguishing feature is that he is completely bald.
Do you remember seeing that Officer at that gateway? - A.
No.

I appreciate that the position may be obscured by one or
both of the people on the fence, but in relation to the
point which you have marked on the plan almost opposite
                                                                     32

                                                     S. P. T. SWEENEY


         that gate, can you see the position in which you were or
         even possibly can you see yourself in that photograph? -
         A. No.

              THE CORONER:   Thank you, Mr. Sweeney.   I am most
B        grateful to you for coining.  I think we will now have
         Mr. Doyle.

                       BRIAN JOSEPH DOYLE Recalled

                             3y THE CORONER:

    Q. Mr. Doyle, I will remind you that you are still on oath.
       I had more or less finished asking you my questions and I
       think Mr. Payne had asked you one or two questions and
       then we had to pause because you will remember we had to
       stop.   Then, of course, we had the bad weather and
       everything else and that has delayed us.     There is
       actually one point I want to check with you.    I wanted
       to go back to your evidence when you were talking about
       coming out of pen...   Well, before you came out of pen
       2, when you were just climbing over, do you remember? -
       A. Yes.

    0* You were describing a Police Sergeant, I think? - A. Yes.

    0.   You told me that there was a Police Sergeant and    he was
         carrying a stick or baton, do you remember? - A.    Yes.

    0.    Can you describe the stick to me? - A. It was like a cane
         with a brass tip on it.

    0. Have you ever seen any Officers carry that type of stick
       before? - A. No.

    0.   Do you go to the matches in Liverpool at all?    - A. Not
         very often.

    Q.    Did you used to go to the matches before this   disaster? -
         A. I went to a few, yes, before the disaster.

    Q.    Did you ever see any Officers there with any sticks? -A.
         Yes.

    Q. Was it similar to those sort of sticks those Officers
       used to carry? - A. Yes, it was.




                    0. Would it surprise you,
                                                                        33

                                                               B. J. DOYLE


         Q. Would it surprise you if I told you that we have
            heard from Police Sergeants in South Yorkshire who
            say that they never carry sticks? - A. I am convinced
    B       I seen a Policeman walking up and down with a stick.

        Q. You are convinced about that? - A. Yes.

        Q. Are you satisfied it was a Sergeant as well? You
           were when you told me but I just want to be sure? -
           A. As I say I was talking about the stripes.  I could
           have been mistaken about h i s ...

        Q. You saw some stripes? - A. Yes.

        Q. The only Police Officers who have stripes are
           Sergeants.  If they have stripes then they are
           Sergeants as I understand it? - A. Yes.

        Q. You saw stripes and you saw a stick? - A. Yes,
           definitely.
D                 THE CORONER:   Mr. King, do you wish to ask him
             any questions?

                  MR. KING:  Sir, I have reviewed his evidence
             through the transcript and there is nothing I need to
             ask him about his evidence.

                        Cross-Examined bv MISS ADDLEMAN

        Q. Would it surprise you to know, Mr. Doyle, that the
           Sergeants of the South Yorkshire Force do not in fact
           carry sticks? - A. As I say, I might have been mixed
           up with his rank but I definitely saw a Policeman
           walking up and down with a stick.

        Q. Could I ask you to have a look at a photograph, Mr.
           Doyle?  It is not presently exhibited but it is in
           the bundle MW/11.

                  THE CORONER:   It is not in there, Mr. Doyle.

                  MISS ADDLEMAN: It is 10A.

                  THE CORONER:   Could we give that a number
             please?

                  MR. BEECHEY:   The C number is C.462.

        Q.       MISS ADDLEMAN:  I am asking you to have a look
             at this, Mr. Doyle, because I think I have spotted
             you in this photograph.  I wonder if you recognise
             yourself.  If you look in the foreground of the
             picture actually on the fence there is a gentleman


H
                                                                       34

                                                              B. J. DOYLE


             with a striped sweater with a cigarette in his
             mouth and fair coloured hair? - A. That is not a
 jj I        cigarette.

         Q. I am sorry? - A. It is not a cigarette.

         Q. It is not a cigarette? - A. No.

         Q. But is it you? - A. Yes, it is.

         Q. Obviously that is how you were dressed on this day? -
            A. Yes.

         Q. Just for completeness we can see that the timing
            there on the photograph is nine minutes past three.
            We know that that is eight minutes past three.   Mr.
            Doyle, just to recap on some matters you told us of
            on the last occasion, to refresh all our memories, I
            think basically what had occurred so far as you were
            concerned is this;  you started off in Pen 3 and you
     I      fought your way to the radial fence in Pens 2 and 3.
            You told us of the old gentleman who was there who
            you were tempted to help out but unfortunately could
            not manage it before you yourself managed to climb
            out of the pen into Pen 2. Am I correct so far? - A.
            Yes, that is right.

         Q. The timing you put on that was when you were actually
            on the fence, the radial fence, climbing over to Pen
            2. You recall the big roar of Beardsley hitting the
            crossbar? - A. No, I never said that the roar was
            through Beardsley hitting the crossbar.  I said I
            heard a big roar. As you know, if you are at a
            football match, even if they are attacking you get
            noises all around.  I was not sure whether Beardsley
            had hit the crossbar but I did hear a roar.

         Q. Thank you for that.  In fact, I can quote to you
            exactly what was said on the last occasion.  You were
            asked (Day 46-68F):

                 "Q. Did you see Beardsley hit the
                 crossbar? - A. No.
                 Q. So you d o n ’t know how far the
                 ga m e ... - A . I heard the big ro a r ."

           That was in response to that and so you were making
           an  assumption then that it was Beardsley hitting the
           crossbar? - A. What I said was that I heard anoise
           and I was not really interested in the football game
           anyway.




HI
                                                                   35

                                                          B. J. DOYLE


    Q. Your next reply when giving evidence on the last
       occasion:
B          "As I heard the big roar I was just on the
           fence to jump.  I remember because I turned
           round and looked back at the old fella and he
           was just completely --- he looked like he was
           dead."

       That is what you said last time? - A. Yes, that is
       right.

    Q. Going on from there just to recap on the last
       occasion you told us that you then got into Pen 2 and
       you ran over.  I think you meant to the gate probably
       but you say you ran over and this was just walking up
       and down "he was doing my head in"? - A. Yes, that is
       right.

    Q. That is   correct, is it? - A. Yes.

    Q. That isthe Policeman who you say had     astick?   - A.
       Yes.

    Q. You went on to say you did not see any Policemen on
       the fencing? - A. No, I never.

    Q. At any time I think you say you did not see any
       Policemen on the fencing? - A. No, I never.

    Q. Then you told us of your efforts to draw the
       attention of the Policeman on the track? - A. Yes,
       that is right.  He was on a gate towards the Police
       Box.

    Q. And the   gate was closed? - A.   Yes.

    Q. Mr. Doyle, could I ask you to have alook at a
       photograph which is already exhibited, C.360? Have
       you got that? - A. Yes.

    Q. First of all, we will get the timing on this.  The
       photographs shows it was three minutes past three and
       we know that is two minutes past three.  I appreciate
       it is somewhat earlier than the time you think you
       are dealing with.  Could I ask you about some
       features of that photograph first of all? You can
       see there that we are looking at Pen 2, and to the
       right Pen 3. We can see that the gate is opened,
       correct? - A. Yes, I can see it on here.

    Q. We can see a number of Police Officers, three I
       think, on the perimeter track and they appear to be
                                                                36

                                                       B. J. DOYLE


       shepherding people along to Pen 2? - A. Yes, that is
       right.
B   Q. Do you recall seeing anything like that scene
       depicted in the photograph? - A. No.

    Q. Can you look now closely at the photograph and I hope
       your copy  is a good one? It might be difficult to
       make out but if you start as your reference point the
       gate where the Policeman is standing and then go one
       stanchion of the fence up, there is a black lad on
       the perimeter track just by that stanchion, can you
       see? - A.   Yes, I can.

    Q. Then look   into the pen to the first person behind
       that young man.    Do you see yourself in your striped
       jersey? - A. Yes.

    Q. It does appear then, Mr. Doyle, that you were in Pen
       2 considerably before the assumption, the timing, the
       assumption that you made that Beardsley hit the
       crossbar? - A. I have been telling you this.  I never
       said that Beardsley hit the crossbar.

    Q. I understand that and I accept that you made an
       assumption on the first occasion but it does appear,
       does it not, I think you agree, that you were in Pen
       2 by two minutes past three? - A. Two minutes past
       three?

    Q. Yes. - A. Yes.

    Q. You are standing right at the front there.  Are you
       certain you can recall nothing of this scene that we
       can see in the photograph? - A. No.

    Q. You have told us of coming over the fence and
       shouting at the Policeman and the gate being shut.
       Can you reconcile that part of your evidence with
       what you see on the photograph here? - A. What I see
       on the photograph there is that I could have been
       shouting at this Policeman and he let these fans into
       that pen and shut the gates again.

    Q. Would you agree that that is an assumption you are
       making here? You do not know that that occurred? -
       A. I do know because as soon as I jumped over that
       fence that is all I done anyway, shout at the
       Policeman.

    Q. To open the gate? - A. No, not to open the gate, to
       get someone to sort something out.
                                                                  37

                                                        B. J. DOYLE


    Q. You told us the last time you were here that when the
       gate did open you pushed aside a Policeman and I
       think a WPC? - A. No, it was not a WPC.
B
    Q. And ran out? - A. It was not a WPC at all.     It was an
       old man.

    Q. A Policeman who was an old man? - A. He was a
       Policeman, yes, but he looked like he was about 48 or
       50.

    Q. Can you look now at another photograph? Again this
       is not exhibited as yet and it is PR1, Frame 36A.

              MR. BEECHEY:   The C number for that is C.463.

    Q.        MISS ADDLEMAN:  We are still looking at Pen 2,
         Mr. Doyle, and we can see there that the gate is
         opened.   Can you still see yourself in Pen 2? - A.
         Yes.

    Q. You are standing to the right of the gate, about the
       third person along as we look at the photograph? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. You are looking over towards Pen 3? - A. That is
       right, yes.

    Q. Were you shouting at any Policeman there in that
       photograph? - A. No.

    Q. Just look at the timing of that photograph and... -
       A. Would you be shouting at that Policeman if you
       were seeing what was happening in the next pen?

    Q*       THE CORONER:     Hang on, Mr. Doyle.  Miss
         Addleman is allowed to ask you questions and you have
         to answer.  It is her privilege to ask you questions
         and your privilege to answer them but we are not
         reversing the roles.   She is quite entitled to ask
         you the questions.

    Q*        MISS ADDLEMAN:   Look at the timings, Mr. Doyle.
         We know the last photograph was taken at two minutes
         past three.   Looking at the bottom of this
         photograph, I know it is a bit difficult to make out,
         but it says five past three and we know that that is
         really four minutes past.    So two minutes later I
         think you will agree you are still standing there in
         Pen 2 and whilst we cannot assume that the gate is
         being opened all the time we know from those two
         photographs that it has been opened on at least two
         occasions and you have not taken the opportunity to
         leave the pen.   Do you agree? - A. They w e r e n ’t
                                               B. J. DOYLE


letting anyone out.   They were only putting people
in.

We can see on both photographs that you do not appear
to be making any effort to get out. Am I mistaken
about that? - A. Making any effort to get out?

Yes. - A. I wasn't on the verge of running out to get
out of the pen.  I was looking at what was going on
around me more than anything.

I thought you said that when eventually you did get
out you pushed a Police Officer aside and you ran
out? - A. I did do, yes.

You did? - A. Yes.

Eventually? - A. That is right, yes.




                             /Q. Would you agree with.
                                      B.J. DOYLE



Would you agree with me to this extent, Mr.   Doyle, that
perhaps the sense of urgency which you gave   us to believe
on the last occasion was a mistaken belief,   perhaps the
passage of time has dimmed the memory? - A.   No, I have
not got a dim memory, no.

You do feel that you did have a sense of urgency to get
out of the pen in the two minutes that we know about
with the evidence of the photographs? - A. Two minutes
is a long time when that is going on around you, isn't
it?

Well it could be a long time, I agree.  Could I ask you
to have a look at yet another photograph, Mr. Doyle.
I think this one has been copied and already exhibited,
C406.  I won't keep you a moment with this photograph,
Mr. Doyle, but you would agree with me, I think, that
so far as the length of perimeter fencing we can see there
is concerned, you are not on the fence at that point? -
A. No.  I have already stated that I got on the fence twice
and I think I might have been just to the left of that
the first time.

Well I can show you a photograph where certainly it appears
you are on the fencing.  This is PR2/22 and I think it has
been copied.

      THE CORONER:     Have we got it in or is it a new one?

      MISS ADDLEMAN:     It has been copied sir, but it has
not been exhibited.

      MR. BEACHEY:     The 'C' number for this then sir
is C464.

      MISS ADDLEMAN:  Can you see yourself hanging over
the fence there? - A. Yes.

And this photograph is timed at 15.08 and that is in fact
7-minutes-past-3. Have you any idea how long ....

      THE CORONER:   Can I just stop one minute.  I ought
to explain this because you may be confused.   The timings
on these photographs are a minute wrong which is why
Counsel keeps on saying:   "It is timed at 15.08 but it is
actually 15.07".   We know that.  We just accept that as
being true.  Okay? - A. Yes, okay.

      MISS ADDLEMAN:  Do you know how long you may have
been in that position when this photograph was taken?
- A. No.

I thiiik you will agree with me that there certainly are
Officers on the fence.   They are standing right by you
and there is one over to the right, certainly one.   Do
you remember those Officers standing on the fence? - A. No.
                                       B.J. DOYLE


I don't know whether you have spotted any in any of the
previous photographs or indeed this photograph, the
Sergeant that you spoke of walking up and down? - A. No,
I have not spotted him.

You haven't? - A. No.

Now for the sake of completeness I would like to show you
another photograph because it pins the time somewhat when
you would have got on to the fence.  I don't think this
has been copied unfortunately sir.  It is one that has
escaped me.

      THE CORONER:     Sergeant Killoch, can you do us a
photocopy of it?

      MISS ADDLEMAN:    For those who have the photograph,
sir, it is PR2/13.

      THE CORONER:   While that is being done, Miss Addleman.,
can we get, because I won't remember which one of all
these thousands of people on the photograph is this
witness.  Can you put a little cross above the head on
the photographs where you are so we know in a year's time
who you are or perhaps ten years' time.   Don't obscure
yourself, just put a mark, a cross, an arrow, whatever
you like.  There were I think three photographs up to now.
Can you mark them all?

      MR. BEACHEY:  The last photograph mentioned, sir,
the 'C' number is 465.  That is PR2/13.

      THE CORONER:     Is that the one that is being done at
the moment?

      MR. GRIFFITHS:     I have just done 464 sir.

      THE CORONER:     Not the one that is being done at the
moment.

I take it you were wearing a striped pullover of some sort
that day.  Is that right? - A. Yes, a striped sweat shirt.
Can I ask a question over this photograph?

What is it you want to ask? Tell me. - A. What the lady
was saying to me before, as you can see Police Officers
around you.  I can't see one leaning over though,     you,
helping anyone?

That was not the question.  The question was .... No, you
can't ask that question because the jury will decide what
if anything they are doing.

      MR. GRIFFITHS:     Was the reference number PR2/22?
                                       B.J. DOYLE


      MISS ADDLEMAN:     PR2/13.

      THE CORONER:     Has he copied the wrong one?

      MISS ADDLEMAN:  Sir, I wonder, I don't want to flood
the Court with more photographs.  Perhaps I can show my
copy to the witness.

      THE CORONER:  It will be done.     He has obviously
copied the wrong one.

      MISS ADDLEMAN:  Do you see that, Mr. Doyle, that
the timing there is 15.06? - A. Yes.

So we know that we are talking about 5-minutes-past-3 and
I think you can confirm from the view of that photograph
you are nowhere to be seen on the fencing? - A. Yes, that
is correct.

So you obviously must have got on the fencing between
5-minutes-past and 7-minutes-past when we have the previous
photograph which you were shown? - A. Well it cannot be
right because I have seen the Police video where I am on
the fence for nearly 12 minutes.

I think the video in fact, Mr. Doyle, has been seen and
you appear to be on the fencing.  5-minutes-past-3 and
some 41 seconds you are first seen on the fence and you
get down from the fence at 12-minutes-past-3. Are you
prepared to accept that from me?   I am corrected, I am
sorry I misled you as to the time when you got off,
8-minutes-past-3 in fact? - A. So how long would that put
it that I was on the fence for?

Short of 3 minutes? - A. No, that    is not right.

      MISS ADDLEMAN:     No, you disagree.   Yes, thank you,
Mr. Doyle.


                Further by THE CORONER:

Before I let you go, Mr. Doyle, can I just check this.
Are you saying you were on the fencing for 12 minutes
altogether.  I did not understand what you were saying?
- A. I got on the fence twice.  I was definitely on for
longer than what she says.

I think the point is, you may have misunderstood the
question, what she was asking you in this photograph
which you have got in front of you, that is timed at
5-minutes-past-3? - A. Yes.
                                        B.J. DOYLE




And I think you said you could not find yourself on that
photograph, right, on the fence? - A. No.

Then we showed you another one which is timed at
7-minutes-past where you can find yourself on the screen.
Right? - A. Yes.

So what she was putting to you in the first instance was
do you agree with her that you must have got on the fencing
between these two photographs? - A. Yes.

Bearing in mind that you were in Pen 2 at 4-minutes-past
because we had another photograph of that.   Now that does
not mean to say that you did not then stay on the fencing
for a period of time and indeed you may have come off, as
you have told me, and got back on, you know you may well
be right on that. What we are trying to establish is the
earliest time that you were seen on the photograph.   Have
you understood? - A. Yes, I have understood.

      THE CORONER:  That, Miss Addleman, is more or less
correct, isn't it, but I have got the substance of what
you were putting to the witness right, haven't I?

      MISS ADDLEMAN:   You have sir, yes.

      THE CORONER:  Is this the one you were after,
Miss Addleman? Miss Addleman, is this the one, 15.05,
which he has not identified himself on the fencing?




                       MISS ADDLEMAN:    That is the last
                                              B. J. DOYLE


     MISS ADDLEMAN:     That is the last one in the
sequence.

     THE CORONER:   Can we give it an appropriate "C"
number so that we know what we are talking about.

     MR. BEECHEY:     It has already got one, sir, C465.

             Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

When you gave evidence the other day you told us, or
you were asked by the Coroner, whether the match had
finished by the time that you were on the fence, and
your answer was no.  Is that still your recollection? -
A. As I got through the gate in pen 3, where the
Policeman was, the match was still going on, because I
seen Police Officers running after me.

     THE CORONER:     Pen 2, you mean? - A. Pen 2, yes.

     MR. RUSSELL:     What you said the other day, when
you were asked when   you jumped on the fence whether the
match had finished,   your answer was, "No, because I
remember someone in   the stand shouting 'Doyley'". - A.
Yes, that's right.

"I do remember this man shouting, 'Doyley go and grab
the ball', because they were still playing . That is
your recollection, is it? - A. That is right, yes.

You see, I   am a little confused by that because in the
photograph   that you have just identified yourself not
in, if you   follow me - the one that is on the screen at
the moment   - that is moments before the match was
stopped. -   A. Yes.

So it would appear that you weren't on the fence when
the match was stopped.  Do you think that might be
right? - A. What might have happened there is that I
was on the fence and got back down.

You see, the Jury will have an opportunity to have a
close look at the compilation video in due course, and
another thing has puzzled me a little, you say it isn't
a cigarette in your mouth in the first photograph, but
you do smoke, don't you? - A. I do smoke but I
certainly c a n 't ....

And you had a packet of cigarettes with you when you
left pen 2? - A. Yes.

You see, the Jury I think will be able to see you
coming from pen 2, 41 seconds after 5-past-3, after the
match was stopped, going to the fence and as you get to
                                              B. J. DOYLE


the fence putting your cigarette packet into your left-
hand hip pocket and then getting on the fence at about
45 seconds after 5-past-3, some half a minute after the
match had stopped.  Do you think that is about right? -
A. No, not really.

So your recollection is more reliable than the video
film of you doing those things, is that what you are
telling us? - A. As I am saying to you, when I was on
the fence I distinctly seen Bruce Grobbelaar like
looking back, but I can't remember the game being
stopped, no.

Do you think that Bruce Grobbelaar might have been
looking back, as we see him on the video, to collect
his bag of belongings, the match having been stopped,
in order to leave   the field? - A. Quite possible.

     MR. KING:   Sir, this does not arise out of any of
those questions.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, that is all right.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Mr. Doyle, I have just been asked by those I represent
who are relatives of those who died just to thank you
for the assistance you obviously gave on the day to
help people who were in need, and thank you for that. -
A. Okay.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Doyle, thank you very much
indeed for coming, three times as it happens, but for
being here. - A. Okay, thanks.

     THE CORONER:   Would it be more convenient if we
rose now and came back at 10-to-2, or carried on for 10
minutes and came back at 2.    I don't want to lose ten
minutes.   So 10-to-2 for everybody back here, including
the witnesses please.

               (Luncheon Adjournment)
                                                 P. EDWARDS


                 PAUL EDWARDS Sworn

                     By THE CORONER

You are Paul Edwards,   I believe, is that right? - A.
That is right.

Mr. Edwards, can you just give us your address, please?
- A.                                Liverpool.

I think, Mr. Edwards, it is right, isn't it, that you
came to the match by car, is that correct? - A. Yes,
from London.

You travelled with your brother, was it? - A. My
brother and two friends.

You didn't actually know the friends, or not very well?
- A. That was the first time I had met them.

You got to Sheffield at about 12 noon, right? - A. Yes.

What time did you depart, can you remember? - A. I
can't remember but it was very early.

It doesn't matter.   You got to   Sheffield at   noon. - A.
Yes.

What time did you get to Leppings Lane? - A. I got to
the queue at the turnstiles about 25.-past-2.

How did you spend your time in between, very briefly? -
A. We arranged to meet in a pub; we were meeting my dad
and my uncles from Liverpool so we met in a pub outside
Sheffield.

Did you meet up with your dad? - A. Yes, we  all met up
and we stayed there about an hour and left the pub
about 10-to-2, and arrived not far from the ground
about 5-past-2.

Then you said what time at the ground? - A. About 25-
past-2.

Do you know which pub it was, just as a matter of
interest? - A. I think it was called the Penistone Inn.
I am not certain but I think that is what it was
called.

Were you the only Liverpool supporters there or were
there others? - A. There were others.

How much did you have to drink there? - A. Two pints of
lager.
                                             P. EDWARDS


Having arrived at the turnstiles, at that time was
there a big crowd there, as far as you remember? - A.
Yes, there was just one big mob outside the gates.

When you say outside the gates, you mean outside the
perimeter gates? - A. No, outside the turnstiles.

Had it spread out beyond the perimeter gates yet?- A. I
think where I joined the queue it was at the perimeter
gates.

We don't need to go into a lot of detail because we
have heard from dozens of supporters but were you
crushed yourself in that turnstile area? - A. Yes.

To such an extent that you were uncomfortable? - A. I
would say more than uncomfortable; I would say on the
verge of being panic stricken.

Really? - A. Yes.

Were people around you in the same condition? - A. Yes.
If I can just explain, we were towards the left of the
mob of supporters so we were getting slammed into one
of the gates, one of the concertina gates ....

On the left hand side. - A. That is what was causing
the panic, and then as we got towards the turnstiles we
had no control over our movements, so we were going
towards the wall, so we were worried that if we didn't
get to a turnstile we would be slammed up against the
wall.

And that was one of the reasons why you were really
worried? - A. Yes.

Did you get through a turnstile or did you go through a
gate? - A. Through a turnstile.

Did you see the gate open at all by chance? - A. No.

Obviously, fortunately for you, whatever the fears, you
managed to get to a turnstile? - A. Yes.

And I take it your friends and so on did as well, and
dad? - A. They were in before me; when I came through
the turnstiles they were waiting for me in the
concourse.

Having got through the turnstile you were in a biggish,
more spacious area? - A. Yes.

Is it right that immediately ahead of you there was a
tunnel? - A. Yes.
                                               P. EDWARDS


You had not been to the ground before, had you? - A. I
had.

You had? - A. Yes.

Had you been there in 1988? - A. Yes, but I was in the
West Stand.

I see, you were upstairs? - A. Yes.

So this was your first experience of going onto the
terraces at Hillsborough? - A. No, I was there in 1980
for a semi-final.

A good long time ago.  I don't suppose you really
remember much? - A. I do actually.

From 1980? - A. Yes.

Do you really? - A. Yes.

Did you go on the terraces in 1980 then? - A. Yes.

How did you get onto the terraces in 1980? - A. In 1980
there were gates blocking the tunnel so we went to the
right.

This was in 1980? - A. Yes.

Can you remember whether any radial fences were in
place on the terracing? - A. There were none.

On this occasion you went down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Is it right then that you knew that you could get onto
the terracing by going round to the right? - A. I did
know but at the time -- I should have known but at the
time I didn't.  In 1989 it didn't occur to me that I
could go round the side.

What you are saying is that you know now because you
have been thinking about it, but when you were there on
the day the tunnel was the obvious route in as far as
you were concerned? - A. Yes.

The alternative route   had escaped from your ...? - A.
Yes.

That is fine, it was nine years previously.  You went
down the tunnel; was the tunnel clear or full, or what
was it like? - A. It was clear.

So you weren't pushed or shoved, you were able to walk
down normally? - A. Yes, I walked down normally.
                                                P. EDWARDS


Having got down the tunnel you got to the exit, right?
- A. Yes.

Did you turn left or right? - A. Left.

Did you have to worm, ease, force, push your way onto
the terrace or were you able to get onto it at the time
you went through relatively easily? - A. There was a
wall of people as I got to the end of the tunnel and it
was extremely difficult to make any headway onto the
terrace?

Did people actually let you through? - A. No.

In that wall. I mean? - A. No, they wouldn't let you
through, you d have to push past them.

There was you, your brother - did you say dad was still
with you? - A. No.  There was just four of us in the
terrace.

Were you together when you went in? - A. We walked down
the tunnel together, yes, and into the terrace
together.

When you exited onto the terrace, you said you went to
the left, you had a bit of a problem getting through
this wall, but you did it in the end, what was it like
when you got to the other side of the wall, to speak,
the wall of people? - A. It was very, very packed and
we were just shouting to each other, "Keeping going
left", because we knew there were more people outside
who would be coming down the tunnel, so we were just
trying to go left, but it was more difficult than I had
ever experienced before.  Normally you are experienced
at making your way, even though it is difficult, but
this time we were making very little progress.

Can you remember what was happening on the pitch at
that point in time? - A. The players weren't out.

Do you know what time it was?  Did you by chance look
at your watch or the clocks or anything like that? - A.
I didn't but I think it was round about 10-to-3.

Did you hear the   players being announced?  Can you
remember that? -   A. I can remember hearing the cheers.
As each player's   name is announced the crowd cheer, I
remember hearing   that.

Was that when you were making your way across the left?
- A. Yes.
                                               P. EDWARDS


You are pretty accurate,   that is just about turned 10-
to-3? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   That is right, is it? You have got
me worried, Mr. King.  I think it is 14.50 or 51.

     MR. KING:   The announcement of the team, sir, is
14.51.07.

     THE CORONER:   At that point, when you were
working your way across towards the left, and I have
understood what you are saying, you say it was tighter
or more difficult than your normal experience? - A.
Yes.

Were you at that point concerned for your safety? - A.
Yes.

Did it get any worse? - A. Yes.

When did it get worse? - A. It got worse gradually from
the minute I entered the terrace.

Were you able to link the getting worse with anything
that was happening on the pitch? - A. Not with on the
pitch, no.  It was inevitable in some ways that it
would get more packed because it was getting nearer to
kick-off time, and obviously there were a lot of people
outside, but it seemed at the time it was so packed
that there was no room at that time, so it was
frightening because I knew there would be a lot more
people coming in.




        /Q. Are you saying
                                                                50

                                                        P. EDWARDS


    Q. Are you saying that was what was worrying you, the fact
       that you knew there were other people outside and you
       wondered where on earth they were going to go? - A. Yes.

    0. Because on that day as far as you knew the only entry was
B      down the tunnel?   In fact you know now that is wrong,
       but on the day you had assumed that everybody was going
       to come down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you at any point feel any surging?    Do you know what
       I mean by sur^ine? - A. Yes.

    0. What I call oulsed pressure as opposed to steady
       pressure? - \. Yes, there was constant pressure and then .
       there was...   1 was having great difficulty seeing
       anything on tie pitch because I was concentrating on my
       movements, but there was then a bigger surge roundabout
       kick-off tire.

    0. Did you actuillv see the players running purposefully up
       and down tne field? -A. No, I could just see one player
       which was tno goalkeeper, Bruce Grobbelaar.

    Q. Was he stanriinr, tnere as if he was warming up or was he
       standing there as if he was actually playing? - A. I
       noticed him when he was warming up because a ball went
       behind hin into the crowd and as he turned to fetch it he
       had a very concerned look on his face and I realised then
       the situation I was in was intense.      From then onwards
       he was tne onlv thing I could focus on.      I can recall
       focusins, on nirr. wnile the game must have been in progress
       because nis novenents were consistent with playing the
       game.

    0. I think tnise surges which you have mentioned, did they
       go forward a m !>ack like a lot of surges do, or were they
       different in nv way and if so, which one was different?
       - A. Constnntl v it was different because normally as you
       jostle for *>os ition in a match people naturally move
       forward, but t ien you move back, but this wasn't
       happening.    ueople were moving forward and weren't
       coming back.     They were going further and further down.
       The big sur«’e I have described roundabout kick-off time,
       or I assume it was kick-off time, then there were a lot
       of people who went forward and nobody came back.

    0. You can distinguish a number of what one might call
       smaller surges and then there was a real big one, which
       you relate to kick-off time?  It could have been later,
       suppose, but it might easily have been kick-off time? -
       A. It was around kick-off time.
                                                                        51

                                                                P. EDWARDS


        Q. What I would like you to do is to show me in a plan...
           Before you do that, it sounds as though you were heading
           left and then you were carried forward? - A. Yes.

    n   0. How did you yourself get out? - A. I was pulled up the
           wall at the back into the stand.

        0. Does that mean you didn't get any further forward than
           that wall or did you move back towards the position to
           get pulled up? - A. I was making a constant effort when
           the crowd moved forward to try and move backwards.    I
           wasn't watching the game, I was trying to move backwards,
           but there were times when even the concentrating on
           trying to do that, I felt myself going forward.    At one
           time I was up against the barrier, at which point I
           panicked and made a real effort to try and go backwards.
           I remember seeing a fan run on to the pitch and grab the
           goalkeeper, Bruce Grobbelaar and he told him to get back
           off the pitch.  Shortly after that the game was stopped.
           By this time I was really panic stricken.   I just turned
           to the back because I could see no other way of getting
           out of the terrace.  When I turned to the back there were
J)         a lot of people clambering up the wall.   I attempted to
           do the same and after a while I managed to get up the
           wall as well.

        0   .   Right, show us then on this plan.
                positions.
                                                     There are two
                              The first one where you were aiming left,
                the furthest you got, so to speak, and then the furthest
                you got down.    (The witness marked the plan)

                     MR. BEECHEY:   That is C.466.

        0. It looks as if in fact you       were fairly near the back most
           of the time? - A. Yes.

        Q. In relation to that particular terrace, I mean.      Were
           you able to see what the people were like right at the
           front?    I am just interested whether you could see what
           it was like at the front from your position. - A. I
           couldn't see the people right at the front on the fence
           but I could see the gate to the fence and I could see all
           the people below me, apart    from those right up against
           the fence.    They were out of my view.     They were too
           low down.

        Q. Did they appear to be in the same sort of position or
           condition as you were, or were you any different? - A. It
           seemed worse.

        Q. It seemed worse further down? - A. Yes.

        0. You said you saw the gate? - A. I could see the gate,
           yes.




H
                                                                52

                                                     P. 'EDWARDS


Q. Did you see people exiting through that gate? - A. Yes.
   All around me people were just shouting, "Open the gates.
   Open the gates."    I wanted them to open the gates to
   relieve the pressure on me, but I knew it must have been
   worse at the front.    I saw the gate open.   Some people
   escaped and the gate shut again.    At that time everybody
   around me started panicking.

Q. Did you see re-open? - A. No.

Q. That means you didn't see any of the Police Officers.   A
   bald headed man, you didn't see him by any chance? - A.
   No.

0. You saw it open once and shut and then you didn't see it
   again after that? - A. Yes.

Q. You don't know when that was, the opening and the
   shutting? - A. No.

0. I don't want you to guess.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE;

0. You are right that in 1980 there were no radial fences,
   [low do you know that yourself? - A. Because when we came
   into to the right we were able to move across nearer
   towards the goal.    We had free movement from the right
   hand side across the terrace towards the goal.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

0. Mr. Edwards, tell us something about your experiences as
   a football supporter.   Before 1989 how regularly have
   you attended big matches? - A. Very often.

0.   Can I show you a chart as to times?    I want topinpoint
     the time a bit better if I can - C.277 please.    These
     are timings which have been taken from a video we have
     and are accepted as accurate of certain events.    You
     told us that as you were getting on to the terrace you
     were conscious of the names of the team being announced
     because you could hear cheers? - A. Yes.

Q.   Just look on that chart in front of you andlook  on the
     internal column on the left hand side, the second column.
     If you look all the way down we see "14.51.07 - Liverpool
     team announced." - A. Yes.

0. Now you went through a turnstile? - A. Yes.
                                               P. EDUARDS


Just look down a bit more on this chart, 14.52 on the
left hand side under "External", do you see a record
there of Gate C opening, which is a reference to the
concertina gate, "A large number of supporters enter."
Did you see that happen? - A. No.




      0. So you clearly entered
                                                       54




                                                      P. EDWARDS


    Q. So you clearly entered before 14.52 but got on to the
       terrace round about 15.51, nine minutes to three? -
       A. Yes.
B
    Q. You have told us that you have had a lot of
       experience at football grounds. Does that include
       going on the terraces? - A. Yes.

    Q. You tell us that when you entered which would be
       round about nine minutes to three your immediate
       experience and feeling was that you were concerned
       for your safety? - A. Yes.

    Q. Have I got it right that you were concerned about two
       matters? You were concerned about your own safety
       because of the way it was packed around you? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. But you were also concerned about the fact that there
       were so many people already outside? - A. Yes.

    Q. You were wondering where they were going to go? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. Do I take it from that that where you were, in the
       pen you were in, you could not see where they could
       possibly go? - A. No. It was jam packed as I got in
       and so I thought, "Let us get away..... (witness
       became distressed)

    Q. I am sorry, Mr. Edwards, I do not mean to upset
       you. - A. I thought I was going to have to get away
       from the tunnel because there were a lot of people
       behind us outside the ground and so I thought, "They
       are going to come the same bit that we are. It is
       already jam packed now. Where are they all going to
       go? It is going to get worse and worse".

    Q. Why did you feel they were going to come the same way
       that you had come? - A. Because as I walked
       through....

    Q. Walked through where? - A. Walked through the
       turnstile on to the concourse, straight ahead was the
       tunnel and that was the only thing I could see. I
       could not see anything else and because it was about
       ten to three you were not going to stop and look
       around. So that just seemed the natural way to go.
       It was the only way I could see to get on to the
       terrace.

    Q. It was obvious to you when you got on to the terrace
       the people who you knew were still outside were
                                                               55

                                                      P. EDWARDS


       likely to come through the tunnel the same way you
       were going to go? - A. Yes.
B   Q. You could not see where on earth they would go on
       that packed terrace? - A. Exactly, yes.

    Q. The pen you were in was to the left and that would be
       Pen 4? - A. Yes.

                  Cross-Examined bv MR. CATCHPOLE

    Q. Can I just follow that up slightly? You said at ten
       to three you were not going to stop and look around.
       Is that because you obviously wanted to get into the
       game and so you looked for the shortest and most
       obvious route on to the terraces? - A. Yes.
                   Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN

    Q. Mr. Edwards, you said it was very crowded when you
       got on to the terraces and you thought that these
       people you had seen outside were going to come down
       that tunnel into that already packed area? - A. Yes.

    Q. Could you have turned round at that point and gone
       back out of the tunnel? - A. I cannot say for sure
       because I did not turn round but once I had started
       to enter the terrace   it would have been very
       difficult to go back out.

    Q. You did not try to go but you would have found
       difficult you say? - A. Once I had entered the
       terrace it would have been very difficult to turn
       away from the flow of the crowd and go back out.

    Q. Was that because people were coming down the tunnel
       or not? - A. I did not look behind me and so I could
       not really answer that accurately but once I entered
       the terrace it was obvious at that time there would
       be other people behind me coming in.

    Q. You say you found it quite uncomfortable there? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. But you were prepared to stay there at that point? -
       A. Once I entered it   was like a point of noreturn.
       Once I had entered on to the terrace then that was
       it. I did not think of turning round and going back
       out. I just tried to go left away from the tunnel.

                   Cross-Examined bv MR. RUSSELL

    Q. You told us that as you crossed the terrace or made
       your way across the terrace it was to the cheers of
                                                                     56

                                                             P. EDWARDS


             the people in the ground saluting each name as it was
             announced over the tannoy system? - A. Yes.
    B   Q.   Is that unusual? - A. No, that is normal.

        Q. Have you ever known with the cheers a punched salute
           to each name as it is read out? - A. Yes.

        Q.    Do you recall that happening on that occasion? - A.
             No.

        Q. Are you sure about that? - A. I am sure I do not
           recall it.

        Q. I am sorry? - A. I am sure that I do not recall it.
             It may have happened but I did not recall it.

                             Further bv THE CORONER

        Q. I want to ask you one thing about 1980. I think you
    I      said you did not go down the central tunnel that
           year. Did you say that the gates were shut or
           what? - A. There were two gates blocking it off and
           so it was impossible to go down it.

        Q. Were you told that it was full or did you just see
           the gates and you had to find some other route? - A.
           There were just gates there and so we could not go
           down.

        Q. You do not know why they were shut at that point? -
           A. I assumed it was because it was already full.

        Q. What I want to know is that when you got on to the
           terrace — you are quite right and Mr. Payne is quite
           right that there were not any radial fences in 1980 -
           - you moved towards the centre, did you not? You
           told us that, did you not? - A. Yes.

        Q. Was it, in fact, crowded towards the centre in 1980
           if you can remember that? - A. Yes, it was.
        Q. It was? - A. Yes.

        Q. Was it more crowded in the centre than it was at the
           wings? Do you know what I mean by the wings? - A.
           Yes, it was.

        Q. It was? - A. Yes.

        Q. Where did you actually position yourself in 1980? -
           A. In 1980 I was only young and it was very packed
           and so I went down the front and stood by the fence
           because I was worried about how packed it was.


H
                                                                     57

                                                            P. EDWARDS



        Q. I am sorry? - A. I was worried about how packed it
           was in 1980.
    B
        Q. When you say very packed, I want to know which bit
           was very packed. Are you saying that the whole of
           the terrace from one end to the other was packed?
           Sergeant Griffiths, can you put the ground plan up?
           This, of course, is a ground plan of 1989 but if you
           just turn round and look. Just indicate the
           terracing from one end to the other. Ignore all
           those radial fences because you are quite right that
           they were not there. Are you saying that the whole
           of that was packed or are you saying that just a
           central section was packed? - A. When we first came
           in to the right that was less packed. As we moved
           across it was packed for a good distance. It was not
           just the centre. A wide area was packed.

        Q. It was sufficiently dense there for you to want to
           move towards the front? - A. Yes.

        Q. Is that because right at the front it tends to be a
           little bit easier? - A. Yes.

        Q. Because people   do not actually like standing there or
           whatever? - A.   At the time I was young and that is
           where a lot of   young people go at the fence, out of
           the way of the   crowd and you have got a better view.
        Q. I do not think you are very old now but you were
           younger. Thank you very much indeed. - A. Yes.

                             IAN JOHN FEARNS Sworn

                                Bv THE CORONER

        Q. You are Ian John Fearns? - A. That is correct.
        Q. Is it still                 - A. It is, yes.

        Q.               Liverpool, I believe? - A. That is right.
        Q. Mr. Fearns you are another lifelong Liverpool
           supporter? - A. Yes.

        Q. You came to the 1989 match anyway on the 15th
           April? - A. That is correct.

        Q. Did you come to the 1988 one as well? - A. Yes, I
           did.

        Q. Let us talk about 1989.    I think you had a ticket? -
           A. I did.


H
                                                   P. EDWARDS



You came by train I believe, is that right? - A. That
is correct.

It was not a football special but it was just a
regular train? - A. It was a shuttle train that was
on its way to Norwich which passed through Sheffield.

You stopped off and you got off I think at about
quarter to twelve I think the train arrived, is that
right? - A. That is approximately quarter to twelve.

It does not   have to be to the minute or anything like
that.  When   you got off how many people were there?
Were you by   yourself or did you travel with a
group? - A.   I travelled with one friend on the train.

Which one was that? - A. Terry Mainwaring.

I think you met two or three other people I think? -
A. We met three other friends when we were actually
put on to the buses that were laid on to take us to
the ground.  We actually met them on the actual bus
itself.

Was that Paul Carlisle, Paul Murray and Ian Ford? -
A. Yes, that is right.

Were you wearing football gear? - A. No,   I was
wearing casual jeans and a jeans shirt.




                             /Q. So how come.
                                     I.J. FEARNS



So how come that you got on to the football coaches? -
A. Well as we were coming off the train the Police were
saying:  "Liverpool supporters this way, Nottingham
Forest supporters the other w a y " , so we just followed
their directions.

Then you were steered towards these coaches? - A. We
waited in the forecourt, car park of the area till the
buses actually arrived.

So you were quite pleased because you came with    one
friend and you had  met three more so there were   five of
you at that point?   — A. Yes, that is correct.

You then, I think the coach eventually or bus took you
towards Leppings Lane.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

I think you got off near the ground about half-past-12
something of that order? - A. Something about that.

I think the first thing you did was find yourself a chip
shop, got something to eat, and then I think you bought
four cans of lager each. Is that right? - A. That was not
specifically what I said during the course of the interview
by the Police.  I said we purchased a couple of cans of
lager.  I did not give any quantity.

I see, so how many cans did you actually have yourself?
- A . I myself only purchased two.

It does not matter to me whether it is one or ten.  Well
ten might matter to me but all I am trying to find out
as briefly as I can, you had a couple of cans.  Right?
I think you sat on some nice grassy slope? - A. Yes, there
was a verge just across the road.

Because it was a beautiful day? - A. Yes.

All I want to deal with at this point, I want you to tell
me about Paul Carlisle, all right, because he was with
you at about 12.30? - A. He was.

How long did he stay with you? - A. He stayed for approx­
imately I would say, what, half-an-hour at the most.

In other words you are saying he left you for whatever
reason at about 1 p.m.? - A. That is correct.

You never saw him again after that, did you, on the day?
- A. Unfortunately not.

So when he left you that in fact was goodbye, unfortunately?
- A. Yes.
                                     I.J. FEARNS



Now Paul, why did he go? Tell me why he left, as far as
you know.  Don't tell me what other people have told you
at this stage, just what you know as to why he left? -
A. Paul was saying previously when we met him on the bus
and for a number of days before that he wanted to obtain
a Stand ticket.  Unfortunately he only had a season ticket
at Anfield for the ground so he was only allocated a ground
ticket and he wanted to actually try and swap this ticket
and obtain a Stand ticket.

I see, so when you say "ground ticket" he had a terracing
ticket? - A. He did indeed.

And what he wanted was to have a Stand ticket to go upstairs
- A. Yes.

Was that the reason why he left because he hoped to do a
swap? - A. He hoped to do a swap.

And in fact I think you went towards a place called the
Horse and Jockey but you have got no idea, he just said
"That is where I am going".  Is that right? - A. Well he
said he was going up to the pub up the top of the hill to
try and swap his ticket.  We gave him roughly three-quarters
of an hour and followed up.

Oh I see.  And having followed him you never found him?
- A. We didn't no.

So you can't say whether he succeeded or not but you know
that that is what he was trying to do? - A. That is the
reason he left.

Hoping to do, shall we say? - A. Hoping.

So   you then followed him up and eventually you came back
to   the turnstile area at about half-past-2 I think.  That
is   right, isn't it? - A. Yes, approximately quarter-past
to   half-past.  I could not be sure.

I am not going to take you through the detail of how you
got in apart from asking whether you went through a turn­
stile or through a gate? - A. I went through a turnstile.

The only other question I want to ask you is did you see
any of the big gates open? - A. No, not at all.

You never saw that? - A. No.

When you got in tell me who you were with when you got
through your turnstile? - A. When I entered the actual
ground I was with Terence Mainwaring? Ian Ford; Paul Murray
and we had met up with a friend just outside called
Carl Lewis.
                                                         61


                                       I.J. FEARNS



Q. So it was Ian Ford, Paul Murray .... How well did you
   know Paul Murray, did you know him well as well? - A.
   We went to home games.  I knew him more through Paul Carlisle
   who knew him a lot better than myself.  He was a friend we
   went to the matches with.

Q. And then you met up with this other lad called Carl Lewis?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. You met him on the inside? - A. On the outside.  We were
   actually in the area outside the turnstiles with him and
   we all entered the ground together.

Q. Did he come through a turnstile as well as far as you know?
   - A. He did.

Q. Now on the inside there were the five of you including
   yourself, I think you noticed some Police Officers in that
   concourse area.  Is that right? - A. I did indeed.

Q. Do you know about how many you saw? - A. No, it was just
   about three or four, five at the most.

Q. And did they search you, can you remember?  I don't mean
   all of them? - A. I recall them  searching some fans but
   I myself never got searched.

Q. So you saw that was happening but you weren't? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you wait any longer for Paul or did you decide you
   did not know where he was and you were going .... A. No,
   we assumed if he had swapped his Stand ticket we obviously
   would not meet up with him until the way home or if he
   hadn't we told him we would be in the ground at a certain
   place, you know, hoping to meet him in there, so we made
   our way straight there.

Q. And did you go down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. Now something peculiar I think about Carl Lewis.  Did
   he actually have a terrace ticket? - A. He didn't, he had
   a Stand ticket.

Q. What did he do, did he go to the Stands or did he come
   with you? - A. Unfortunately he came in through the turn­
   stiles with us and we were waiting for Paul Murray who
   was still outside at the time.  I don't know exactly what
   happened but between the time we were actually going in,
   which must have been all of about two minutes, Carl did
   not have his stub so he was not allowed up into the
   Stands.

Q. Was your ticket torn, can you remember, your ticket I am
   talking about when you came through or was it intact? -
   A. No, the person on the gate had taken the stub from
   the ticket.
                                                            62


                                         I.J. FEARNS



Q. I am not too worried precisely what happened to the ticket,
   but what you are saying is he could not get up to the
   Stands because he could not prove ... A. He could not prove
   he had a Stand ticket.

Q. So if he was going anywhere he had to go down on to the
   terracing? - A. Well that was the way.

Q. And in fact that is what he did with the rest of you? -
   A. Yes, he did.

Q. And you all went down I think the tunnel.    Is that right?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. Did you know there were other routes into the ground? -
   A. Yes, I did.

Q. But do I take it that   you liked being behind the goal.
   I don't mean directly   behind the goal but in that centre
   section? - A. Well at   Anfield that is usually where we
   stand so therefore to   make it easier when Paul Carlisle
   had gone away to swap   his ticket that is where we said we
   would be.

Q. I see.  So that was where you were hoping Paul would come
   if he had not succeeded with his swap? - A. That is right.

Q. And you went down the tunnel.  The tunnel I take it was
   reasonably clear.  You did not have any particular
   difficulty in the tunnel? - A. No, no real problems at
   all.

Q. And when you exited from the tunnel did you turn right or
   left? - A. Right.

Q. Have you any idea what time this would have been that you
   got there? - A. Roughly about 25-past, half-2.

Q. How long would you say it took you to get through the
   turnstile area? - A. From the outside I would say between
   15 minutes, you know about 10/15 minutes.

Q. If you got to the turnstile area at the time you told me
   you would have had to be later on the terracing wouldn't
   you? - A. Yes. As I say they were given as approximate
   times.

Q. In your statement you put 20-to-3.  Would that sound
   reasonable to you or would you prefer to change that?
   - A. 20-to-3 was when we actually got on to the terracing.

Q. Yes, that is what I am trying to find out.    You have
   understood what I am asking? - A. Yes.
                                                            63


                                       I.J. FEARNS



Q. At that point were you able to find, select a spot where
   you wanted to be? - A. We obviously had to push through
   because obviously there was a crowd there but we didn't
   find any great difficulty at all except when we got in
   obviously the crowd was still increasing and there was a
   lot of pushing going on.

Q. Did you feel any surges? - A. Yes, I did.   The first surge
   must have been about quarter-to-3 but that was just with
   people singing and what have you because as I say at that
   time there was nothing out of the ordinary.   Then it must
   have been some time between 10-to, 5-to-3 there was the
   surge that came and that just pushed me right down to the
   front.

Q. Can you remember whether the players were already on the
   pitch at that point, not for playing but for pre-kick-off?
   - A. No, they weren't.

Q. They weren't or you can't remember? - A. No, they weren't
   on the pitch.

Q. They were not.  So you felt this surge which carried you
   forward before the players came onto the pitch? - A. I
   did.

Q. Some time after 10-to-3 you would say but before the players
   were on the pitch? - A. It was before the players came
   on the pitch.

Q. Before, that is right.  Did you hear the teams being
   announced? - A. I can't honestly remember. I probably
   did but I can't honestly say.

Q. Did you see the players come on to the pitch at all? -
   A. No.

Q. Did you see any bit of the match? - A. No.

Q. I don't mean the detail, but did you .... A. I never got
   to focus on one player or the ball at all.

Q. So you are not able to say any of your events inrelation
   to what was going on on the pitch apart from being sure
   when the surge came it was before they had come out? - A.
   It was before they came.

Q. Did you get split up from your friends? - A. Yes.

Q. But I think you did actually see Carl at one point, he
   was slightly over to the right, wasn't he? - A. Carl was
   originally standing to my right just in front of Terry
   who was also standing to my right.  When the surge came
                                    I.J. FEARNS



that pushed me right forward to near the front I went
off sort of to the left and Carl went straight forward
and that was the last I saw of him.

Was it at this point when this big surge came? -   A. Yes.

Did this surge go forward and ease back at all or did it
stay continuously forward? - A. No, when the surge came
the pressure was so intense with the surge that I decided
me and Paul Murray had been pushed that way, we will see
what it is like down the front because usually there is
a gap between the railings and where the terracing starts
coming up. We got into this gap and then the surge just,
you know, it became more and more and then we became
trapped unfortunately.

Tell me:  when you first got down to the front was there
in fact a gap there? - A. No. We assumed there would be
a gap there but when we got there there wasn't and there
was no way back.

Obviously we know things became dreadful in the front
there, we know that. What I am trying to find out when
you first got to the front bit where you were hoping
things would be easier, was it in fact any easier at
that point when you were moving or being moved by the
surge? - A. No, when we actually got to the front it was
just as packed as what it was up the back and then it
just gradually got worse.

Could you see the little gate? - A. I saw it when I
was further up the pitch being opened once but when I
was forward I had no   view of the gate at all.

Tell me about that.When did you see   this little gate
open then, tell me? - A. It was just before the surge
came the gate opened.  I don't know for what reason or
whether there was a fan trying to get out.   I honestly
don't know.  I just remember the gate opening and the
Police Officer pushing the fan back in and closing t-hc
gate.

You say this was before the players were on the pitch?
- A. That was before   the players were on the pitch.

You are quite sure about that? -   A. Positive.

And you say you saw it opened and the fan being pushed
in at that point? - A. Yes.

After that you lost sight of it? - A. Yes.
                                    I.J. FEARNS



How did you yourself get out as a matter of interest?
- A. I was stuck in the crush for about a full 20, 25
minutes and when the pressure did finally ease off a
little and I was able to move my body and turn, I
literally panicked and forced my way to the back.
A gentleman who was nearer the back actually took hold
of me and he did literally hit me and told me to calm
down and then him and a friend passed me up into the
Stand above.




                      Q. You did the right
                                                I. J. FEARNS


You did the right thing to go back actually.    I am sure
that was the right thing for you to do.   I want you to
show us on the plan where you, were when you took your
match viewing position, and then show me the second
position, where you finished up near the front.
(The witness marked Exhibit C467) Ithink you     said
that in 1988 you were    in one of thestands, is that
right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

There was one other thing I wanted to ask you. Do you
remember a beach ball being knocked about? - A. I do,
when I first went in,    yes.

Was that the     position   which     you   have marked with a "1"?
- A. Yes.

Were you there at that time? - A. I was there at that
time.

So the big surge happened sometime after that? - A. It
did.

               Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Mr. Fearns, you tell us that Paul - this is Paul
Carbide - wanted to swap his ticket? - A. That is
correct.

So he obviously did not want to be on the terrace in
the standing area, he wanted to be in the stand.  Did
he say anything to you as to why he wanted to swap it?
- A. He never said anything to me personally but me and
my friend Terry Mainwaring came to the assumption that
obviously he was a bit worried about this.  For what
reasons, I didn't get into ....

I am just interested in whether he spoke to you.  Mr.
Terry Mainwaring is here, isn't he? - A. He is not, no.

     THE CORONER:   Ask him for the hearsay.      I am not
intending to call Mr. Mainwaring.

     MR. KING:   I see.  Sir, I want the best evidence
but this may be the best I can get.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.     I don't mind you taking the
hearsay on this point.

     MR. KING:      Thank you, sir:

Let me investigate a bit further then: what did you
assume and why did you so assume was the reason for why
Paul did not want to be on the terraces? - A. For the
whole of that season, even being at Anfield on the Kop,
                                               I. J. FEARNS


on numerous    occasions Paul when he did stand behind the
goal, moved    away to either the side or nearer the front
because the    pressure, he felt it was too much for him.

Do you know whether he had been to the semi-final     in
1988? - A. He had been, yes.

Were you there with him in 1988? - A. No, I didn't
travel with Paul.

Did you ever speak to him about his experiences in
1988? - A. Only about the game itself.

Not about his experience on the terrace? - A. Not about
any experiences, no.

              Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Fearns, did you say you saw the perimeter gate
opened before the players came out? - A. The perimeter
gate in area "C" was actually opened once to my
recollection, that I can remember, but that was
immediately shut by the Police Officer who was on the
track.

Yes, you are talking about in the perimeter fence,
aren't you? - A. Inside the ground itself.  Not gate C,
as in the concertina gate, no.

No, gate 3.  I was wondering if you could look at C277,
the sixth time from the bottom.  Can you see there it
says 14.59.20, I think it is, "Gate 3 open"? - A. Yes.

So that was a little later than you have said, wasn't
it? - A. No, I said ....

You said you saw it open before the players came on the
pitch? - A. Yes, it did open once.  As I say, there was
no big flood onto the pitch.  The Police Officer just
closed it straightaway.

It is just the time that I am trying to get correct. -
A. As I say, I couldn't be certain on it.  It was
before the teams were on the pitch though.

Because we know the teams came out at 6-minutes-to-3
and 14.59 is when gate 3 opened, so all the events that
you have mentioned in the pen, could they have been
just a few minutes out, do you think? - A. As I say,
that is possibly the case, but I can remember that gate
being opened before the teams were on that pitch.

Yes, it is not the events themselves, it is just the
timing.  They could be that little bit later?
                                           I. J. FEARNS


     MR. KING:   Sir, to help Mrs. McBrien, it is a
long time since I made the point, but all we know for
certain is that 14.59 shows the gate in a state of
openness.  Sir, I think Mrs. McBrien, probably not
deliberately, has rather misrepresented to the witness
when indicating at 14.59 the gate was in the process of
being opened.

     THE CORONER:   I think what Mrs. McBrien is trying
to find out is whether this witness could be five
minutes wrong with his time but we don't know.

     MR. KING:   We don't know.  I am only trying to
make sure that there is no confusion over the
significance of 14.59 on the chart for gate 3. That is
only a time when we know the gate was in a state of
openness.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   And it doesn't say anywhere that
gate 3 was opened before, does it, sir?

      THE CORONER:   No, it does not, but you cannot
from that figure say that it didn't open before; you
cannot say that it did; and you cannot say what
happened after it.   All you can say, as Mr. King
correctly points out, is that at 14.59 it was open.
How long it was open, whether it was shut again,
whether it stayed open continuously, from the figure
itself you can't tell.   What this witness is saying,
and he will correct me if I misrepresent what he is
saying, is that his recollection is that the gate did
open, but that it was considerably earlier, before the
players were on the pitch, that somebody came out and a
Police Officer put him back in, and then it was shut,
but he has no further recollection of any events on the
gate.   That is his evidence.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Mr. Fearns, you do say that your
timings could be a little out, don't you? - A. Yes, but
I do know distinctly that the teams were not on the
pitch when I first saw that gate open.  As I say, when
the gate was opened it was closed virtually immediately
by a Police Officer who was on the track, so for the
record that might not go down as the gate being open,
but as I say, it was opened and closed straightaway.

When you saw that gate open what was the state of the
pen then? - A. From where we were it was starting to
get really quite packed at the time.  It was just
before the surge actually happened.  As I say, then the
surge came and recollection from then was just panic
really.
                                           I. J. FEARNS


You didn't feel in any danger at all when you saw that
gate_first opened? - A. No.  I was feeling a bit
worried about the intensity of the pushing, but it was
just like any cup game to me at the time.

Did you see how the gate was opened? - A. No.  I can
only recollect the actual gate opening and the Police
Officer closing it virtually straightaway.  I couldn't
tell you who opened, why it was opened.

Did anybody g£t out at that time? - A. No, the gate was
closed virtually immediately.

Nobody at all? - A. No.

     THE CORONER:   Did you say nobody got out?  I
thought you said somebody got out and was put back in?
- A. Well, they didn't get out - that was the question.

I see, yes.   I understand.

     THE CORONER:    Mr. King, are you happy with what
you have heard with regard to Mr. Mainwaring? As I
say, I do not intend to call Mr. Mainwaring because I
think it isn't really terribly -- I know it is very
important to the family but it is not terribly relevant
to the Inquest.   Do you want to ask him any further
questions?

     MR. KING:   Yes.  I don't want to suggest
something which he has no knowledge of.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Did you know Mr. Carlile in the previous season, that
is Paul Carlile, in the 1988 season? - A. Yes.

Would he go to the Kop at Anfield in the 1988 season? -
A. Yes, he did.

 In the 1988 season did he exhibit the same reluctance
 to be on the Kop and worried about crowding? - A. Yes.
 I myself only started going to football matches with
Paul Carlile, it was about the '87 season.   Ever since
then I knew for a fact that he was nervous of the large
crowds, but as I say, he never, ever actually came out
and said it to me personally.

In the 1987 and '88 season he was still going on the
Kop as far as you knew? - A. Yes.

Then he went to the '88 semi-final at Hillsborough? -
A. Yes.
                                             I. J. FEARNS


I may have asked you this and I am sorry if I have, but
do you know what sort of ticket he had in 1988, where
he was? - A. I believe he was actually in the stands in
1988.  I could not be 100 per cent sure on that.  As I
say, I didn't travel with him that year.

He was in the stands.  Then in the 1989 season, before
the '89 semi-final, again on the Kop at Anfield, the
impression you gained was that he was concerned .... -
A. Even more so than the year before.

Even more so about being behind a goal? - A. Yes.

So there is no mystery, I am trying to discover whether
you know anything about what he either knew or saw or
experienced at the 1988 semi-final at Hillsborough
which made him reluctant to go on the terraces in 1989.
- A. He had only mentioned in passing, but to be
perfectly honest I didn't take much notice at the time,
the fact that he had heard from a few people he knew
that the crowd at the '88 was intense behind the goal,
which is one of the reasons I have only come to the
assumption of with Mr. Mainwaring that he didn't want
to, and he wanted to swap his ticket because of that.

Thank you very much.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Fearns, you have been very
helpful and I think you have been more helpful than you
realise so thank you very much indeed.

              TERRY ALAN COOPER Sworn

                   By THE CORONER

You are Terry Alan Cooper? - A. Yes.

Give us your address, Mr. Cooper? - A.
                            Northants.

You are a Liverpool supporter? - A. Yes.

You came to the 1989 semi-final? - A. Yes.

Did you come to the 1988 one? - A. No.

I think you came by coach? - A. Yes.

Was it Ashford's Coaches? - A. Yes.

Just as a matter of interest, you obviously came a
different route from Wellingborough than a lot of
people did from Liverpool, what time did you leave, can
you remember? - A. I think it was about half-past-10.
                                                                    71
                                                        T. A. COOPER

    0. What time did you get to Sheffield, about? - A. 1.30.

    0. Was the coach stopped anywhere? - A. No.

U | Q. So you weren't stopped by the Police and searched or
  1    anything like that? - A. Not that I can remember, no.

    0. Did you have a ticket? - A. Yes.

    Q. Was it a terrace ticket? - A. Yes.

    0. Having arrived in Sheffield did you go straight to the
       ground, or what did you do? - A. Yes.

    Q. You did? - A. Yes.

    0. So what tine did you arrive at Leppings Lane? - A. To go
       into the ground, about 1.50.

    0. Did you go straight in? - A. Yes.

    0. At 1.50 most people have told us it was pretty        easy
       getting in? - A. Yes.

    Q. You would agree with that? - A. Yes.

    0. Were you searcned on your way in, as     amatter of
       interest? - \. :.'o.

    0.   Were you searched inside? - A. No.

    0.    Were you by yourself or were you with a group? -A.No,     I
         was with a -.roup.

    0. How :nany were there in your group, about? - A. About four
       or five.

    0. Having got in, vnat time did you say you got in, 1.50? -
       A. Yes, we were in the ground about two o clock.

   0. Where did vou go? - A. As we went through the tunnel we
      went to the right so we were positioned directly behind
      the goal.

   0.    Was that wnere you were hoping to be? - A. Yes.

   0.     I take it at two o'clock - I am not saying it was empty,
         but you had plenty of room? - A. Yes, there was space for
         you to choose where to go.

   0. What happened then?   Tell me how things progressed as
      far as you were concerned.   Did you stay in that pen, by
      the way? - A. Yes.   Well, not throughout the course of
      three quarters of an hour, no.   At two o'clock it wasn't
                                                                        72
                                                               T. A. COOPER

                too bad then     The atmosphere was building up.    As
                people were coming in you were being pushed slightly,
                which is to be expected.     It was about quarter
                past/twenty past when it was getting too bad.     There
    jj I        were twenty or so people coming through the tunnel.     You
                were getting pushed to the front and you were finding it
                hard to get back to the middle where you were positioned
                at first,    After a few pushes we were getting a bit
                tired of wha t was going on.    We wanted to be able to
                stand somewh ere and stand there all the time.    About
                twenty past two we decided to move to the right, in the
                same pen jus t to the right a bit, because we could see
                there was a lot more space there and no pushing going on.

                We moved there.     We stood there for ten or fifteen
                minutes, talking   and trying to watch the game...

           0.    Watch the game?   It hadn't started. - A. Well, not watch
                the game but the players coming on.    Then gradually it
                was doing the same there.    That was filling and then it
                was getting to the stage where it was happening again and
                people who were coming in through the middle were trying
D(              to push to the right again, so that was filling up.   We
                were getting pushed again, so we looked to the right and
                there was a fence and another pen, which was just
                completely empty at the front and towards the middle.    We
                jumped over the fence and got into the next pen where we
                stayed for the rest of the time.

           0. Would I be right in saying that if we take the twenty
              past two situation, at that point you were more or less
              directly behind the goal? - A. Yes.

           Q. Which from your point of view would have been the ideal
              location? - A. Yes.

           0. It sounds to me as if you were being subjected to surging
              movements - pushes - by people coming in in groups,
              thirty I think you said.   Smallish groups, but groups. -
              A. Yes.

           Q. It sounded to me as if in fact this was a localised thing
              where you were standing, and that over towards the right
              you could see this wasn t happening, is that right? - A.
              Yes.

           0. I have correctly understood what you are saying? - A.
              Yes.

           Q. That is why you moved to the right?   To get away from
              what you considered was discomfort? - A. Yes.




H
                                                                     73
                                                           T. A. COOPER

    Q.    Then after about fifteen minutes or so, having moved to
         the right, the same sort of thing began to happen? - A.
         Yes.

    Q. You in fact moved even further to the right? - A. Yes,
B      into another pen.

    0. From there onward, of course,       you were OK,   it didn't seem
       to happen there? - A. No.

    0.   I don't want to go into too much detail about pen 2, but
         where did you take your position in pen 2?   Near the
         front, or the back or in the middle? - A. Round the
         middle.

    0.   How far over towards the corner did you take up your
         position?   Did  you stay as near as possible to pen 3, or
         did you move fairly well into the pen, having said you
         were going to be comfortable? - A.Is this    to start with?

    0. In pen 2 I am talking about. - A. It was to the bottom
       corner.

    Q.   So you were now   standing near the corner post? - A. Yes.

    0.   Did you see the   match at all? - A. Yes.

    0. There was no reason why you shouldn't have done, but I
       take it you saw the players come out? - A. Yes.

    Q.   You saw the kick-off? - A. Yes.

    0.    Did you see Beardsley hit the crossbar?  Can you
         remember that? - A. I can't remember, but...

    Q.    You probably did see it but you don't remember it any
         more.     Do you remember the match stopping at all? - A.
         Yes, we did.     When I said I was at the corner, I didn't
         mean the corner of the goalpost.      What I meant was, as I
         got over into the new pen, I was in the corner that side
         of the fence.

    0. So are you saying in the corner between pen 3 and pen 2?
       - A. Yes.

    0. I had misunderstood you.   I beg your pardon.          Did you
       look into pen 3 at all? - A. Yes.

    0. What did you see? - A. Well, allthe time   there was
       pushing going on.   People were standing and being pushed
       to the front and finding it hard to get back to where
       they were standing.  One of my friends was in there.    He
       was trying to get over into our pen.  We were trying to
       tell him to come over but obviously he was finding it
                                                                      74
                                                       T. A. COOPER

         hard to try and progress from the middle to where he
         wanted to go.

    Q. Did he make it in the end? - A. Yes.
B   Q. Did he make it before or after kick-off? - A. Yes,       it was
       before kick-off, about ten minutes before.

    0. Did you see the gate in your pen, pen 2, open at any
       point? - A. Yes, I did.

    0. Tell me when you saw that? - A. It was being opened I
       can't remember how many times.    People were trying to
       tell the stewards, or whoever was on the touchline,
       trying to tell them what was going on in the opposite
       pen, and were trying to get out towards kick-off time.
       This was about five to three.   That was when it was
       being opened.   It was opened continually.    For a little
       while the Police were coming up and continually closing
       it.

    Q. Did you see people come into your pen from the pitch
       side? - A. No.

    0. You didn't see that? - A. No.

    0. Did you see people walk past you, going towards gate 2
       and gate 1, which was even further along, at any point? -
       A. Yes, I did.

    0. When did you see that? - A. When you say through my gate,
       about three o'clock time, just as the game was being
       abandoned and people started realising what was going on.
       There were Police coming in through our gate going over
       to the middle.

    0.   Be careful about timing because the game actually started
         at three.    It wasn't abandoned at three.  Are you
         saying that as the game was being abandoned  you saw
         Police coming into your pen? - A. Yes.

    0.   What Iam trying to find out is whether you saw
         supporters come into your pen through that little gate at
         any point? - A. No.

    Q. You didn't see that? - A. No.

    Q. Did you see either supporters or Police Officers standing
       on the railing fences?    Not opposite your pen, but
       opposite the one next to you, number 3? - A. Yes, I did.

    Q.    Can you remember when you first noticed that or are   you
         not able to say? - A. No, I can't say.
                                                                 75
                                                      T. A. COOPER

    0 . On our little plan I want you to show us three positions.
        I want you to show me where you were at about twenty
        past, when you got fed-up;  then where you raoved to
        within pen 3 and then where you took up your final
        position in pen 2 where you stayed. - A. Yes, OK.    (The
B       witness marked the plan).

             MR. BEECHEYi   That will be C.468.

                      Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

    o.   I am interested, Mr. Cooper, in the method by which you
         got to pen 2.   You climbed over the fence? - A. Yes.

    Q. Why did you use that method? - A. Well, because we_didn't
       see...   I think the entrance was at the top, was it?

    Q. I don't know.   I mustn't put words in your mouth.   You
       tell me why you climbed over the fence? - A. Because for
       our own safety that was the quickest way of getting into
       the next pen.

    o. Did you know about any other way of getting in on the
       day? - A. No.

    Q. Your friend, how did he get into pen 2? - A. The same
       way.   He was lifted over.

    o. He was lifted over the fence? - A. Yes.

    0. You say he had some difficulty getting to that position
       to be able to get over the fence? - A. Yes.  Well, there
       was a group of five of us.  Four of us decided to move to
       the right and he didn't come with us.   He stayed in my
       first position.   Obviously when we decided to go into
       the next pen he was still in the first position.

    0. What was the difficulty he was in?   What was preventing
       him getting even to the fence? - A. Well, crowd
       congestion.   As he tried to move he was being pushed
       forward all the time.   As he tried to make progress he
       was being pushed back.

    Q- Clearly he himself didn't try to get to the back to get
       out that way? - A. No.

    o. What time was it, roughly, in relation to the players
       coming out on the pitch, when you clambered over the
       fence into pen 2?   Was it before or after the players
       came on to the pitch? - A. I cannot remember if the
       players were on the pitch when we actually did go over
       the fence, but it was around half past two.
                                                              76
                                                    T. A. COOPER

Q. You think it was about half past two when you clambered
   over the fence? - A. Yes.

0. How long was it after that that your friend, after the
   difficulty you have described, got to the fence and was
   lifted over? - A. About quarter to three.

Q. You say the difficulty he was in was crowd congestion? -
   A. Yes.

Q. You would be in pen 3 originally? - A. Yes.

0. Your friend would be in pen 3 originally? - A. Yes.

                 Cross-Examined by MRS. MC3RIEN:

0. Mr. Cooper, are you saying you were in difficulties at
   2.30, is that why you moved? - A. Yes.

0. Are you quite sure about the time? - A. I couldn't say
   2.30 dead on, but it was around 2.25 to 2.35, all in that
   sort of ten minute period.   There was just constant
   pushing.  We had to get out for our own safety.

0. Did you have a watch on? - A. No.

0.   So you weren't able to check the time at all? - A. No.

Q.   You just thought it could be   that time? - A. Yes.

                Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN;

Q.    You have shown on the plan where you were standing in pen
     2. Did you stay around that area approximately? - A.
     Yes.

0. Could you look at a photograph, please?  Perhaps before
   you do that could you say what you were wearing?   Do you
   remember?   Were you wearing the Liverpool Candy shirt? -
   A. No.

Q. You can't remember after this length of time? - A. No.

0. Would you like to look at a photograph, C.360?   You will
   see in that photograph that we can see the part of the
   area where you have marked on the plan where you were
   standing.  Would you like to look at it and see if you
   can see yourself? - A. No, I can't.

0. Does the scene depicted there ring a bell with you?   You
   will see in the foreground of the picture, we can see the
   gate of pen 2 is open.   There are Policemen on the
   perimeter track and they appear to be shepherding people
   along. - A. No.
                                                                77
                                                       T. A. COOPER

    Q. You don't remember that? - A. No.

    0. The timing of the photograph, just to clarify things, is
       two minutes past three.   It says a minute difference on
U |    the photograph but it is two minutes past three.   That
       is certainly taken at a time when it would seem that you
       were somewhere around the right hand corner of pen 2. Do
       you agree? - A. Yes.

    Q. But you don't remember that scene? - A. No, I don't.

            MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, it is a bit of a long shot, but
       it is the next frame in the film.

                      Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

    0. Perhaps for speed I can hand up this photograph.   This
       person is in the photograph shown.   He is just looking
       in a different direction. - A. No.

    Q. No? - A. No.
            THE CORONER:    Mr. Russell, what I think we will do,
       I will adjourn for about five minutes and then I will let
       you come back.    In the meantime this young man can have
       another good look at the photograph.    I think there is
       somebody there who looks like you but it may not be you.
       I am very bad at recognising people so do not be guided
       by my judgment.

             Can we just rise for a few minutes and we will come
       back.    In the meantime we will show him some of the
       better quality photographs.   These are duplicated ones
       but we have got better quality ones.

                           (Short adjournment)
                                                            78

                                                 %. A. COOPER


Q. C.463 is now on the screen.    Has C.463 been shown to
   you? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you have been able to find yourself on that
   photograph? - A. Yes.

Q. Could you please point out, with the assistance of
   Sergeant Griffiths, so that one knows where you are
   and so that the Jury can see? - A. Yes.

        THE CORONER:   Let us give that another C number.

        MR. GRIFFITHS:  We need another C number as it
   is the same photograph, sir.

        THE CORONER:   It is a photograph we have already
   exhibited.

        MR. GRIFFITHS:   This was marked and signed by
   Mr. Doyle this morning.

        THE CORONER:  Let us give it another number
   otherwise we will get ourselves confused.

        MR. KING:  Sir, could I suggest my usual method
   of adding an A to it?

        THE   CORONER: Yes, an excellent idea.

        MR.   BEECHEY: That is C.463A.

        MR. RUSSELL: It is a photograph that Mr.   Doyle
   is on about one stanchion width to the left.

        THE CORONER:   I am sorry, I could not hear you,
   Mr. Russell.

        MR. RUSSELL:  This is the photograph that Mr.
   Doyle found himself on, one stanchion width to the
   left towards Gate 2.

        THE CORONER: Did you want to ask him anything
   further, Miss Addleman, about the photograph because
   you started the hunt?

        MISS ADDLEMAN:  Sir, I think not at the moment.
   Thank you very much for the opportunity though.

                    Further bv THE CORONER

Q. The Jury have asked me to ask you a couple of
   questions.  They want to know what you could see when
   you were looking into Pen 3 from Pen 2.  The Jury
would like to know that. - A. Around the three
o'clock time?

Yes. - A. People were either trying to go to the back
or coming to, trying to get to the fence where I was
standing, and being pushed over, helped over the
fence to safety.

Did you hear anything? - A. Lots of screaming, yes.
Everybody was shouting to the Police to obviously
help and the stewards.  That was it.

That was it? - A. Yes.

What was the earliest time that you remember seeing
that happening to any extent? You climbed over at
half past? - A. Yes.

So you might say that that was the earliest but when
did it begin to become more — when did you notice
that things were really acute? - A. About quarter to,
ten to three.  That was when everybody was trying —
not so many people were trying to get over but there
was ten or twenty people at a time trying.

Coming over at the back? - A. Yes.

            Cross-Examined bv MR. CATCHPOLE

Mr. Cooper, you have twice mentioned that you shouted
to Stewards.  Do you think there were stewards
because they were wearing yellow bibs or jackets? -
A. Yes.

I think if you look behind you at the photograph on
the screen you will see the gentlemen who are wearing
yellow coloured bibs are, in fact, photographers.       I
can tell you, and you can take it from me, that there
w e r e n 1t any stewards in front of those perimeter
fences.       So is it possible that your recollection is
that you were actually shouting to people who you
thought were stewards but who were, in fact,
photographers? - A. Yes.

                 Further bv THE CORONER

The next question which I want to ask you is this;
what was the Police reaction to pleas for help from
the fans that you noticed and not what people have
told you or what you have read about in the paper but
what you noticed at the time? -A. I think at first
when they weren't totally aware of what was going on,
it was a bit of neglect.  They weren't willing to
come in and help us and we knew what was going on.
                                              T, A. COOPER


It took them a few minutes to realise and see for
themselves what was going on but when they did, they
did co-operate, and did as best they could.

What you are saying is that there appeared to be a
little....  - A. Hesitancy.

A little delay? - A. Yes.

But once it had clicked, so to speak, they did what
they could so far as you could see? - A. Yes.

Two more questions from me now and then we have
virtually finished.  I know what you have told me
about hearing people screaming.  When did you first
realise that this was something quite exceptional?
It is a difficulty question and if you cannot answer
it please say? - A. It is not something you do
realise.  I do not think I did realise until it had
happened, until people were getting over and were
injured, and you see for yourself.  I don't know and
I couldn't exactly say.

One final question which is to do with the radial
fence;  Mr. King quite correctly asked you about how
you got over and you said you climbed.  You, in fact,
referred almost obliquely in your answer to the fact
that you put it as a question, weren't the entrances
at the back, or something like that? - A. Yes.

What I want to find out is, is that where you
expected the gates to be? - A. No, I would expect
them to be at the front and back obviously and so,
yes, I would say I would expect them to be there but
why we actually went over there was because that was
probably the quickest way of going over.

At the time did you know that there were gates at the
back or was there just an assumption that there would
be gates somewhere? - A. It was an assumption, yes.

Have you ever been on a terracing with radial fences
before, not Hillsborough but anywhere? - A. With
fences going into different pens?

Yes. - A. Yes.

Where was that, can you remember? - A. I think, no,
it wasn't Millwall.  Not on a big game, not a
Liverpool game.

I am not asking about how big the crowd was.  What I
am trying to find out is whether you had experience
                                                    t   -   A. COOPER


     of terraces with what we call radial fences? - A.
     Y e s , ok a y .

Q. You have? - A. Yes, West Ham.      I have been to West
   Ham.

Q. Did you realise there was a means of communication at
   the West Ham  ground? - A. Yes.

Q. That is what    you based your deduction on that there
   probably was    one? - A. Yes.

          THE CORONER:  Mr. King, did you want to ask        any
     questions arising out of that?

               Further Cross-Examined bv MR. KING

Q. Mr. Cooper, the position was that you yourself did
   not know whether you were within what I would call a
   totally self-contained pen with no means of exit, no
   gate, or whether there was a gate? You just did not
   know that was the position? - A. No, we did not know.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Mr. Cooper, thank you very much
     indeed for your help.  We appreciate it. - A. Thank
     you.

                       ALBERT ATKIN Sworn

                         Bv THE CORONER

Q. You are Albert Atkin? - A. Yes.

Q-                     t - A. Yes,

Q. In Liverpool? - A. Yes.

Q.   You came to the match on 15th   April 1989? - A. Yes.

Q.   By car Ibelieve? - A. Yes.

Q.   In fact there were three cars because there was a big
     group of you, about fifteen in number? - A. Yes.

Q. One of them was your friend Peter McDonnell? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Others may have been friends as well but Peter
   McDonnell was certainly one of them.  Tell me, did
   you all have tickets for this match? - A. Yes.

Q. What time did you arrive? - A. We got into Sheffield
   for about eleven o'clock.
                                           A. ATKIN

11 am was that? - A. Yes.

What time did you get to the ground? - A. Outside the
ground?

Yes. - A. About quarter to three.

So you spent about two and three quarter hours
somewhere in Sheffield? - A. Yes.

What did you do? Did you walk around, go     to the   pub?
- A. We went into two pubs.

All 15 of you? - A. Yes.

Approximately how many pints would you say you had
each? - A. About three or four.

In the two pubs together or in each? - A. We had one
in a pub in the town centre and we had about another
three in another pub by the ground.

So three or four altogether? - A. Yes.

Do you remember by chance the name of these pubs?  I
am just interested in these names.  If you do not
know then it does not matter. -A. It was on a hill
but I cannot remember the name of it.

I take it they were fairly full? - A. Yes.

When you left the pub, the last one, that was the one
on the hill, was it? - A. Yes.

You walked down to the ground and you told me you had
got to Leppings Lane at 14.45, about quarter to
three.  The group I think split up, did it not? - A.
Yes.

You were left with I think four friends, was it
not? - A. Yes.

Anthony Gill, Anthony Vannecker, Carl Haigh and Peter
McDonnell? - A. Yes.

At the time you arrived there was a huge mass of
people, is that right? - A. Yes.

We do not need to go into all the details because we
have heard a lot of what was going on outside but you
first of all came up against the perimeter gates, is
that right? - A. Yes.
                                           A. ATKIN


I just want to establish that.  At the time when you
came up to them they were shut, is that correct? - A.
Yes, correct.

Were you squashed against those perimeter gates? - A.
No, there were more people in front of us and we were
just crushed up.

Pardon? - A. There were people in front of us and we
were crushed up behind them.

What I am asking is, was there a crush outside those
outer perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

You thought, in fact, it was quite severe, did you
not? - A. Yes.

How severe would you put it? - A. You just could not
move and you found it hard to breathe.

You found it hard to breathe? - A. Yes.

That was outside the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

Eventually you got through them? - A. Yes.

Let us not worry about exactly how that happened.
You then got into the area between the perimeter
gates and the turnstile area, that is right, is it
not? - A. Yes.

What was the position like in there by the time you
got in? - A. It was just the same.

It was the same? - A. Yes.

Were you still impeded with your breathing? - A. Yes.

I think you actually saw people.  Did you see a
Police Officer up at the top of the turnstiles
pulling people out? - A. Yes.

You saw that, did you? - A. Yes.

Did you see any gates open? - A. No,   I didn't   see any
gates open.

You saw no gates open? - A. No.

How did you get in? - A. There was a Police Officer
at the gates and he was just letting so many through.
So many were just getting through the gate.   There
was only a little gap open.
                                                  A. ATKIN    v


Q. That is the perimeter gate you are talking about now?
   - A. Yes.

Q. What I meant was that once you had got through that
   area how did you get into the ground? - A. We ended
   up getting back out of that perimeter fencing.

Q. You did not like it within the turnstile? - A. We
   climbed up where the Police Officer was pulling
   people up on to the turnstiles.  We got over into the
   stand, West Stand.

Q. So just let us get this right.   You were at the
   perimeter gates and you were squashed.   You got
   through the perimeter gates.   You did not like it.
   You came back out? - A. No, we climbed over.

Q.   Climbed over the wall, did you? - A. Yes.

Q.   Just look at the model and we will just make sure
     what you did.  Just walk up to it if it is easier for
     you.  Can you stand to one side? - A. We came in
     through there (indicating) into this area and we were
     getting over that to there (indicating).

Q.   So you climbed over that wall? -   A. Yes.

Q.   Separating turnstiles 1 to 16? -   A. Yes.

Q.   That big bank of turnstiles? - A.Yes.

Q.   All five of you? - A. Yes.

Q. You   dropped down the other side? - A. Yes.

Q. Was it any easier at that side? - A. There was more
   of a crush.

Q. Pardon? - A. There was a crush in there as well.      It
   w a s n 1t as bad as in the other.

Q. You   do not know what time that was, do you? - A.   No.

Q. Having got into that other area how did you then
   eventually get into the ground? - A. We got in
   through the turnstiles.

Q. You managed to get in through the turnstiles and they
   took your ticket, or did they not? - A. They just let
   us jump in because we could not get back out.

Q. You got into the concourse area behind those
   turnstiles? - A. Yes.
                                            A. ATKIN


Having got in there, what happened next? - A. We
tried to get up the stairs into the stand.

Into the stand? - A. Yes.

Sergeant Griffiths, can you just point at the
stairwell? (indicating on m o d e l ) Is that the
staircase you were trying to get up? - A. Yes.

I take it that you actually had terracing tickets? -
A. Yes.

What happened? Did you succeed? - A. The Police were
stopping people at random checking their tickets and
they stopped us, and saw we had ground tickets.

Pardon? - A. They stopped us and saw we had tickets
for the terracing and told us to wait and they would
get someone to take us through a gate into the other
side into the terracing.

Peter McDonnell   had managed to get out? - A. Yes,    he
had walked past   the Police Officer and he never
checked his ticket.

I cannot hear you? - A. They never checked Peter's
tickets.

He was up in the stands? - A.   He was on the stairs.

You were being   stopped by the Police Officers? - A.
Yes.

Do you know if the match had kicked off by then?  I
know you would not have seen it because you were on
the wrong side but did you hear any roars or     anything
or did you look   at your watch? - A. No, I do   not
think the match had kicked off.

You do not? - A. No.

When the Policeman stopped you and said, "Sorry you
cannot come up here", what did you then do? - A. We
waited for a few more people to come in and then we
walked up with them and walked up.

Carry on.  Did    you succeed in doing that? - A. Yes,
we walked past and got up into the stands.

I am sorry I could not hear you? - A. We walked past
and got up the stairs into the stand.

Was Peter McDonnell still ahead of you on the stairs
at that point? - A. Peter McDonnell had come back
                                               A. ATKIN

when the Police had stopped us and a Police Officer
went up after him to check his ticket, I think, I am
not sure.  That is the last time I saw him.

You then went up into the stands, did you? - A. Yes.

As soon as you got into the stand, what was on the
pitch? - A. The match had started.

How far into the match had it gone? - A. I saw when
Peter Beardsley hit the bar for Liverpool.

You saw that? - A. Yes.

Were you up there for any length of time or was that
about the time you got up? - A. I must have been up
there for about two or three minutes.

How many minutes before that had you last seen Peter
McDonnell? - A. I am not too sure.

Pardon? - A. I   am not too sure about that.

Have a look at this page of your statement (handed to
the witness)? You do not have to read the lot, just
the little bit and tell me when you have read it
whether that is correct or not? - A. Yes.

Would you say that is right? - A. Yes.

I will read it to you so that everybody can hear it.
What you said in your statement was:

    "Eventually myself and Anthony Gill managed
    to get up into the West Stand seating area."

That is more or less what you have just told    me:

    "Just as we got up into the rear of the West
    Stand I remember Peter Beardsley hitting the
    crossbar."

You actually saw that with your own eyes, did you? -
A. Yes.

You go on to say:

   "The last time I saw Peter McDonnell was
   about three minutes before Beardsley hit the
   crossbar as me and Anthony had gone towards
   the stairway to try and get in the first
   t im e."

Is that right? - A. Yes.
                                          A. ATKIN



You can remember him walking up.  So he was actually
ahead of you and then he came back when he saw that
you were stopped, is that right? - A. Yes.




                /Q. You then got through but you.
                                                          88


                                          A. ATKIN



Q. You then got through but you lost sight of him, you don't
   know what happened to him.  Is that in fact what you are
   telling me? - A. Peter had come back down to see why we
   weren't getting in and the Police Officer must have asked
   to see his ticket so Peter turned round to walk back up
   and the Police Officer walked up behind him.

Q. That is when you lost sight of him? - A. That was the
   last time I saw him.

Q. And then another crowd of people had come in and you
   managed to get out? ~ A. Yes, we walked back then.

Q. You then were watching, Peter Beardsley hit the cross bar.
   The match stopped almost immediately after that.  Is
   that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you then see people on the pitch? - A. Yes.

Q. What was your first impression when you noticed people?
   - A. I thought it was like a pitch invasion.

Q. That is what it looked like to you from up there? - A.
   Yes.

Q. When did you begin to realise that this was not what you
   thought it was? - A. When people were lying in the goal­
   mouth area getting resuscitated.

Q. And then you realised that this was something exceptional?
   - A. Yes.

Q. And it would be right to say that you in fact saw nothing
   of what was going on on the terracing as such? - A. No,
   I did not see anything.

Q. Is that because you could not see the terracing or because
   you did not look at them? - A. I could not see because
   we were right at the very back of the Stand.

Q.   Were you standing or sitting? - A.    We were sitting on
     like a barrier at the very back of   the Stand.

Q.    Am Iright in thinking that if you  were sitting in that
     position you could not actually see the terracing? -
     A. No.

Q. You could see the pitch of course? - A. I could see the
   pitch, yes.

Q. But the overhang was such ....  Could you see the fencing
   on the terracing? - A. You could see the fencing, yes.
                                       A. ATKIN



How much of it, top, all of it? - A. I could see the top
of it.

      THE CORONER:  Show us on a plan where you were as
near as you can on the Stand.  Okay.

      MR. BEACHEY:     C469 sir.

      THE CORONER:     Mr. Payne?


              Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

You and your 15 friends arrived at the ground at about
a quarter-to-3. Is that right? - A. Yes.

Are you a regular football supporter? - A. Yes.

What time do you usually arrive at the match? - A. Usually
about the same time.

Is that normal for you and your friends to arrive? - A. Yes.

When you arrived there was a big mass of people outside.
Is that a normal experience for you? - A. No.

Can you offer any help as to how it was that so many
people were arriving at that time? - A. No, not really.


               Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

Did you regard yourself as late? - A.      No.

Do you go to many     football matches? - A. Yes.

Some football matches you have to pay money to get in,
don't you, you have to pay? - A. Not at Anfield you don't.

You don't have to pay at Anfield? - A. You have to
have tickets in advance to get in.

So be it, but some games you have to pay at the turnstiles?
- A. Not many, most Liverpool games are all ticket.

At the all ticket   games, of which you obviously have a lot
of experience, do   you normally arrive at the sort of time
you have told us? - A. Yes.

      MR. KING:     Thank you.


             Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Mr. Atkin, you said you had a terrace ticket didn't you?
- A. Yes.
                                                             90

                                         A. ATKIN



Q. But you managed to go into the Stand? - A. Yes.

Q. Have you ever been able to do that at any other match?
   - A. No.

         MRS. McBRIEN:    Thank you.

         MR. CATCHPOLE:     Can I just follow up?

         THE CORONER:     Yes.


               Cross-Examined bv MR. CATCHPOLE:

Q. You had a terrace ticket? - A. Yes.

Q. And I think your evidence is you were stopped by a
   Police Officer and told not to go up there? - A. Yes.

Q. And despite that, him telling you to do that, you waited
   for the opportunity to get up into the Stand? - A. Yes.

         MR. CATCHPOLE:     Thank you.

         MRS. McBRIEN:     Sorry, could I just come back again?

         THE CORONER:  No.  Perhaps I had better not say
   "no" so decidedly.  Tell me what your question is,
   Mrs. McBrien.  Put your question to me, don't put it to
   the witness and I will decide whether you can come back.

          MRS. McBRIEN: When the witness got up into the
   Stand I just wondered if any Officer approached him up
   there as he was not sitting in a seat, he was sitting on
   a barrier, to check if he had a ticket.  I was going to
   ask him was he checked when he got up into the Stand
   area ?
          THE CORONER:  I don't think it is terribly relevant
    actually to the issues but I will.

Q. Were you rechecked upstairs in any way? - A. No.

          MRS. McBRIEN:     Thank you.

          THE CORONER:  Mr. Atkin, thank you very much
    indeed.  That is very helpful.  Are the McDonalds here
    by any chance? No.
          MR. KING:  Sir, I am sure I can say on their behalf
    they are grateful for you having called the witness because
    I know that he was called at their request.
                                         S.A. TRACEY



       THE CORONER:  As you know if the family are here
 I like to acknowledge them, so to speak, but that is
 fine.

       MR. KING:  Sir, I might say, it might be one would
 need to look at the summary again just to make sure
 what is in there fits in now with the evidence that we
 have heard.  There are one or two matters I can see which
 are factually slightly inaccurate.  It is not essential
 that I draw your attention to it this very second sir.

       THE CORONER:  My view is, I must confess I have not
 studied the summary ....

       MR. PAYNE:     Sorry, what summary is that?

       THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, this is from the interim
 Inquests   the way we dealt with    not how but where, when
 and who,  but of course we. were    if you likereciting some
 of the evidence.

       I will have a look at it but on the whole my feeling
 is, if I  can just say that, if    amendments, alterations
 are made to the facts as recounted in the summary, I don t
 think there is then any need to alter them formally in the
 documentation because we have got the whole evidence.

       MR. KING:  I am sure that is right sir.  Just so
 that my learned friend understands, the relatives receive
 a copy of the summary.  It is often a very important docu­
 ment to them because it is easy reference and they read
 things in there which concern them and when they hear
 evidence slightly different they are always anxious that
 the summary be rectified, but sir it does not have to
 be done formally through the calling of evidence to the
 witness box.

        THE CORONER:  When     we rise let me just say a word
 about these summaries to      you because you have raised the
 point.   We don't need to     detain everybody.

       MR. KING:     It does   not affect this part of the
 Inquest.

       THE CORONER:     That is right.


                    SHANE ANDREW TRACEY Sworn

                         Bv THE CORONER:

. Now you are Shane Andrew Tracey I believe.      Is that right?
  - A. That is right, yes.
                                     S.A. TRACEY


Is it                             ]ln Bedfordshire.     Is
that right? - A. That is   right, yes.

You too are a Liverpool supporter.   Right? - A. I am not
now.

Well never mind that we won't go into that but you were
at the time? - A. Yes, I was at the time, yes.

You came to watch the match on the 15th of April 1989?
- A. Yes, I did.

Did you come in 1988? - A. No, I didn't.

And you came by train? - A. Yes, that is right, yes.

And you came to Sheffield Central Station at about 12.45
I think.  Is that right? - A. Yes, that is right.

And took the bus, which was a supporters' bus was it? -
A. Yes.

It took you to   the ground and you arrived at about    1.15.
Is that right?   - A. Yes, that is right, yes.

Did you then go straight in or did you stay outside? -
A. No, we were  trying to find tickets.

Ah, you didn't   have a ticket? - A. No.

How many were there of you? -   A. Just me and         my mate.

Did anybody ask you whether you had tickets at the
Railway Station? - A. No, they didn't.

You got to the ground, the first thing to do was to find
one, as you say? - A. Yes.

In fact how long did   you spend looking for one? - A. I
would say about 4 5 minutes.

Whilst you were looking for tickets there were others
doing the same? - A. Yes, that is right.

What opinion did you form as to the numbers who were
looking for tickets, very roughly? - A. Roughly about
half the people who were outside the ground.

Sorry? - A. About half the people walking towards the
ground.

So you thought there was a huge number of people? - A.
Yes.
                                                            93

                                           S.A. TRACEY



Q. Did you see any Police activity with regard to these fans
   or indeed yourself? - A. They were asking a few people
   but not many.

Q.   What were they asking? - A. If they had a ticket or   not.

Q.    And what were they telling the people as far   as you could
     make out? - A. Pardon?

Q.    What  were the Police telling these people    whom they were
     asking? - A. They said if you did not have a ticket to
     move away from the ground.

Q. Did you hear that with your own ears? - A. Yes, I did yes.

Q. Was this near the ground or away from the ground? - A.
   It was near the ground.

Q.   As a matter of interest did anybody approach    you? - A.No,
     they didn't.

Q.   They didn't as it happens? - A. No, no.

Q.   Well is that right? Can you think back.   You were with
     a friend called Martin.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. And weren't you with a group of about 12 other people
   who did not have tickets.  Can you remember that? - A.
   No.

Q. Have a look at this little bit that I have highlighted
   in yellow and see what you make of that.  Read it through
   to yourself first and then tell me whether it is right?
   - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. Do you say that is right? - A. Yes.

Q. That is from your statement which you made on the
   30th May 1989? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. And you stand by that do you? - A. Yes.

Q. So if I read it to you now you will be able to confirm
   that for me will you? - A. Yes.

Q. I will start reading from where I think you started which
   is:

           "There was a Policeman on the gate leading to
           the turnstiles and he was regulating the
           flow of people going into the area immediately
           in front of the turnstiles."

     Did you read that? - A. Yes.
                                                             94


                                           S.A. TRACEY



Q. It continues:

          "There were also several Policemen in
          Leppings Lane area asking people whether
          they had tickets.  They were instructing
          all people without tickets to keep away
          from the ground.

           Martin, myself and about 12 other ticketless
           supporters were approached by a Policeman
           who questioned us about tickets and then
           told us to keep away from the ground."

     Is that right? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. And then you go on to say:  "I did not notice at this ^
   time whether there were any Stewards at the turnstiles
   but that is another subject, so is it right then that
   you were actually approached by an Officer who said:
   "Have you got a ticket and if you haven't keep away ?
   - A. Well I was not myself.

Q.    But the group in which you were? - A. Yes, but I was   not
     with those 12 other people you see.

Q. I see. - A. We were walking together but I did not know
   them at all.

Q. No, I am not saying were they your friends, but that was
   an incident which you yourself realised had happened?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Did you or they in fact move away from the ground? ~
   A. No, we didn't.

Q.   Is that because you had come a long way and were hoping
     to find a ticket? - A.  Yes, that is right.

Q. I am not saying that you were going to get in without
   but you were hoping to find one? - A. Hoping to find one,
   yes.




                          Q. Was that the impression
                                            S. A. TRACEY


Was that the impression that you got from the other
fans who were being approached, that they stayed as
well? - A. yes, that's right.

How often have you been to grounds without tickets,
where you need to get them like you did on this
occasion? - A. I have been to about three matches
before that I have needed tickets which I have not had
on the day.

Where you have had to look for them? - A. Yes.

Have you been successful on the other three occasions?
- A. Yes, I have.

From your experience then was the sort of approach
which you were getting what you had had before at other
matches? - A. No.

In what way was it different? - A. It was a lot bigger
this time; a lot more people wanted the tickets.

So there were more people looking for tickets, you are
saying? - A. Yes, that is right.

What I was meaning was, at other matches had you also
been approached and said, "If you haven't got a ticket
clear off", or words to that effect? - A. No, we
hadn't.

That had not happened? - A. No.

I think we have explored that enough for the time
being.   Eventually you did manage to get one, I think?
- A . No, we didn't.

Didn't you? - A. No.

So what happened? - A. It was around about 5-past-2, we
went and had another cup of tea in a cafe up the road
and after we came out of there we tried walking round
to the Nottingham Forest away end, trying to see if we
could get a ticket for their stand so we could get to
see the game, but we didn't find any there either, so
then we walked back again and tried again outside the
ground.

What happened then? - A. We did not have any luck at
all.

Were there still a lot of people milling around at that
point looking for tickets, or had the numbers reduced?
- A . No, if anything they were getting bigger.
                                            S. A. TRACEY


Where were you? Were you near a little bridge?   Can
you remember that? Were you right near the entrance or
were you at a distance? - A. We were right near the
entrance.

Are you saying that the crowds were bigger in the sense
that there were more people there, or that there were
more people there who you thought did not have tickets?
- A. That I thought did not have tickets.

You did not actually know that directly, did you? - A.
No, I didn't.

Then what happened after that? What time was this by
the way, roughly? - A. It was about 20-to-3.

So by this time had you given up hope or what? - A. No,
we were still in hope of getting some but whether we
did or not was a different matter.

You have already told me you didn't get any tickets so
how did you   get into the ground? - A. When thesurge
started outside the ground, when everybody wasclumping
in ....

Sorry? - A. Everybody was outside the ground and the
numbers got larger and larger and we were stuck in the
middle, and   then as we heard the game kick off- we
heard a lot   of shouting from the ground - a big surge
went up from outside the ground and I could see people
trying to get over the walls.  As the surge came it
started to get more packed and then I could feel us
gong forward and from then on we just had to go with
the flow because there was no way of getting out.

When this happened were you still outside the perimeter
gates?  Do you know what I mean by those? - A. Yes, I
was.

And the flow through those gates you are saying? - A.
Yes.

Then did you go into a big concertina gate?   How did
you get into the ground itself, can you remember? - A.
I can't remember, not now.

But you were taken with the crowd? - A. Yes, that is
right.

You are not saying that you were off the ground? - A.
No.
                                             S. A. TRACEY


It was just that you were surrounded by other people
who were all going in one direction? - A. Yes, that is
right.

When did you realise that you were actually in the
ground, as opposed to being outside? - A. When we came
up to the tunnel.

So once you saw the tunnel you knew that you were
through so to speak? - A. Yes.

But you don't recollect how you got there? - A. Not
really no, because I could not really see.  There was a
lot of people round me.

You don't recollect which gate   youwent in or anything
like that? - A. No.

You got to the tunnel, you saw   it, right? - A. Yes.

Did you go down it? - A. Yes.

What was it like when you went   down? - A. Very packed.

Could you see what was happening on the pitch before
you set off down the tunnel? - A. No, I couldn't.

When you were going down the tunnel was it so packed
that you had to shuffle along, or were you able to walk
normally? - A. No, it was definitely a shuffle.  You
could not move your legs properly.

Was this the whole length of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Describe to me what happened then? - A. As we got
towards the end of the tunnel, once we got out of the
end of the tunnel, we felt ourselves go to the right
and there was a big surge on our backs, so you couldn't
pick whereabouts you wanted to go, you just got pushed
in one certain place.  We just kept on getting pushed
and pushed forward, and you were going into people in
front of you and still getting the surge from the back
so you couldn't move out of the way.  We just sort of
went forward.

Do you know what was happening on the playing field at
that time? - A. No, I don't.

Can you remember whether   the match had started or
whether the players were   on the pitch?  I don't mean
the detail? - A. I could   see there were a couple of
players, I could sort of   see them flash past, but that
was about it.
                                            S. A. TRACEY


Did they look to you as if they were playing at that
point? - A. I could not tell if they were playing or
not.

You had thought that the match had started earlier on,
hadn't you, from when you were outside? - A. Yes, that
is right.

Try and think back as hard as you can, as to whether or
not you can visualise what was going on, on the pitch?
- A. No.

All right, I won't press you any further on that.
Whilst you were on the terrace did you eventually come
to a stop? - A. Yes.

Where was that? - A. I can't exactly say whereabouts it
was.

Was it near a barrier or not? You know these crush
barriers they have, was it anywhere near them? - A. I
couldn't see one, no.

Did you hear or notice anything else after that? - A.
There was just a lot of shouting.

Did you know what they were saying?  Could you make out
what was being said? - A. People were asking, "Let me
out of here", shouting.

Was there still pressure being applied from the back at
that point? - A. Yes, there was.

Did you see the little gate at the front of the
perimeter fence, by chance? - A. No, I didn't.

You didn't see it? - A. No, I didn't see it.

Eventually I think you managed to get out over the
front fencing, didn't you? - A. Yes, that is right.

Do you know whether the match was still in progress
when you got out? - A. I was not looking tosee if it
was; I can't remember if it was or not.

You don't know? - A. No.

In fact, I think you then for a while stood still
because you were so shocked in a way, that is right,
isn't it? - A. That is right, yes.

Did you see the little gate in the   front after that, to
try and help people out?  Can you remember that? - A.
Yes, I did.
                                             S. A. TRACEY


You did see it from the pitch side? - A. Yes.

Can you remember anything at all about that? - A. I
could see that people were getting out of that gate at
that time, but it was only the odd person at a time
because they were so cramped up to the gate that it was
hard for people to get out.

You did your best to help those people? - A. Yes.

Can you show us on a little plan, when you were carried
in and you said you came to a stop initially, can you
show us where that was?  (The witness marked Exhibit
C470) There is one other thing, in your statement you
mentioned that you heard a loud crack? - A. That is
right.

What did you mean by that?  I didn't understand what
you were trying to say there.  Can you remember what it
is you had in mind? - A. Just sort of like a big bang
as though something had hit the floor, or snapped or
something like that.

You did not see what it was? - A. No, I didn't.

It was not anywhere near you, as far as you know,
except that you heard it? - A. No, just heard it.

You don't know when that was? How soon after you got
onto the terracing, do you know? - A. I would say about
five minutes, round about five minutes.

              Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

I just want to get some estimates from you, please.   As
you approached the ground you said that you thought
that about half the people walking towards the ground
did not have tickets? - A. Yes, that is right.

Then you did your circuit round the ground and finished
up back at the Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A. Yes.

When you thought that there were more people still who
did not have tickets? - A. Yes, that is right.

What   was there about the behaviour of the crowd that
made   you think that? - A. You could see people asking,
just   walking up and down the street asking everything
that   come along if they had had tickets or not.

When the surge came which took you into the ground,how
many were there in your particular group of friends? -
A. How many ...?
                                            S. A. TRACEY


Were you on your own? - A. No, I was with my friend
Martin.

That is just one? - A. Yes.

Did he have a ticket? - A. No, he didn't.

Can you please tell the Jury, where did the surge take
you?  From where to where, that part that you were
swept along? - A. From outside the ground to the front
of the tunnel.

Are you saying that you could not get out of the crowd
when it surged forward at that period? - A. I am not
saying that I could not get out of the crowd.  It was
just that we wanted to get into the ground to see the
game so we didn't really think about getting out of the
surge.

So you went with it? - A. Yes.

That took you into the tunnel, did it? - A. No, just
outside the tunnel.

To the entrance to the tunnel? - A. Yes.

From then on you were shuffling through with the crowd?
- A. Yes.

How far had you got before you felt the surge from the
back? - A. What, into the tunnel?

You were actually in the tunnel when you felt a surge?
- A. No, I was asking you.

We have got you as far as the tunnel with the surge,
then you are shuffling through the tunnel.  Now, how
far did you get before you felt the next surge from the
back? - A. About halfway down.




       Cross-Examined by MR. KING
                                                                       101
                                                            S. A. T RACEY

                            Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

        Q.    Mr. Tracey, you didn't have a ticket and you have told us
             that the person you were with didn't have a ticket? - A.
             No.
    B
        0. You can't say for certain whether the people who went
           with you into the crowd with the surge, did or did not
           have a ticket because no-one checked tickets? - A. I saw
           one Officer, as I have said, asking people if they had
           tickets or not.

        0.   That was   early on, wasn't it? - A. Yes.

        0.    When you actually entered the ground, you remember you
             said you found yourself going in, at that stage no-one
             was checking tickets, were they? - A. No.

        Q. You don't know how many of the people, apart from you and
           your friend, did or did not have tickets?   You don't
           know? - A. Mo, I don't.

        0. Were you aware of people holding their tickets in their
           hand?   Waving their tickets as they were going through
           in that crowd.   Did you see that? - A. No, I didn't.

        Q. You didn't see that.

                         Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

        0. Mr. Tracey, in the surge that took you into the ground up
           to the tunnel, you said at one point you couldn't really
           see because of all the people around you.   So is the
           impression you want to give to the jury is that the surge
           carrying you forward was such you had to concentrate on
           going forward, not stumbling, and just concentrate on
           going that way? - A. Yes.

        0. So it wasn't a case of being able to stop and walk out?
           What you were trying to do was keep your feet and were
           being pushed along from behind? - A. Yes, that is right.

                         Cross-Examined by MRS. HC3RIEN:

        0. Mr. Tracey, you said you went to the Nottingham Forest
           end to look for a ticket there? - A. Yes, that's right.

        0. You said you were not successful so you made your way to
           the Liverpool end? - A. Yes.

        0. To get there did you go through a big gate on Penistone
           Road that brought you along the side of the river, or did
           you use the main road area? - A. There was a road that
           was running by a little brook, it sort of run level with




H
                                                               102
                                                     S. A. TRACEY


     the ground.   That is the road we walked down and then we
     turned left and walked round to a corner where there were
     some fans standing.

Q. Are you saying you walked alongside of the river, inside
   the ground itself? - A. No, I was outside the ground when
   I was looking for the tickets.

0.    I don't mean where the turnstiles are.   I wonder if we
     could have a plan? C.274 please.    Can  you see the
     turnstiles on Penistone Road North, the Nottingham Forest
     turnstiles? - A. Yes.

0. If you make your way towards the Leppings Lane end you
   will come to a large gate. - A. No, it is where the South
   Stand is.   There is the river.  We walked up from
   Leppings Lane, turned right and followed the river down
   and then turned right on the corner.

0.        THE CORONER:    Walk up to tne bigplan and with    a
     stick take us round how you did it. - A. Down here.
     Walked round this way.

          MR. GRIFFITHS:    I think 284 might assist because
     that is a street plan.

          THE CORONER:    Yes

0. Does that help you in any way?

          MR. GRIFFITHS:   He has indicated he went from the
     turnstiles down Leppings Lane, turned left into Catch Bar
     Lane, down Parkside and turned left into Penistone Road
     towards Penistone Road North for the turnstiles for the
     Spion ICop.

          THE CORONER:   I think what you are trying to find
     out is whether they went on the internal road?

          MRS. MCBRIEN:    Yes.

          THE CORONER:   We will double check that to make
     absolutely sure.   Put the plan of the ground up again.
     Can you indicate, Sergeant Griffiths, the little roadway
     within the ground:

0. Can you see that?   Did you walk along there within      the
   confines of the ground at all? - A. Not within the
   ground.   I was outside.

          THE CORONER:    I think   that is what you are trying
     to find out?

          MRS. MCBRIEN:    Yes, thank you
     THE CORONER:   Mr. T r a c e y ? I appreciate your coming,
particularly as some of the evidence may have been
difficult for you to give but I appreciate your help.
It makes it easier for the jury to reach a decision so
thank you very much indeed.

     H o w , Members of the Jury,   you can go.

              (In the absence of the jury)

      THE CORONER:   Shall I tell you who we have planned
for tomorrow, all being well?    I will read the names,
but this is not necessarily the order:   Mr. Hicks,
Mr. Seamen, Mr. Ellis and then there are two Police
Officers, Police Sergeant Hemmingway and Police Constable
Packer, if we get to them.    We will do our best.

     With regard to   Mr. Seamen, that is the Fire Officer,
in a sense he is in   the same situation as Mr. Bullas.   I
do not intend to go over every conceivable aspect of the
Safety Certificate and so on.    What I want to deal with
are rather  more limited aspects, but I think he can give
us some useful information with regard to the
positioning, particularly of the gates in the radial
fences and  some of the rationale which went into that.

     I say  that because it is going to be a tremendous
temptation to explore the whole field of capacities and
Safety Certificates   and so on.   Obviously we want to
hear as much as we need   to but I don't want to go all
over it again.

     MR. KING:   Sir, on the list some days ago was a
Police Sergeant Higgins.   He dealt with Gate A.   I
assume he has not been forgotten and ne is coming at some
point?

     THE CORONER:   Well, there are two Higgins.   There
is an ex-Police Sergeant Higgins, who is the man who was
at the tunnel in 1988, and I definitely want to hear him.
I did have a Police Sergeant Higgins, whom I originally
listed, who was at Gate A, but although I had him on the
list and in that sense you can fault me, I have been
thinking about him and I am inclined not to call him
because I think we have heard quite a bit about Gate A
and it is perhaps peripheral.   Do you feel you would
like to hear him?

     MR. KING:    Could I say why I don't think it is
peripheral?    Gate A was tne gate where a Serial of
Police Officers did arrive.

     THE CORONER:   Well, I am quite happy to call him.
That didn't worry me tiiat much.  There was one other
aspect of his evidence which did interest me but I was
going to forego.   Bearing in mind I had him on a
published list at the back of the Court I can hardly say
he is totally irrelevant and I wouldn't wish to do that.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I have a copy of his original
statement where I am also interested in his evidence as
to what he observed as to the state of the ground.

     THE CORONER:   Can    we put him back?  I am not
saying we will have him tomorrow but we will   put him back
into the pool, so to speak.

     MR. PAYNE:   Are you are able to tell us the subject
- I am not asking for his evidence - but the subject on
which Mr. Hicks is being recalled?

     THE CORONER:    Yes, Mr. Payne.     It is really in
order to enable him to correct, if it is appropriate, an
error which I made.    When I was taking him through the
time sequences which he had given, he said that
Mr. Collins had said this was before the formal entry of
the team.   My comment was, "I don't know     what
Mr. Collins meant by the word, 'formal'".     Then
Mr. Hicks said they come on and they mess around and warm
up a bit and then they go away and they come back.       I
then said to Mr. Hicks,    "Yes, that was quite early on,
about twenty past two."

     Urten I looked at the video when Mr. Motson was here
I realised that in fact players had been on the pitch at
about twenty to three.    They may well have been there at
twenty past as well - in fact we know they were there at
an earlier time.    I felt that perhaps bearing in mind
that I might have misled him with regard to that comment,
and also because I know I have not allowed other people
to put things which I thought were in error, I didn't
think it was right that I should be allowed to get away
with it, so to speak.

     It is simply in order to go over that bit of the
evidence, make sure that what I had put to him hadn't led
him astray in his reply.   That is all.   I don't
anticipate he will take very long.

     MR. PAYNE:   Quite.   I am a little concerned that
the total effect of the evidence is not changed by
recalling the witness on one short point, because as I am
sure you will remember, it is quite important actually,
he gives evidence at the time at which he first
appreciated there was a disaster.   You will remember,
sir, that his evidence varies very substantially from one
statement to another.
     THE CORONER:   That is precisely why I feel it is
essential that if I - I must say inadvertently, because I
certainly had no intention of doing it - if I
inadvertently put something to him which may have given
him cause to give an answer which was incorrect, then I
feel I must give him the opportunity to correct that.

     We will sort it out, and we will take as long as it
needs.   I don't think it is going to take very long
because I am pretty clear in my mind as to his evidence
because after all I have had the privilege of seeing the
statements as well as reading it, so I know what he wants
to say.   I think it is only right I should give him that
opportunity.   Indeed, there will be opportunity to
cross-examine him on the point.    I am not saying I will
ask him questions but nobody else will get a say.    I
don't think you need worry.    I hope not.
In fact, it is only fair to say that this matter has
arisen entirely at my suggestion.  It has not been
put to me by Mr. King or anybody else.  It was I who
raised it because I felt that it was the right thing
to d o .

     MR. KING:  Sir, it is only fair to say it was
raised about a week ago.  I have mentioned it once or
twice in the interim saying that we were taking on
board what you were saying and certainly up to now I
have heard no objection prior to today about this.

     MR. PAYNE:  It is not that there is any
objection.  It is, however, an important point
because it may be that the Jury might in their
deliberations have to eventually to decide whether or
not they are going to rely on the evidence of that
particular witness as to timing.  What I am just keen
to achieve is that the Jury get the full picture and
not just a part of the picture because the witness is
being recalled some time later.  Provided it is put
in the context of his three statements then, of
course, I am not objecting.  I am not objecting in
the least little bit.  I am just anxious that is full
evidence should emerge and not just one part of it be
highlighted inadvertently and for the very excellent
motive of correcting a small mistake.

     THE CORONER:  Yes, I understand that and it
depends to a certain extent what his reply is because
if he says, "No, I was not misled" then that is the
end of the story.  If he says, "Yes, I was" then it
may be necessary to go into slightly more detail but
we will just have to see what he says.  I do not know
what he is going to say because I have not asked him.
We will see what happens.  Mr. Manning, you are a few
minutes late! Welcome nevertheless.

     MR. MANNING:   You are very kind, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I think that is probably it, am I
right?

     MR. KING:  I do not want to delay matters now
but you did say you were going to mention something
about the summaries at some point.

      THE CORONER:  Yes, what I wanted to say was
this;   you are correct that we did send copies of the
summaries out.   I think it is one of the things I
regret doing because it has caused us a considerable
amount of anguish.   What the purpose of sending the
summaries out — and you may not have seen these
summaries because we circulated them to the
families — was to try and prevent them being more
upset than they were going to be anyway by hearing
the evidence stone cold in Court.   It was never my
intention that those summaries which were circulated
were gospel.  What happened in many cases was that
the summaries or the detail was changed before we got
to the point of presentation because we found errors,
because we thought we could present them better,
because more evidence came to light, or whatever
reason there was.

    What I was going to say to you, Mr. King, and
this is an important point but nothing, in a sense,
to do with the Inquest, that I am anxious that the
families should realise that the only evidence which
is of any significance, certainly so far as the Jury
is concerned, is what they heard in Court.  The Jury
have not heard the summaries.  They have heard
evidence which we know in many cases was either
identical or similar or followed the pattern, if you
like, of these summaries but the only evidence that
actually matters is what was said in Court.  I am
very, very anxious that the families should not take
the view that, "Oh we have had a copy of these
summaries, that is gospel and everything else is
not".  In so far as there is any gospel — and I
would not wish to say even that — it would be what
was put before the Jury and ourselves at the interim
Inquest and at these Inquests.

      That is why I say that if, for instance, and I
have not checked the transcript against what was said
this afternoon, but even if there was a discrepancy
between what we summarised, which was based on the
statements basically, and what the witness then gives
in evidence, what will count is what we heard viva
voce from the man.  If he supports his statement, so
be it, and if he says, "No, I don't agree with
everything that is in there" so be that.   I do not
think we need to recall Officers to say, "We have now
heard the evidence and we, therefore, need to delete
this word or that line from the summaries” . It is
not significant I do not think.

     MR. KING:  Sir, very briefly, first I am
grateful for you explaining the significance of the
summary because I, for one, was not at the mini
Inquest and I did not know that.  Secondly, you will
understand, however, how the families when they
receive it as a document which has emanated from the
Inquest in some form or another regard it as a piece
of paper with evidence upon it as far as their
eyesight goes.  Thirdly, sir, it no doubt will none
the less still be part of the Inquest papers and will
be retained.

     THE CORONER:   I am not sure about that.

     MR. KING:  I just mention this, sir.  I do not
know whether at a future date any of the papers will
be looked at but if there is any glaring error of
substance, if I can only put it that way, sir, then I
know those I represent will be grateful if it could
be rectified.  I cannot take it any further than
that, sir, but you will understand how the confusion
will have arisen but it will have been sent out, I
know, with the best will in the world.   We are
grateful for that but once it is there the families
will see particular matters which can, on occasion,
cause them concern.  I say no more, sir.

     THE CORONER:  The thing that concerns me about
it, and this is an aside really, is that if I — God
forbid — ever had a similar situation again I
certainly would not do that again.  We did it because
we were trying to help and because people were saying
"We want to know".  We thought that this was the
kindest and easiest way of giving them information
for the reasons I have already given.  The bit that
worries me is that if you then do that and then you
discover that, in fact, that is counter-productive
because all that happens is that you then have to
correct not only the transcripts but summaries which
were sent out as non—evidential documents, the lesson
I learned from that is, do not do it again.

    Whilst that would make it easier for me I
personally think it will make it much worse for
probably other people and I think that that is a
great pity.

     MR. KING:  I cannot enter into the debate
because I do not think it is proper or necessary.

     THE CORONER:  No, indeed.   I am not saying it is
your fault in any way.

     MR. KING:  One of the problems, of course, is
that we have so many deaths, sir.  On another
occasion there might only be one or two.

     THE CORONER:   Indeed, it might be different.

     MR. KING:   In those circumstances it is that
much easier.

     THE CORONER:  God forbid we have another
situation like this.

     MR. KING:  Indeed, sir. As regards the
families, however, it is not 95 deaths but one death
in the particular instance.

    THE CORONER:    I realise that.
      MR. KING:  Certainly the summaries are not long
 documents for the most part in that there are only
 one or two sheets. In so far as evidence does emerge
 which calls for rectification then administratively,
 sir, it perhaps is not a difficult matter if it is a
 matter of substance and that is all I would urge upon
 you.  It is not perhaps as horrendous a task as
 perhaps it could be.

      THE CORONER:   What I do not want to do is that I
 do not want to recall all the presenting Officers and
 ask them to go through pure formalities saying that
 we need to alter i t . I want to make people as happy
 as I can at the end of the day within the limits of
 my ability and within reasonable bounds.

      MR. KING:   We are content, sir.

      THE CORONER:   Mr. Catchpole, did you want to say
 something or not?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  No, not really, sir.    It was
just to say that the summaries did, of course, appear
as evidence given under Oath.  Then so far as there
is a matter of substance that is raised — which is
what my learned friend is saying — then certainly
there will have to be some word by you, sir, to the
Jury at the appropriate time that the evidence they
have heard from the actual witnesses should be
preferred to that given as hearsay b y . ...

     MR. KING:  I am grateful for that, sir, because
I was misled.  I am not saying you misled me
deliberately, sir, I am sure you did not.

     THE CORONER:  I hope I did not.     It was
certainly not intentional.

     MR. KING:  Up to thirty seconds ago I understood
that these summaries were not presented at the
Inquest to the Jury.  I now understand that they were
and became part of the evidence.

      THE CORONER: That is precisely the point that I
am making that what was presented to the Jury is what
is in the transcript.  If there is an error in the
transcript which is of any significance then it may
be we must draw it to the Jury's attention and say,
"Look, X on 15th April said this.  We have now heard
from Y who is in fact the witness being summarised
who has said Z and, therefore, you are much more
likely to accept the Z rather than the X because that
was based on best ability". What I am complaining
about is that not only is one saying, "Hang on, we
want to look at the transcripts" but you saying, "We
want to look at the summaries which were the basis on
which the evidence was given".  It is like you saying
to me, "Here is a statement by Mr. Tracey.  It
differs from what he has now told me.  We must,
                                                       110




therefore, correct his evidence here because of what
it says in this statement". I do not think you mean
that.

      MR. KING: We may be at cross-purposes sir.
Were these summaries read out to the jury sir?

      THE CORONER:  Yes, but not always in the form in
which they had been circulated and that really is the
point that I am trying to make, but everything that was
read out to the jury is in the transcripts.  There are
1,400 pages of it and so every single transcript, every
single individual case has within it a Presenting Officer
who presented a summary of the evidence to me as to who,
when and where the deceased was, and as I have said before,
in infinitely more detail than we would normally have done.

      That was done on oath.  That is not unusual that
the Coroner's Officer presents the evidence on those
three topics, usually much more briefly, but that is how
it is done, so insofar as that is concerned yes, but what
I know from certain correspondence is that people have
written to me and said:  "Yes, but in the summary which
is circulated it is said something happened at a certain
time. When it was presented the times were changed"
for instance.  Now that may well be so because we may
well have done some more research in the interim but that
is a problem we have always got and indeed you have got
the problem now because we are still in a position where
we have had evidence which appears to be changing what we
were told at some earlier time.

      What I would like you to do, or your instructing
solicitors, if there are any points because I may well
miss them, it is impossible for me to remember 95 detailed
Inquests.  However hard I try I just can't do it, but if
there is anything where you feel that the evidence
vive voce which we have heard substantially alters what
has been put in April/May time last year then please
draw it to my attention and I will do my best to try and
find some way of getting it right and making sure the jury
know that, if it is of any consequence.

      MR. KING:  Sir, you will know that first of all I
am certainly not and I know those behind me are not
trying to make your task any more difficult than it already
is.

      THE CORONER:   Yes, I am sure that is true.

      MR. KING:  I can only repeat again sir that as far
as an individual family goes they will look and concentrate
on that transcript and that summary relating only to their
loved one.
                                                         Ill




      What will therefore be easier for them, in a sense
for them to instruct us, is as regards their individual
case what matters of substance they are concerned about
even now and I can draw that to your attention not through
this formal way but through the proper channels.

      You already know sir that we have communicated
with you I think no more than I think it was a maximum,
I can't remember the numbers but they weren't huge numbers
out of those I represent where there were matters of
concern and in many ways sir I am sorry that we got our­
selves into this at this time of night because all I am
concerned on behalf of those families is in respect of
matters of substance, and we know what we mean by that,
if there is anything on the record, and we know what
we mean by that, which is of significance in the light of
what we have heard, we would welcome consideration to put
that right and we would communicate in the proper way to
that effect.

      THE CORONER:   I don't think really there is any
difficulty about it.   I hope not anyway.

      Right, shall we go home?   10 o'clock tomorrow
morning then if all is well.

              (The Inquests were adjourned until
              10 o'clock the following morning)
