HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




      INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

             STADIUM DISASTER

          ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                   Bef ore

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                     At

              The Town Hall,
                Sheffield.

                     On

      Monday, 19th November, 1990.




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, L t d .,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield 'SI -2DX
                         INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                Page

OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER                  1

APPEARANCES                                       2

LEGAL SUBMISSIONS                                3

STATEMENT BY THE CORONER                         15

SUBMISSION BY MR. ISAACS                        25

STATEMENT BY THE CORONER TO      THEJURY        54

     S. BROWN Sworn

        By The Coroner                          59

     M. LAYTON Sworn

        By The Coroner                          63
        Cross-Examined   by   Mr. Payne         79
        Cross-Examined   by   Mr. Isaacs        79
        Cross-Examined   by   Mr. King          80
        Cross-Examined   by   M r s . McBrien   81

LEGAL SUBMISSIONS                               83
                    FIRST DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                  MONDAY, 19th NOVEMBER,   1990

     THE CORONER:    Good morning and welcome to all of you.
You will notice that these chairs are empty.   These are the
chairs for the jury.    The reason why that is, as my legal
colleagues will of course appreciate, is that this morning
we will reserve for legal submissions and as I would have
sent the jury out as soon as we commenced I didn't see any
point in making them be here initially but they will be
available this afternoon, all being well, when we actually
get down to taking evidence.

     Most of you, and certainly the legal representatives
will remember that we had what I have termed a business
meeting which was intended to sort out some procedural
aspects so we could make the running of the inquests
smoother and so that we could proceed properly but with
despatch.   It was at that meeting that it became clear
there would be points which needed to be raised on legal
points and that is what we are now about to do.

     You will forgive me, I hope, if I ask you to introduce
yourselves so that the shorthand writers and also I know who
is who at this stage.   It is possible I will ask you to do
it again this afternoon when the jury is here, but I hope
you will forgive that.   Which is the best way of starting?
If I start at number 1 and just work across.   If you could
just introduce yourself, your name and who you represent.

     MISS HAMPTON:   Miss Alison Hampton of Counsel,
appearing with Mr. Richard Maxwell of Counsel, appearing for
the Sheffield City Council.

     MR. HALE:    Vincent Hale, solicitor,    for Superintendent
Roger Marshall.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I am Richard Payne, Counsel,
appearing with Patrick Limb, Counsel, for the Chief Officer
of Police.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I am Paul Isaacs, Counsel,
instructed by Messrs. Hepworth and Chadwick of Leeds,
representing Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

     MR. MANNING:   I am Richard Manning, s.olicitor, of
Walker, Morris, Scott, Turnbull, solicitors of Leeds,
representing Superintendent Murray.

     MR. KING:   My name is Timothy King of Counsel.   I
appear on behalf of forty-three families of the deceased.
     MISS SINCLAIR:   Sir, I am Fiona Sinclair of Counsel,
appearing for Eastwood and Partners, the consultant
engineers.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir,   I am Stuart Catchpole appearing
for Sheffield Wednesday.

     MR. CALLAGHAN:   Sir, I am Andrew Callaghan, solicitor,
for South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service.

     MISS ADDELMANN:   Sir, I am Andrea Addelmann
of Counsel, representing the Police Federation.

     MR. RUSSELL:    Sir, I am Christopher Russell,   Counsel,
representing Superintendent Greenwood.

     THE CORONER:   Are there any individual family members
who are not represented by Mr. King and who want...?   Yes,
Mrs. McBrien.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   I am Joan McBrien and I am representing
our family in this matter.

     THE CORONER:   Is there anybody else in that category?
Mr. Church is not here?   I just want to be quite sure we
haven't missed him.

     Now, the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service, can you
just tell me what your wishes are with regard to
representation and why you feel that your clients constitute
an interested party in these proceedings?




                 MR. CALLAGHAN:    Sir, you
                                                          3




     MR.   CALLAGHAN:    Sir, you know the representation on
previous occasions and I should say it is my intention to stay
only for today and in the case of one or two witnesses-    I
will not take any major part in the Inquiry.

     THE CORONER:   I have got no particular objection to
you being here.   I thought you probably would not be here
continuously but I wanted to be sure about that.   Perhaps
the best thing would be if we started with you really and
if we started with appropriate legal submissions.   It may
be easiest if we start with Mr. King and then we will move
across the table, so to speak.

     MR. KING:    Sir, my primary legal submission is
directed to your preliminary ruling on the last occasion
that this Inquest should be concerned only with events up
to about 3.15 pm.    As I understand your ruling, sir, it
was designed to ensure that this Inquest would only be
concerned with events leading to the crushing on the
terraces and the first arrival of an ambulance.

     As you know, sir, the families whom I represent are
very anxious that this Inquest should deal with what to
thpm is a very major issue, as to how their loved ones came
by their deaths, namely how the services and the rescue
services, and those attending with the emergency, coped
with it immediately after people were brought off the
terraces because death was not certified in many, if not
most, cases until after 4 pm.   Sir, I do not know if you
have had an opportunity to read these.    I did ask those
instructing me to send to you statements from each of the
families whom I represent setting out a number of
individual questions directed to their own Inquest but also
incorporating in their individual cases why they were
anxious to learn of what happened between the time there
was a first sighting of any loved one being brought off the
terracing and the pronouncement of death.    I do not know
if you had an opportunity to read them.

     THE CORONER:   I have briefly because these did not
arrive until Friday afternoon but I have looked at them.

     MR. KING:    What I would like to do is take you
through some individual examples in order to persuade you
that this is a question which ought to be gone into at this
particular Inquest.    I do not know whether that is a
format you want to follow or whether you want first to hear
some other representatives as to their attitude to my
submission.    I am happy to go into considerable detail
about it.

     THE CORONER:   There are several points which have
occurred to me and the first point I would like you to deal
with is this;     you were not present but you will be aware
that in April/May this year we sat for two-and-a-half weeks
approximately and we dealt with the 95 deceased and we
dealt with three issues which Coroners deal with;       who the
deceased w a s , when he/she died and where he/she d i e d . I
specifically excluded from discussion at that time the
question of how he or she died because as you will
recollect the DPP was still actively considering the matter
and we did not want to trammel his investigation but, on
the other hand, I felt it was right we should allow people
to hear what we could deal with.

     I will raise the second point at the same time because
it may be easier for you to deal with the two things
together.   At those hearings we dealt in considerable
detail, in fact infinitely more detail than we would
normally deal with in an Inquest, with events after the
pathological cause of death and I did it because I realised
that the families were desperately anxious to know what had
happened immediately after the incident.   My question to
you is - and I think this is what we need to deal with and
get right - bearing in mind we have only dealt with the
question of who, when and where and that we have done it in
considerably greater detail than one would normally expect
to do, why is it necessary to review that very activity
again which I think is what you are really asking me to do?

     MR. KING:   Sir, as I understand the individual
Inquests there was not an enquiry into, in the individual
cases, the impact of the organisation rescue on the
survival or otherwise of the particular loved one.      All
that was done when   one looks at those Inquests was to
identify the time of a first sighting, that isto say,
somebody who seemed to be unconscious, and of a time when
effort was made to resuscitate in any given case and then
death was certified.    In many of the cases there was a
large gap of time after 3.15 pm when it was not
investigated at the individual Inquests the nature of the
services available to deal with those being brought off and
if I can just give   one or two examples of that, you have
examples of people   who are brought off at 1522 and it is
said that there was an effort to resuscitate by a lay
individual and then that particular lay individual is not
heard of again, or the officer is not, and it is said that
the given loved one arrives at the temporary mortuary.
There has been no investigation directed to the global
organisation of what happened immediately after they were
brought off the terraces.   Certainly I have been through
the individual transcripts and there does not seem to be
any evidence directed to that issue and those witnesses who
were called could not deal with those issues, sir.
     THE CORONER:   Are you suggesting that the cause of
death in respect of these individuals is not in fact the
pathological cause of death which we have been given but due
to a novus actus in effect by person or persons whose
evidence you have not yet heard?

     MR. KING:    Certainly the families, and I put it as
openly as this, sir, and putting it bluntly, cards on the
table, are not convinced at all that had there been a far
more sensible, logical organisation of the rescue services,
of the major disaster team being brought in, of proper
medical equipment being available, of proper triage being
carried out, that those measures, had they been there, in
several cases, would not have resulted in the survival of
their loved ones.    They cannot - obviously they were not
there - produce through me concrete evidence of that at this
stage but at every stage of an Inquiry into this disaster,
and this certainly is true even in the Taylor Inquiry, that
particular aspect of the disaster has never properly been
gone into.

     Again putting it very simply to you, sir, most of the
families I represent feel there has been a complete blanket
(not a deliberate blanket) been held down over what happened
after they were brought off the terraces and before
individuals were certified dead and there has been no effort
made systematically to analyse what was the organisation at
the time for the rescue, what might have been, and what could
have made a difference.    A very simple example again is that
I am instructed there is evidence of Dr. Gumpert given at the
Inquest that without an electrocardiogram we can never be
sure whether or not there is a pulse and when dealing with
individual loved ones taken off the terraces and simply dealt
with by lay people, the absence of such sort of equipment
means that one would never know whether or not that
individual was alive or dead at that stage.      It is a
matter - and I do not mean this pejoratively - which is swept
under the carpet as if to say, "All we are interested in is
the   immediate crushing leading to those being brought off the
terraces".    I cannot put it any more firmly than that, sir.

     THE CORONER:    You have put it very plainly and I
appreciate it.    I will give a ruling on your application in
a few moments but do you want to develop it further?
Obviously I want an opportunity to hear from your colleagues.

     MR. KING:   Have you the individual statements which
were supplied?

     THE CORONER:   I   do have those in  front of me. I would
not  want to go through all of them but if you wish to pick
one or two as examples I am prepared to listen to you and
indeed it also makes it easier for everybody else.
     MR. KING:   Sir, if you were to turn to No. 11 to start
with, which is the submissions to you of the Jones family,
Richard Jones, I do not know whether you have been given one
or two documents.    I have two documents in relation to M r .
Jones one headed "Dear Miss Steel" and one headed "Dear Mr.
King".

     THE CORONER:     No. 11, did you Say?

     MR. KING:   Yes, sir.    I beg your pardon, sir, it is
No. 10.   Sir, if you look ---

     THE CORONER:    Mr. King, may I just stop you for one
moment because something has occurred to me, and I have been
reminded, which I ought to say to the Press before we go
further?    The session this morning is being heard without
the Jury and the reason we have not got the Jury is because
we are dealing with legal points.    That means no doubt that
you can report we are in session but you should not actually
report what is being said.    You will no doubt be familiar
with the provisions of Subsection 2 of Section 4 of the
Contempt of Court Act and I say you must not report what we
are discussing.    If we had wanted the Jury to hear we would
have had them present but we do not wish them to hear at this
stage.   You may, when we have finished the Inquest, if you
still feel it is a reportable and interesting aspect then, of
course, that is a different matter but for the moment please
do not report the content of the legal matters we are
discussing.    Mr. King, I am sorry to interrupt you, would
you continue?

     MR. KING:   Sir, the document I am looking at and I
appreciate those alongside me are not looking at any document
but it is just to help you is one headed to myself, "Dear Mr.
King".

     THE CORONER:   I have a document headed "Dear Miss
Steel" dated 22nd October.

     MR. KING:      Sir, this   is dated 7th November.

     THE CORONER:   I have      not got it I am afraid.   It is
not in front of me.

     MR. KING:   I apologise for that and I will take you
through, if I may, through five points which are raised by
Mr. and Mrs. Jones.   Sir, they make the basic point that the
report into the death of their loved one, Richard, was
certified at 1600 hours in the temporary mortuary and,
therefore, so far as the family are concerned, so far as
evidence is concerned, they presume, as they say they must be
                                                        7




entitled to, up to that time the evidence of death is not
clear as having already occurred.

     Point No. 2, sir, is extracted from the evidence given
by Dr. Gumpert at the Inquest already held here and in fact
it was evidence given on the occasion of Kevin Tyrrell and,
sir, it is a quotation from his evidence which you may
recall:

     "I would like to observe that feeling the carotid pulse
     is quite difficult in someone who has a low blood
     pressure as would have been here.   In fact it can be so
     difficult it is impossible and you have to have an
     electrocardiogram on to know whether the heart has
     stopped or not."

     Then there is the statement of Mr. Eccleston, which is
certainly a statement in the large bundle of statements given
to the West Midlands Police, and indeed Mr. Eccleston gave
evidence to the Taylor Inquiry in which he says this:


                                  /"For an extremely long.
                                                         8




     "For an extremely long time we were without any form
     of medical equipment of any description.   I still
     cannot understand why the local health authority's
     major medical disaster team were not called upon.  I
     understand that all health authorities in this
     country have a major disaster policy.   It is
     impossible accurately to estimate the difference this
     would have made in saving life.  I do, however,
     believe that the Liverpool fans should have been
     given the chance".

And the question raised by Mr. and Mrs. Jones is this,
sir:  there was a major incident vehicle.  Why was it not
called?  Lack of equipment undoubtedly resulted in deaths.

     Sir, I pause there.  Of course, Mr. and Mrs. Jones
were not there and of course they are not experts, but you
will see, sir, from the basis of that evidence they are
firmly of the belief that one cannot just ignore an
inquiry, an inquest, into that aspect.

     Sir, number 4 point made by Mr. and Mrs. Jones comes
from the statement made, again in the large bundle, sir,
from Dr. Glynn Phillips, particularly where he says that
after 3.15 p.m. he gave mouth to mout resuscitation to a
man for 15 minutes, and just as he'was giving up the heart
sprang to life, and after that the man started breathing
on his own.  We know that this does not prove this man
lived, or if he did he may have been brain damaged, but
the point we are trying to put across to the coroner is
that after 3.15 p.m. not all the people who were later
certified dead were necessarily dead.

     Sir, finally Mr. and Mrs. Jones direct your attention
to the long statement which I am sure you have seen, sir,
of Dr. John Ashton in which there is a series of reasoned
critical comments on the disorganisation of the medical
and the rescue attempts, honest and in good faith though
they were, after the people were brought off the terraces.

     Sir, that is Mr. and Mrs. Jones in tnose comments and
in the short letter, sir, which you have, which you have
already referred me to, sir, they emphasise an issue as to
the failure to implement triage after the disaster
happened, again, concentrating on what Dr. Gumpert has
said as to the fact that without an electro-cardiogram it
is not possible to know whether a heart has stoppped.

     Sir, can I move on from Mr. and Mrs. Jones' comments
and just give you one or two more examples - I appreciate
that in many ways it is repetitious but it is making the
point - to number 14, sir, which is in the case of William
Roy Pemberton.

    THE CORONER:    And this one is addressed to you.
     HR. KING:   Sir, it is not often that instructions to
Counsel are given in advance to the Tribunal, and I
suspect, sir, that it is not a wise move in most cases.

     THE CORONER:   You are probably right.

     MR. KING:   Sir, it was an effort in the relatively
short time since we were before you to put before you the
various matters which the families wished to place before
you and it was felt this was the easiest way to do so,
sir.

     Sir, if I can then turn to Mr. Pemberton, you will
see that he makes the following points:  the report into
the death of his loved one Roy that life again in his case
was pronounced extinct at 16.00 hours hours, and again in
the absence of medical evidence to the contrary, the
family can only assume that their loved one was alive
until that hour, and sir, if you then go to paragraph 3 of
that document you will see there is a reference to the
statement of Mr. Saxton of the St. John's Ambulance
Service, because he refers to the resuscitation of a young
man at 15.50 hours, indicating in the heart-felt view of
Mr. Pemberton, as with all the other families, that death
must have occurred after 3.15 p.m.

     Again he refers you, sir, in paragraph 4, to the
statement of Dr. Byrne when he quotes that he was
approached by a senior Police Officer and asked to start
certifying the dead as there may be some still alive, and
sir, again, the point has been made that as we only know
for certain that death was at 4 o'clock, to ignore these
concerns as to the adequacy of the attentions and the
rescue efforts after 3.15 is to not investigate what could
well have been a major reason for why somebody died and
did not survive.

     The final point on Mr. Pemberton, sir, in paragraph
7, is the question he asks:  why was it that the very
seriously ill and dying, and those who appeared to be
dead, were not taken to the hospital in the very first
available ambulance, and he raises himself the issue as to
why the serious accident response vehicle was not called
out to the stadium, as he understands to be the case.

     Sir, if   I can then deal with perhaps one example of
minutiae, of   detail, if one turns to   the cases of the
Hicks sisters, of Victoria and Sarah Hicks, sir, wnich is
at numbers 7 and 8 in your list, sir, you will notice the
case of Victoria, that on the face of the summary which
was produced   at the Inquest prior to   today, there wasa
gap in time. There is a gap in time between 15.21, which
was the time when Police Constable McGuinness rescued
Victoria from a pile of those who unfortunately had
fallen, and 15.28 when Mr. Turner was seen helping
Victoria out onto the pitch.
                                                                   10
    .rff




         Mr. Hicks has drawn to your attention, sir, that he
    has drawn to the attention of this Inquest the evidence of
    a gentleman, a Mr. Taylor, whose evidence is that he was
    on the very terrace where Victoria was after she had been
     rescued  by P.C. McGuinness, and that for some six
B   minutes he did not, in fact, resuscitate because the poor
    man did not know what to do, and one can understand that,
    but as Mr. Hicks says, those six minutes could have been
    vital to the survival of his loved one Victoria, had she
    received the proper attention.

         Sir, that is just an example of matters which,   in Mr.
    Hicks s submission to you, through me, ought to be
    investigated.

         Sir, if one turns to Sarah Hicks at number 8, again
    if one looks at the tim ings we know that at 6-minutes-
    past-3 a Miss McCaffery sees Sarah, who clearly has
    fallen, and we know at 21-minutes-past-3, helps the fallen
    Sarah through onto the pitch.   Again, the time gap there
    between o-minutes-past- 3 and 21-minutes-past-3.  We know
    it was not Until 20-pas t-4 that Dr. Bull examined Sarah
    and certified ner death , and we know from the summary that
D   it is said that at some time between 15.38 and 15.50 an
    unidentified member of the medical team stated in his view
    that Sarah was at that time beyond help.

         All those times, sir, go beyond 3.15 and they again
    illustrate the need in the submission of the families for
    the-times after 3.15 to be thoroughly investigated.

         Sir, those are just four examples but, sir, if you
    read the papers which I understand and I am sure you have
    they express the flavour of all the other submissions
    that, in fact, we cannot know that a cut off point at this
    stage is the right cut off point at 3.15 and it is
    premature, sir, so to do, in my submission to you.  That
    is how I put it.

         THE CORONER:    Thank you very much indeed, Mr. King.
    I think what we will now do is to give the rest of you an
    opportunity to make points.   I think we ought to start
    with Mrs. McBrien.   I think you would probably support
    what has been said, but is there anything in addition to
    what Mr. King has said that you feel you would like to
    tell me.   Mrs. McBrien can I say if you are more
    comfortable sitting down - indeed, that goes for all of
    you - (if you are more comfortable sitting down, sit down.
    I don t mind - it does not make any difference.   I know
    some of your legal colleagues sitting around you are used
    to standing so they will tend to rise, but you do what is
    comfortable.   Mrs. McBrien, is there anything you want to
    add to what Mr. King has told me?

         MRS. McBRIEN:     No, I go along with everything that
    Mr. King has said,   thank you.



H
     THE CORONER:   If I start at that end and work my way
down tne row, is that satisfactory to you, gentlemen and
ladies?  It is easier for me.

     MISS HAMPTON:     I have no submissions,   thank you.

     THE CORONER:    Mr. Hale?

     MR. HALE:   I am sure that at an appropriate time you
will instruct the Jury and presumably also instruct the
advocates as to how far you are prepared to go.    As we all
know there were well over 3,000 witnesses.    Obviously you
can t call them all.   You will have to exercise some sort
of selection and you will have to restrict the areas into
which you are prepared to enquire further and further, on
top of the enquiries made by the Taylor Report.    I may be
over simplifying matters a little, but I think it is very
well known by everyone concerned that the Police, for
example, have admitted negligence.    There is no secret
about that at all.   There have been civil proceedings,
other people have been joined in them, so it   therefore
seems to me to be a waste of your time and a waste of
everyone's time if we are just going to go over and over
again points tending merely to prove that things could
have been done better, and ought to have been done better,
even allowing for hindsight, so I am sure you will bear
that in mind.

     There are areas, however, which were not explored by
the Taylor Inquiry and my learned friend Mr. King has
mentioned one.  There is also the area of ....

     THE CORONER:     Which one in particular have you ^ot
in mind?

     MR. HALE:   A blanket was pulled down over the rescue
services, but there was also a lack of inquiry into tie
pre-match conduct of the fans and that I know - I have
seen the list of witnesses - that is something that is
going to be gone into, but I hope we are not going to
waste a lot of time on negligence alone, because one item
of negligence is the same as a thousand items of
negligence, and you will no doubt instruct the Jury on a
verdict of misadventure.

     What we are looking for, I am sure, is something
going beyond that, and I would hope that people are not
going to waste their time, but to concentrate on looking
for recklessness, something that would enable you to
instruct the Jurv to find a verdict other than
misadventure, and I would merely mention that.

     There   is one other aspect and that is entirely a
matter for   my learned friend Mr. King, but I see that he
represents   43 families whose circumstances may not all be
the same.    There was a problem at the Taylor Inquiry when
    rJ                                                           12




    the Police were represented by one representative and it
    subsequently transpired that it could well have been
    better if there had been separate representation over
    certain aspects.  Happily, those aspects have not
    materialised and no real harm was done.
B
         I would like to see an end to this Inquest when it is
    over and I would not want somebody coming back again and
    asking for it to be re-opened and started all over again
    because of lack of representation separately by some
    people wiio may be alleged to have played a part in the
    deaths.




D




          /That is a matter which my learned friend




H
                                                             13




That is a matter which my learned friend will, I am sure, fully
understand.  I merely mention it now so it is not said that it is
mentioned with hindsight afterwards.  There may, indeed, be a
great deal of difference between the responsibility or lack of
responsibility on the part of some of those who died, and
separate representation would in normal circumstances be required
because it may be that one family would make an allegation
against another.  Again, I give as an example, and I am not
saying that any such person exists, but if it were shown that
someone who died had come at the very last minute with a great
deal of alcohol inside him and had made his way right down to the
front, pushing and crushing, and had caused some deaths, then
that would be a matter where he or his relatives might well
require to be separately represented.

     THE CORONER:   Y e s , M r . Manning, if I may say so, the issue
of representation is (a) for the families, because that is to
whom you were applying your mind, and (b) for the legal
representatives who obviously have to weigh whatever conflict of
interest there may be between their clients.       So that is really
not a matter for me, and it is not probably even a matter for
you.  It is a matter for Mr. King and his instructing solicitors,
and, of course, primarily for the parties themselves.

     Perhaps I should say one other thing.   You have mentioned a
couple of verdicts and matters like that.   I am not getting into
an argument at this stage as to what verdict if any the Jury
would bring in, or even what directions, if any, I am going to
give them, because the objective of this Inquest as far as it has
one is to hear the evidence and to enable the Jury to reach a
verdict on the evidence.   I have the advantage of having seen
loads of statements.   I do acknowledge that, but experience has
taught me in much simpler Inquests than this that it is not
infrequent that what you think is going to be the verdict does
not turn out to be because the evidence when it actually comes,
or the nuance, if you like, or the innuendoes, or any word you
care to use, is different to what I had anticipated from just
looking at the statement.   So I have made it as far as I am
able a rule not to predetermine the answer but to wait until I
have heard the evidence.   I say this not as a criticism of you
but just as a clarification for everybody.   I do intend to
listen to what is said, which is the reason why we are here
this morning. Obviously, I have read statements and I have
ideas myself, but the crucial thing is the Jury, they have got
to make up their mind, and they do it in the light of the
evidence, and I will do my best.   I can't do more than that.   I
am sorry, Mr. Payne.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, with regard to the submissions by M r .
King, the position of the Chief Constable is that he is neutral.
I have got no submissions to make about what Mr. King is asking
you to do, but I wish it to be heard that the position of the
Chief Constable is that he wants to do everything he can to
assist you in the conduct of this Inquest, and certainly does not
wish to do anything to put in the way of Mr. King any obstruction
into any enquiry that he wants to make on behalf of the relatives
of the people who died.  Sir, that is the position.
    , As a comment on what Mr. King has said, strictly it appears
to us that he is saying that there is the possibility, to put it
in a legal term, of a novus actus. i.e. something which
intervened after the crushing and before the deaths, which caused
or contributed to the deaths of at least some of the people, and
the response of the Chief Constable to that submission, if I put
it correctly, is that we can quite see that is something which
people would wish to see investigated on the question of how it
came about.   I only make that comment in an endeavour to be
helpful, but the position of the Chief Constable is that he has
no submissions one way or the other.

     May I just say while I am on my feet with regard to what Mr.
Hale has just said, as a matter of fact it is not correct that
the Police have admitted negligence.   It is well known and has
been well publicised that what has happened is that the Police
have agreed to make payments to those people who were injured and
to the dependents of those who died, and that such payments are
in the process of being made.   Also there has been a civil action
in respect of apportionment of liability in respect of those
matters.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much, indeed.   I accept
entirely what you say and in a sense I accept what Mr. Manning
says as well.  It is not really relevant to my proceedings
whether or not negligence has been admitted or not admitted.   It
is neither here nor there.  So I did not comment on it, but I
appreciate what you have said.

     MR. ISAACS:   I think, sir, in fact, that is Mr. Hale.      Mr.
Manning sits to my left.

      THE CORONER:    I beg your pardon.   Forgive m e , please, both
of y o u .

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I have no submissions.   It is entirely a
matter for you having regard to the breadth or depth which you
consider appropriate for this particular Inquest.

     MR. MANNING:   Sir, I have exactly similar comments as far
as my client is concerned.

     MISS SINCLAIR:      I have no submissions on this matter, sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I add to that.  The matter is entirely for
you.  You are the best person, having read all the evidence, to
make that judgment, and no doubt that was the reason we had, as
you have already pointed out, sir, a fairly detailed
investigation into the earlier Inquests.

     MR. CALLAGHAN:   Sir, this is not an application of which I
have had previous notice, and which in the circumstances of the
application is some surprise to me.  All I think I should, sir,
is this is not the time and place for some sort of Public Inquiry
into the activities of the Ambulance Service and the Emergency
Services, and it is not appropriate to bring such a matter into
the arena as a sort of side wind.     Beyond that, sir, it is
obviously a matter for you.

     MISS ADDELMANN:   Sir, I have no observations or submissions
about the point, and I can do no better than echo those remarks
made by my learned friend, Mr. Catchpole.

     MR. RUSSELL:   I too endorse those remarks.  None of us,
other than my learned friend, Mr. King, has seen the original
statements, and so are being invited to comment upon a course in
the dark because we have not seen the nature of an example of the
material he now seeks to rely upon.  I recognise it is a matter
for you, and if you decide I don't take a stance one way or the
other.

     THE CORONER:   Shall I then deal with this point? Is there
anybody else wants to say anything on this issue? Mr. King?

     MR. KING:   Sir, only to emphasise that it is not a side
wind which I am embarking on.  I am seeking to address causes,
contributory causes to the deaths, and I am concentrating on
that, and it is in that context I have invited the Court to look
beyond 3.15, and certainly we are dealing with it from the point
of view of possibilities of novus actus, yes, I accept that.

     THE CORONER:   I have listened hopefully with attention, and
perhaps I ought to say this to you, Mr. Russell, before I go on.
I know you have not had the advantage of seeing the letter, but
it is only fair to say Mr. King in his summary of the points as
far as I can see summarised the points which his clients were
making entirely fairly.  There is nothing extra in the letter, so
to speak, except connecting words, basically.  That is for your
reassurance, if I can put it like that.

     Throughout, and in fact almost from the word "g o " on the
15th April, 1989, when I first learned about this incident, one
of the underlying criteria which I tried to apply in thinking
how to set about dealing with the Inquests was to as far as
possible treat the Inquests as if they were completely
standard, if I can put it like that - it is a horrible word -
but completely normal Inquests.   The fact that it was national
news, that it was 95 young people, that it created a terrible
amount of anxiety, pain and so on, in some ways is unique
because of the numbers, but each individual death I dealt with
families are in exactly the same situation, and I tried to
think and I still try to think, what and how would I set about
if I had had a road traffic incident or a works accident as
opposed to an incident in a football stadium.     I have thought
back on many occasions to say a road traffic incident where
somebody might have suffered a serious head injury.     That
person may well have been at the road side for X number of
minutes while one was waiting for the ambulance services to
attend.   They may then have been taken by an ambulance to a
hospital.   They may have gone into the resuscitation room.
They may have been worked on by the doctors. They may have gone
into hospital and they may have then died t w o , three d a y s , may
be longer after the incident.   Or alternatively, you could have
a situation where by chance the road traffic incident occurs on
the ;road and a doctor happens to be.  He walks up to the
patient, looks and says, "I am sorry, the injury is so severe
that this person is dead".   Or you could have a situation where
the person has this road traffic incident and is taken into
hospital and is certified dead on arrival.

      In none of those instances would I as a matter of routine
call evidence of what happened after the incident ;itself was
concerned, and indeed, the pathologists in the example which i
have used would have given as cause of death serious head injury,
for instance, or multiple injuries with fracture of the skull, or
something of that nature.   It seems to me that the fact that the
person may survive an injury for a number of minutes or hours o r ■
even days, is not the question which I as Coroner have to
consider.   My task is to establish who the person was - I am
sorry to repeat this - where he died, when he died and how he
died.   It is from my understanding of the pathological evidence,
the overwhelming pathological evidence is and was that the people
died as a result of crushing or traumatic asphyxia.   Different
words were used, but the sense was always the same.   The
underlying problem which these poor men and women were subjected
to was an inability to breathe.

     That does not mean to say that some of them did not in fact
respire for a period of time or even have a heart beat
thereafter, but the damage was done, and indeed, both Dr.
Gumpert, Dr. Slater, Prof. Usher, who dealt with this question in
an overall point of view, all in fact said, as I understand their
evidence, exactly the same.

     One of the points, Mr. King, which you have made is that
because ;a person has not been certified dead until a particular
point in time, one must therefore assume that he is alive.  With
the greatest respect I don't accept that as a reasonable -
"reasonable" is a very unkind word - as a proposition which I
would take.  Indeed, if you think about it for a moment I am sure
you would agree with me, if a body were to be found in a
macerated state one would call a doctor who would
certify death, but it would be a little bit illogical to
assume that that particular body was actually alive
until that point.

     The issue of death certification and the timing of it is
important, because one wants to have if possible certainty.   That
is the first thing.  Secondly, the conventional way of
establishing a person is definite dead is that a medical man says
so, but to draw the conclusion that until a medical man has said
so a person is alive is in my view an impossible proposition to
maintain.




                    /I do understand the anxiety.
     I do understand the anxiety which a lot of the families
have about this issue, but as I have already said the
overwhelming medical evidence, the pathological evidence,
and that is the crucial one I am interested in, is the
damage that caused the death was done due to the crushing.

     Now I picked the arrival of the first ambulance not
because there is anything magical about that but because
when we look at the videos we can actually see that and it
is a convenient marker, that is all.   If the first
ambulance had arrived at 3*30 I would have picked that time.
It is simply intended as a marker, but, and this is an
important point, I considered the medical evidence.  The
medical evidence was that once - I am not quoting verbatim -
but the sense of what Professor Usher said, and, indeed, the
others as well, was that once the chest was fixed so that
respiration could no longer take place, then irrecoverable
brain damage would occur between four and six minutes.
That is the point.

     Now I felt that the evidence which I had heard and in
the light of what I had read that the latest time, the
latest, when this permanent fixation could have arisen would
have been approximately six minutes past, which is when the
match stopped.   It almost certainly was before, but let us
assume six minutes past, add another six minutes to that,
that is twelve minutes past and then as I say I went on to
find a convenient marker beyond that point in time.    In
other words, what I am trying to say is I did not just pick
the arrival of the first ambulance entirely out of the blue,
I did try and consider in the light of the evidence which we
had heard what could have been the latest time when the real
damage was done.

     I have already indicated that at the - I will call them
the interim inquests if I may just for the sake of a name -
we did endeavour to give a great deal more information or
evidence than we would ever do in a normal inquest and in^
that sense I broke my own rule straight away because I said
I wanted to treat this matter as if it were a completely
standard normal road traffic incident, if you like.    I
didn't, I gave a great deal of information for various
reasons which I don't need to go into now.

     As an aside I can assure you that within the limits of
our ability the summaries and the evidence which was given
was an accurate reflection of what people said and if there
was a gap, for instance, as has been suggested in some cases
which is unexplained, the reason wasn't because there is
some hidden evidence which we have put under the curtain,
but because we didn't know of it or couldn't find it or it
doesn't exist.  The truth of the matter, of course, is that
people weren't being watched individually continuously by
somebody else   recording what was happening.   It is entirely
fortuitous as   to whether or not there is a witness or
witnesses who   happens (a) to have been with a person, (b)
who remembers   who he is and (c) has some idea of the timing.

     Some of you who were there will remember that in some
cases we had a great deal of evidence with regard to what
had happened post-crush, shall I say, and in others we had
next to nothing because it is very sad particularly for
those families where we have got so little to share with
them, but we are living in the real world and in some cases
there was overwhelming - for instance, there were dozens of
photographs as you know - some of the people were all over
the newspapers and in others we could not find any.     It
can't be helped, it is just one of those things.

     Bearing in mind that I intend at this stage to deal
with the question of how, and 1 do intend to deal with it
reasonably comprehensively, I have to remember two things:
that my powers are limited.   I don't have an open ended
authority to carry out an investigation.   The Rules and the
Act, indeed, are quite clear as to the limits of what the^
coronal inquiry should be.   I admit that the word "how" is
a little bit flexible and assuming we call all those
witnesses on that preliminary list which I have circulated I
hope you will agree that I have been reasonably flexible
with that word, but nevertheless I do have to draw a line.
Indeed, this was done in other inquests.   If you think back
to the Zeebrugge inquest, for instance.  The learned Coroner
there drew a line.   He was judicially reviewed on where he
drew it and in that particular case the Divisional Court or
the Court of Appeal, I can't remember now, clearly said that
a line has to be drawn and in the Zeebrugge case they agreed
it was right.   I am doing my best.   I am trying to draw a
line as well.

      If you think of the other major disasters where
inquests have already taken place, you will find that lines
were drawn there as well and I think you will find that the
line with regard to the question which we are now thinking
about was very, very much tighter than what we have already
done.

     In answer to your submission, I still consider that as
a general proposition we are going to accept - I am going to
take these inquests and deal with the question of how on the
basis of what happened to about 3.15 or thereabouts.    I
have explained it to you so I am not going to repeat it and
I base it mainly upon the pathological medical evidence.

     Having said that, I think it is probably right to say
because we will be calling witnesses it may be that some of
the things which worry you may be dealt with to a minor
degree but it is certainly not my intention to allow us to
stray down that path.

     I have also got to say, it is only right, that what I
think you are really inviting me to do, Mr. King, is to hold
a further judicial inquiry into matters into which, as I
understand it, are outside my authority and scope.    I also
seem to recollect, although Lord Justice Taylor s Inquiry
isn't - as I have already said to you at the business
meeting, I don't really want to spend too much time on it -
but I do recollect that the emergency services were very
well represented at that Inquiry and, indeed, a lot of
discussion, from my reading of the transcripts, did deal
with the issues of the medical response.

     Whether or not that was satisfactory, whether Lord
Justice Taylor should have done more, whether somebody else
should look into that when we have finished that is nothing
to do with me.   However, as far as I am concerned, my
intention is to stick with what I gave you as my initial
preliminary intention.

     I have, of course, already looked through the documents
which you sent me and insofar as in one or two instances
witnesses are mentioned, if I think, and, indeed, I have
thought that one or two of these in fact I think three at
the moment, you have got a point.   It would perhaps be
advantageous to call those persons and we are making
appropriate arrangements.   Please don't think that I have
said, "Good grief, fifty pages, I am not dealing with that,"
I have already spent quite a bit of time thinking about it
and I will hopefully have another look.   If I were - which
is highly unlikely - in any particular instance to feel we
ought to go a little bit further down that line because
there is a specific point to be made in any particular
instance, then I will if I think it necessary, tell you.
However, I think it is unlikely from what I have seen and
what I have read and for the reasons which I have given you.




           MR. KING:   Sir, thank you for that.
                                                           20




     MR. KING:   Thank you for that.   Can I raise a
separate matter, sir, which is not connected with the issue
of cut off but is connected with the issue of 50 pages
which you have referred to?

     THE CORONER:      I was not saying that as a criticism.

     MR. KING:   Not at all, sir.   One only has to state
the number of families whom I represent to know that.
Sir, a number of the families have raised specific
questions relating to the summaries which were put before
you in their individual Inquests *  I just give one
example, sir; in the case of No. 13, Jonathan Owens, you
will note they have a particular concern as to the timing
when their son came to the ground and a particular concern
to the fact that the summary suggests he joined the crowd
at twenty to three when, in fact, they point out to you
that the positive video evidence shows they were standing,
not having joined the crowd at all, round about ten to or
eight minutes to three.   I put that as an example.

     Are you willing, sir, to go through those individual
questions - not now - and indicate at some stage, perhaps
even in writing to us, whether or not you would be prepared
to reopen those individual Inquests to deal with those -
may be small points in the whole but to the individual
families - important points of factual errors which seem to
have crept in by reference to positive evidence which can
now be laid before you?

     THE CORONER:   My recollection of the papers is that
they affected very few or where I feel it is justified.    I
think those two things go together.   As I say, I have not
had sufficient time to study it in detail but if I were to
think there was a genuine error and that that error was
actually relevant - the incident which you have given me
indicates with respect to the family it is an anxiety to
them - but the crucial point is not whether he was standing
in a crowd or whether he was standing aside but where was
he or at least at what time was he still outside the
ground?   One has to ask the question, does it actually get
us any further forward?

     MR. KING:   May I just interpose to say that the
example I gave was directed as much to the timings outside
the ground in fact.

     THE CORONER:   If we have made a mistake, and we will
be checking that...

     MR. KING:      I am obliged.
     THE CORONER:   When points have been made of actual
error we have been trying to check.    If we agree with
them, as Mr. Fraser and some of the others will remember,
we have made from time to time ad hoc amendments when
points of error were pointed out to u s .  I am not averse
to that, not in principle anyway, and if it helps somebody
by clarifying something then I will be pleased to do so but
I would not want necessarily to spend endless time on
clarifying minutiae which, in the final analysis, do not
matter so far as the Jury are concerned.    I am sure you
accept that.

     MR. KING:   I understand that, sir, but I am sure when
families are supplied with an "agreed" summary and they see
matters which are of great concern to them which appear to
be incorrect then obviously they are desirous that that
should be rectified as quickly as possible.

     THE CORONER:      I take it none of you have any adverse
comments on that?

     MR. KING:   What I am going to suggest is that those
instructing me extract from those documents which do
confuse two issues, those which are directed specifically
to individual questions and they can be then sent to you in
a more orderly manner which enables us the more quickly to
obtain help from you.

     THE CORONER:   That would be very helpful indeed
because then we would really know what we are looking at
and what we have got to concentrate on.

     MR. KING:      Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:      Are there any other comments from
anybody?

     MR. ISAACS:     Yes, sir.    I just wondered how we are
going to deal with   these matters.    I know that you started
with Mr. King and    I thought probably    what you would do is
run down the line    so to speak.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, we will do that.      Have you got
any submissions to make?

     MISS HAMPTON:   I have no submissions raised by Mr.
King, though he has raised one particular matter which
concerns the City Council with regard to the agreed summary
of facts.   They have been through the proposed summary
prepared for today's hearing and there are one or two
matters, they have instructed me on, which concerns them,
     THE CORONER:   I think I will be able to short circuit
this submission.  You will recollect, ladies and gentlemen,
at the business meeting a suggestion was made that we
should try and extract various paragraphs out of Lord
Justice Taylor's Report as an agreed statement.   I was not
particularly enamoured of the view and for some reason
which at the moment I cannot account for I forgot to
mention at the meeting that we were actually in the process
of preparing what we thought was an actual non-
controversial, entirely neutral, account of various
activities which we hoped it would be possible to put to
the Jury so that they had an underlying base on which one
could build the edifice, so to speak.

     In the events which have happened, we have heard from
most of you, if not all, but whilst quite a lot of you have
actually come back and said that you are reasonably happy
with the summary there have been quite a number of you who
have had substantial points of criticism to make with
regard to the content.   Unfortunately some of these points
- and I do not think I am criticising anybody and I am not
going to name any names either - were not made until Friday
or even later.   When I say Friday, I mean Friday late
afternoon.   I have come to the conclusion that we are not
going to use these summaries at all.   We will build, if
that is the right word, what we need as we go along.

     I mention that now, and I will mention it when the
Jury are here, but what we are going to do is that we have
got some two dozen slides which we are going to show.
They are shots of the ground from the air and so on in
order to give the Jury some idea of what we are talking
about and then we will just build the evidence on it as far
as is necessary for the purposes of the Inquest.    I think
that probably deals with your point.   I know that many of
you thought it was a jolly good idea but in the event it
has not worked out.   I thought it was a jolly good idea as
well which is why I intended to do it but I would rather
not.   Some of the points which were made, I could see what
was being said and some were very good, but I would rather
not have anything which people were not entirely happy on.
Some of you might feel you have been pushed because you
have been asked to agree to something.    If you are not
happy with the evidence, that is another matter altogether.
I take no responsibility for what the witnesses say.     We
have to accept the evidence that is given.    Are there any
other submissions you want to make, Miss Hampton?

     MISS HAMPTON:    No, thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER:    Mr. Hale, what about you?
     MR. HALE:   I wonder if you could remind me of your
procedure for documents?   I imagine it is going to be
impractical to assess what documents are going to be
required in advance, never to depart from it, but from time
to time one may wish to put in a document and there will be
the need to supply copies of a document and so on.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, those of you who were at the
business it was suggested in effect we would have a core
document of bundles.    I was almost persuaded but not
quite.   In the end I decided on the point that your
instructing solicitors made.    I did write to them and say
that I did not want to do it that way.    What we do intend
to do is build up the documents as we go along.    We might
find there are not as many as we fear.    I may be wrong but
we have to remember we are dealing with an Inquest and not
a Public Inquiry.    On balance, I think it would be better
to do it this way.    If I am proved wrong we can review it
and if need be I will review it but I think this is the
best, easiest and simplest way of doing it.    I do agree if
you are going to ask me to accept a document then you must
bring with you sufficient copies of that.   It is a waste of
paper, I appreciate, if I decide against you and I do not
adduce it but I do not see how I can get round that
particular problem.    Is there anything else you want to
raise with me?

     MR. HALE:      No.

     THE   CORONER:       Yes, Mr. Payne.

     MR. PAYNE:    Sir, I wonder if we may enquire what will
be your practice with regard to the tape recordings and
video recordings, which we understand have been made, of
some of the statements of some of the witnesses you may be
calling in the Inquest?

     THE CORONER:         Are you talking about the PACE
statements?

     MR. PAYNE:   Yes.   Our enquiry is as to how you have
it in mind to present that evidence?

     THE CORONER:   The position is that in the normal
course of my model, if you like, for an Inquest of a
traffic incident (and forgive me for using such a simple
example but it is easier for me) what we would normally do
if there had been a PACE audio recording done of the driver
is that we would either read the typed version of the
transcript or, depending on factors, we would listen to the
audio recording.   In this particular circumstance they are
very long statements, exceedingly long, and they will take
hours to go through but I feel it is right we should extend
the'practice and hear these statements.    My present
position is that we should listen to the audio tape.    I
think it will be easier than trying to listen to
transcripts but I fear we are in for some pretty heavy
stuff when we get to them.    If there is any change in that
I will announce it.

     MR. PAYNE:   Do we understand from that, sir, that the
playing of the tape will amount to the evidence of the
witness in chief?

     THE CORONER:   Yes.   My normal practice is that what
normally happens is that the officer who has taken the
statement introduces it and I will either read it or play
it as the case may be and then at some convenient point
call the witness who has made the statement.   I will
usually ask then to confirm that it was an accurate
recording or accurate reading of what was said.    I do not
ask them if that is true because that is potentially
incriminating and I do not think it is fair to ask them but
I do ask them whether they have any quarrel with the
transcription, for instance, and then I normally give them
the opportunity to ask any additional questions, subject to
the rules, which the witness may or may not respond to.

     MR.   PAYNE:   Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:    So I do reserve the right to ask
additional questions in chief but I can assure you I shall
explain all this, Mr. Payne, this afternoon when the Jury
are here and so Iwill not deal with it now.     I am very
well aware that the rules of this Court, with regard to
incriminating questions, are different to the procedure at
a Public Inquiry.

     MR. PAYNE:     Thank you very much, sir.




                         /MR. ISAACS.
      MR. ISAACS:   Sir, you have just touched upon the
ve'ry matter upon which I make the submission that I
indicated just a short time ago, and that is the question
of the privilege against self-incrimination, and
particularly so far as it affects Chief Superintendent
Duckinfield, whom you know I represent, and the burden of
my submission to you now is to ask you for a ruling that
Chief Superintendent Duckinfield be not obliged by you to
give evidence before this    Jury, so that is the burden of
my submission and one can    hear from the ....

     THE CORONER:    Just a minute.  Sit down for a minute,
Mr. Isaacs, please.   Quiet please.  This is my Court and I
am not going to permit interjections of this nature.     Mr. .
Isaacs is entirely within his rights to make whatever
submission, legal submission particularly, in the absence
of the Jury - which is why they are not    here, so that they
cannot hear any of this -    that he feels it is that he
wishes to put to me.

     It is entirely within my province whether I accept
his submissions but it is not within yours to try and
either shout him down or - and I don't think you would
succeed, actually, because he has got a microphone and you
have not - or to indicate to me your feelings on the
matter.

     I have said on several occasions that I want to
conduct these inquests properly and fairly and I intend to
do that, but I intend to conduct them in accordance with
the rules.  There are rules and you will hear about them
this afternoon when the Jury are here, because they have
got to hear about them as well, and I will not allow you —
forgive me for putting it like this - to interject.   We
have got to have order in the Court.  I don't want to turf
anybody out, I don't want to wield a big stick.   That is
the last thing I want to do because I realise that
inquests are very, very charged, aren't they, and you feel
very strongly so I sympathise with you in that regard, but
please remember we are still in a Court and within the
limits of my ability it is going to be like that.

     Now, Mr.   Isaacs, carry on.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, let it be said and let there be no
mistake about it, I am fully aware that there is a body of
opinion who would like to have Chief Superintendent
Duckinfield before this Jury, before you, cross-examined
uphill and down dale as he was before the Taylor Inquiry
and you, sir, know that before the Taylor Inquiry he was
examined in chief, he was cross-examined and there are
130-plus pages of transcript of the evidence that he gave,
and I know, sir, that I am knocking on an open door when I
submit to you that this, of course, is a wholly different
inquiry indeed.
     Sir, may I pass to you a bundle that has been
prepared which may be of some assistance so far as this
submission is concerned?

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.

      MR. ISAACS:   Sir, so there is no misunderstanding,
the bundle that I have handed in is effectively a bundle
of legal law reports, some press cutting, some
correspondence between, for example, the Chief Constable
who conducted part of the inquiry into some of these
matters, and those instructing me, and certain other press
statements made, for example, by the Director of Public
Prosecutions, and I shall come to them in due course, but
there are no, for example, statements that nobody else has
seen.   They are all documents that are effectively in the
public domain or are matters of correspondence which I
shall be referring to.

     Sir, may I make these preliminary observations:   one,
I accept - indeed it is quite clear - that Mr. Duckinfield
may be considered an important participant in the events
of that day.  That is clear beyond peradventure.
Secondly, that although this is a high profile inquest it
is important, and I know, sir, from the remarks you have
already made, not to disregard the interests of any
individual and I was heartened, if I may put it that way,
to hear you say a relatively short time ago that you would
do your best to treat these inquests as if they were a
normal straightforward inquest, and you made the analogy
which I was proposing to make, though you made it before
me, between this as a high profile inquest and the simple
road traffic accident where there is a fatality.

     So, sir, what I would wish now to do is to draw your
attention, and I do it this way because there may be those
here who are not conversant with the principles of law
involved, to my submission under four headings.  Firstly
the law, second what in my submission are the relevant
authorities, thirdly the risks which in my submission Mr.
Duckinfield still faces, and fourthly why in the
circumstances Mr. Duckinfield should not be obliged by you
to come into the witness box.

     I appreciate in saying the last, that a view that
could be taken, well, he should come into the witness box,
he should identify himself, and then you, sir, perhaps
would say, "I am not going to allow any questions in
cross-examination to be put to him", for' the reasons that
I shall go through, but the essential nature of my
submission is that he should not even have to go that far,
and I shall take them in turn.

     The first matter, sir, is the law, and there are' two
areas where one could look.  These are not in your bundle
because I anticipate that you will be fully aware of them.
The first, of course, is Rule 22 of the Coroners Rules of
19*84, dealing with self-incrimination, sub-Rule 1 - and
this is the matter that I referred to:

     "No witness at an inquest shall be obliged to answer
     any question tending to incriminate himself."

And then Section 14 of the Civil Evidence Act, which in my
submission is to the same effect but I refer to it for the
sake of completeness.  That is the Civil Evidence Act of
1968, sub-section 1:

     "The right of a person in any legal proceedings,
     other than criminal proceedings, to refuse to answer
     any question or produce any document or thing if to
     do so would tend to expose that person to proceedings
     for an offence or for the recovery of a penalty, (a. )
     shall apply only as regards criminal offences under
     the law of any part of the United Kingdom, and the
     penalties provided for by such law and (b) shall
     include a like right to refuse to answer any question
     or produce any document or thing if to do so would
     tend to expose the husband or wife of that person to
     proceedings for any such criminal offence or for the
     recovery of any such penalties."

I mention sub-section (b) only because it is there not
because, of course, it is in any way relevant to this
case.

     So, sir, that is the position.    Mr. Duckinfield, as
with any witness before you and before the Jury, has that
privilege not to answer any question which may tend to
incriminate hira. So, sir, what does that mean?     Could I
then ask you to turn to the bundle?    My submission is that
there are two cases, one in the Court of Appeal one in the
House of Lords which followed, in which the House of Lords
confirmed the decision of the Court of Appeal, which gives
you a great deal of guidance as to v; lat constitutes a
risk, a tendency, of incrimination.    The first one is that
in the Court of Appeal, the case of Re .Westi-nghou.se
Electric Corporation Uranium Contract Litigation MDL
Docket No. 235 (No. 2 ), reported in the third volume of
the All England Reports of 1977 at page 717, and I would
ask you at this stage, sir, to find that, which is at
folder 6.

     Sir, the facts of that case are wholly different to
the facts of this, but of course it is the statement of
principle, the ratio of the case to which I wish to refer.
May I first of all read that part of the preamble to the
headnote:

     "Evidence - Privilege - Incrimination of witness or
     spouse - Belief that evidence would expose witness to
     proceedings for offence or recovery of penalty -
     Reasonable ground for belief - Sufficient to show
     real and appreciable risk that proceedings would be
     taken or increase of an existing risk of proceedings
     • • •



and then it goes on to deal with discovery of documents,
production of documents and I don't weary you with that
now, sir.

     Sir, I don't think it will be helpful to you or to
those who are listening to this submission to deal''with
the facts of that cas , other than to say that it was
action involving an American corporation against RTZ, Rio
Tinto Zinc Corporation Limited, and there was an
application for discovery of documents which Rio Tinto
Zinc did not wish to produce because they said that to
produce those documents would give rise to the possibility
that they may well face prosecution or a penalty within
European Community law, but I now deal with what was held,
and this, sir, is at page 718, and these are the
statements of general principle which in my submission
apply to the giving of evidence in any Court, and
therefore before you, sir.

     THE COKONER:   May I just stop you - the page numbers
are missing off mine.

     MR. ISAACS:    It is the second page - the next page
after the first.   I do apologise, sir.

     "Held - A witness was protected from incriminating
     himself by the production of documents ...."

- and, it therefore follows, by the giving of any answer
to any question -

     "... if he could satisfy the court that there was
     reasonable ground to believe that production of the
     documents would furnish evidence against him which
     would be used in proceedings for a penalty .

“ and again, that was, of course, relevant to that case,
but it applies to proceedings for a criminal offence, and
indeed it could be said, having regard to the wide ambit
of the Coroners Rules, for example proceedings in relation
to disciplinary matters, which of course you, sir, know
Mr. Duckinfield along with others still faces.

    "Reasonable ground for the belief might appear from
    the circumstances of the case or from matters put
    forward by the witness himself, but the witness was
    required to show only that there was a real and
    appreciable risk, or an increase of an existing risk,
    that proceedings would be taken against him for an
    existing penalty offence, and not that proceedings
    were likely to be or would probably be taken."
                                                          29




You will see, sir, as we go through the reports, that one of the
poiivts made by those who objected to the claim to the privilege
was that, "Well, the European Commission already know about this,
and so you are not going to make your position any worse".   We
shall see, sir, I hope, how both the Court of Appeal and the
House of Lords dealt with that proposition, because that might be
a point that is taken here.

     Sir, knowing that you don't have page numbers could I ask
you to turn to the next page over, page 721, the right-hand side
of the first judgment which was that of the Master of the Rolls,
Lord Denning.  It is the right-hand side of the page, and he
deals with the common law as to self-incrimination.  I aisk you to
look first of all at between D-E:

          "Today we are not dealing with a party to a cause, we
          are dealing with a witness.   At common law, when a
          witness is being examined in the witness box or is
          subpoenaed to produce documents to the court then,
          quite understandably, he may have something he
          wishes to keep secret to himself so that his
          neighbours or his competitors should not get to
          know of it;  something which he might reasonably
          believe he ought not to be compelled to disclose.
          Not, at any rate, if it exposes him to risk of
          some ill befalling him.   The common law does in
          some circumstances cast its protection over him.
          It adopts the maxim nemo tenetur seipsum prodere.
          No ;one is bound to furnish evidence against
          himself. It says:   'If a witness claims the
          protection of the court, on the ground that the
          answer would tend to incriminate himself and there
          appears reasonable ground to believe that it would
          do so, he is not compellable to answer".

Then there is some reference by the Master of the Rolls to a
certain number of cases which I shall not weary you with, because
they are all dealt with in the judgment itself and the statements
of principle in the judgment.

    Could you go down to H on that same page:

          "But if it appears to the judge that,  by being
          compelled to answer, a witness may" (I stress the "may"
          sir) "may be furnishing evidence against himself, which
          could" (I stress the "could" sir) "be used against him
          in criminal proceedings or in proceedings for a
          penalty, then his objection should be upheld.

          There is the further point:   once it appears that a
          witness is at risk, then 'great latitude should be
          allowed to him in judging for himself   of the effect of
          any particular question':   see R. v. Boyes".
                                                            30




I would ask you to pay particular attention to the next few
linejB, s i r :

          "It may only be one link in he chain, or only
          corroborative of existing material, but still he is not
          bound to answer if he believes on reasonable grounds
          that it could be used against him.  It is not necessary
          for him to show that proceedings are likely to be taken
          against him, or could probably be taken against him.
          It may be improbable that they will be taken but
          nevertheless, if there is some risk of their being
          taken, a real and appreciable risk as distinct from a
          remote or insubstantial risk, then he should not be
          made to answer or to disclose the documents".

I stop there for my purposes in relation to this authority, at
least in the judgment of Lord Denning.

     Could I then ask you to turn over to the next page.    We now
move to   the judgment of Lord Justice Roskill, which is pages 724
and 725, and I ask you to look at page 725, the right-hand side
of the page at D.

          "It has long been a rule of English law, as Lord
          Denning MR has pointed out, that a person cannot ....
          be required to answer questions or produce documents
          which may lead to his being, if I may be forgiven a
          colloquialism, 'convicted out of his own mou t h ’. There
          is a long line of authorities dealing with this topic
          of which the earliest cited to us was R. v. Boves. a
          decision of the Court of the Que e n ’s Bench subsequently
          expressly approved by this court in Re Reynolds. ex
          parte Reynolds. Those two cases, and there are others
          to the same effect, show clearly that a mere assertion
          of a claim for privilege on the ground of an alleged
          risk of self-incrimination is not enough to enable the
          privilege to be successfully claimed.     Nor, of course,
          will the court uphold such a claim for privilege when
          it is made in bad faith."

May I stop there for a moment, sir. An example of that would be
this, and there are reported cases to this effect, where a man
has for example, given a statement to the Police.  He goes into
the witness box as a prosecution witness.  May be because he has
been given immunity he says, "I do not wish to answer these
questions because the answers may incriminate me", when in fact
he does not wish to protect himself but what he is trying to do
is to protect another by not giving that evidence, for example, a
previous employer or a friend.  In those circumstances he would
not be acting in good faith but in bad faith and the privilege
would not be upheld.

At F :

          "The first question which a court must ask itself is
          whether the facts proved in evidence disclose the
          commission of an offence, in some cases a criminal
                                                         31




          offence.  The first question here is whether those
          facts disclose that there is a liability on Rio Tinto
          for what counsel for Rio Tinto called 'a penalty
          offence'.....

          What, then is the degree of risk of penalty proceedings
          following?  It seems to me that once a party to legal
          proceedings who is resisting production of documents
          can show facts which establish the existence of a
          penalty offence (or in other cases the commission of a
          criminal offence) the courts should be slow to deprive
          that party of his privilege against self-incrimination,
          which the common law now for some three centuries, and
          s 14 of the Civil Evidence Act 1968 today, accords him:
          In the absence of bad faith, to say that there is no
          risk of proceedings may in all but the plainest cases
          involve a court claiming for itself a degree of
          prescient foresight to which it would not be wise to
          pretend for it its forecast were wrong and if
          proceedings and penalties were to follow, damage will
          or at least may be done by an erroneous decision of the
          court which it would not be easy thereafter to undo or
          redress

I ask you to turn over the page again to what would be 726, the
left-hand side of the page at D. Again, after a review of the
authorities, Lord Justice Roskill says:

          "It cannot, I think, be right in these cases for
          the court to attempt a quantitative assessment of
          the probability one way or the other of the risk
          of proceedings ultimately being taken, and then
          to seek to draw the line one way where the
          probabilities in the view of the court are
          thought to be more or less evenly balanced and
          the other where the balance is more disparate.
          It is not for the court to resolve problems of
          this kind by calculating odds.  I think that the
          right question to ask is that posed by Shaw LJ; can
          exposure to the risk of penalties (or in other cases to
          the risk of prosecution for a criminal offence) be
          regarded as so far beyond the bounds of reason as to be
          no more than a fanciful possibility?"

In fact, later on Lord Justice Shaw said exactly that.

     Could I ask you to turn from that case to part 7 of the
folder you have been handed, because the case ended up in the
House of Lords, where as I say the Court of Appeal's view was
upheld, as were the dicta of the Master of the Rolls and the
learned Lord Justices.  It is interesting to note when the House
of Lords dealt with the case what was said in relation to this
question of the information already being in the possession of,
let us call them in the context of this case, the prosecuting
authorities.  I anticipate you are lacking in numbers again.   If
I could ask you to turn over the first page and go to the second.
This would be page 437 on the right-hand side, sir, dealing with
                                                           32




that part of the case as to what was held by their Lordships.. I
would draw your attention to (ii) starting with " T h e RTZ
companies".


          "(ii)  The RTZ companies were entitled to claim the
          privilege from the production of documents given by s
          14(1) of the 1968 Act notwithstanding that the
          commission had knowledge of the cartel and had not
          taken any action in respect of it, for if the documents
          were produced under the letters rogatory the RTZ
          companies would be exposed to a greater risk of
          proceedings being brought against them by the
          commission for recovery of a fine than they were
          exposed to at present, since production of the
          documents might authenticate and support the existing
          information in the hands of the commission and afford
          conclusive proof of a breach by the RTZ companies of
          the prohibition against cartels, and might cause the
          commission to decide to take action against the RTZ
          companies".

So, sir,  we have there the House of Lords dealing with the point
that may be raised in this case as to the decision that has been
taken by the Director in this case, but who knows what will
happen in the future.

     Could you then turn four pages on to what would be page 445,
between B-C, still the speech of Lord Wilberforce.  He says at C:

          "I base that conclusion in part on evidence which was
          before and considered by the High Court and the Court
          of Appeal and in part on the proposition that the
          tendency to expose to a penalty would be increased if
          the documents in question were to be validated and
          connected with the RTZ companies by sworn evidence,
          as opposed to being, as they are now, pieces of paper
          found in a file".

Sir, it won't have escaped you the difference between, albeit the
evidence that was given before Lord Justice Taylor was all taken
down, it was not evidence that was given on oath, but of course
the evidence before you would be given on oath.

     Then, sir, could you turn another six pages, pages 456 and
457.  "To give any evidence".  This is the speech of Viscount
Dilhorne, between G-H, and you appreciate, sir, I am only picking
those parts which are germane to this matter:

          "Secondly, it was argued that the discovery of the
          document would not in the circumstances tend to expose
          the RTZ companies to such proceedings". (That is for a
          penalty)  "It was said that as the commission had
          knowledge from the 'Friends of the Ear th ' documents for
          a considerable time of the existence of the cartel and
          had taken no action, there was no real risk of such
          proceedings if the documents in the possession of the
                                                            33




          RTZ companies were disclosed".


Then he deals with the arguments and reference to certain
authority.

     If you could move to page 457, the right-hand side, between
C-D, and he refers to what was said by Lord Denning in the Court
of Appeal to which I have just referred you; he says:

         "With these observations I respectfully agree.     It was
         suggested that the reasoning in the Triplex case had
         reduced the burden which formerly lay on a person
         claiming privilege but I do not think that that is the-
         case.  In his judgment du Parq LJ reviewed the earlier
         cases and based his conclusions on t h e m . Lord Denning
         MR contrasted a real and appreciable risk with a remote
         or insubstantial one, and once it appears that the risk
         is not fanciful, then it follows that it is real.     If
         it is real, then there must be a reasonable ground to
         apprehend danger, and, if there is, great latitude is
         to be allowed to the witness and to a person required
         to produce documents.

         If the RTZ companies are compelled to produce the
         documents which they were asked to produce, I
         cannot reach the conclusion that it would be
         fanciful to suppose that that would expose them to
         no greater risk than at present of proceedings for
         the recovery of a penalty being brought against
         them.  The documents might well authenticate and
         support the information now in the hands of the
         commission".

So what the learned Law Lord is saying, sir, in my submission,
that even though the Commission had evidence before it which they
had decided to take no action on, the production of these
documents, the production of additional information, may well be
sufficient to cause them to take a different view.

     There is just one further part I would ask you to look at,
and that is in the speech of Lord Diplock.  Page 465 on the
right-hand side of a page which begins, "The privilege claimed by
the RTZ companies".  Could you go to the right-hand side, sir, at
B:

          "I do not think that your Lordships are entitled to
          dismiss as fanciful the risk that if the documents
          relating to the cartel were produced at the trial in
          the Virginia proceedings and came, as they then would,
          into the public domain, the resulting publicity in this
          sensitive political field might result in pressure on
          the commission to take against the RTZ companies
          speedier and severer action than they might otherwise
          have done".

Sir, having regard to both past and recent events, some events so
                                                             34




    recent as to be only a matter of days ago in relation to pressure
    which, properly placed, perhaps, is being placed upon the
    Director of Public Prosecutions, sir, those observations, those
    dicta of Lord Diplock, have a particular relevance to this
    particular case.
B
                                /So, sir, that is the law.....




c



D




E




F
     Sir, that is the law that I would wish you to take
cognisance of as far as the privilege against self-
incrimination and what it involves and what, sir, you have
to find.

     Then, sir, to move on:  what are the risks?   The third
heading.   Although I make these submissions on behalf of
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, I venture to suggest to
you, sir, that they could just as well be made in relation
to any number of individuals who may be called to give
evidence before you but of course it is Mr. Duckenfield whom
I have concern for.

     First of all, the risk of criminal prosecution.   Could
I ask you to turn to part 1 of the bundle?   Part 1 deals
with the announcement of the decision not to prosecute any
Body or person involved in this tragedy.   Sir, you will
know that by letter of the 30th August, 1990, which is the
first, there is a letter from a Mr. Cleugh, the Head of the
Police Complaints Division to the Chief Constable of the
South Yorkshire Police.   It is dated the 30th of August,
reading as follows:

     "The Director of Public Prosecutions has now received
     from the West Midlands Police the final report in this
     criminal investigation, together with substantial
     supporting evidence and documentation.   You will
     recall in August 1989 that the Director requested a
     full criminal investigation following publication of
     the Interim Report produced after the Public Enquiry
     conducted by Lord Justice Taylor into the circumstances
     surrounding the disaster at Hillsborough Stadium,
     Sheffield on the 15th of April, 1989.

     The most careful consideration has been given to all
     the evidence and documentation.   The Director has
     decided that there is no evidence to justify any
     criminal proceedings being instituted against South
     Yorkshire Police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
     Messrs. Eastwood and Partners or Sheffield City Council
     in connection with the disaster at the Hillsborough
     Football Stadium, Sheffield, on the 15th of April,
     1989.

    The Director has also concluded that there is
    insufficient evidence to justify proceedings against
    any Officer of the South Yorkshire Police or any other
    person for any offence."

     You, sir, will note the difference between "...there is
no evidence" and "...there is insufficient evidence.":
     "I am sending a copy of this letter to you by FAX..."

He also sends a copy of this letter to a number of different
people, including Mr. Sharp the Chief Constable of Cumbria
and, of course, to you, sir, and to the Police Complaints
Authority and various solicitors.

     It is noteworthy that in the press release that
accompanied that letter, dealing with essentially the
matters I have just referred to, it read originally:

     "Following a lengthy and detailed investigation by the
     West Midlands Police and close consideration of Lord
     Justice Taylor's Report, the Director of Public
     Prosecutions, Allan Green QC has concluded there is no
     evidence..."

"No" is crossed out in the press release and there has been
written in for the world to see, "insufficient":

     "...upon which a prosecution for manslaughter or any
     other criminal offence may be brought against the South
     Yorkshire Police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
     Messrs Eastwood and Partners or Sheffield City Council
     in connection with the disaster at Hillsborough on the
     15th April, 1989."

     The Director has also concluded that there is
     insufficient evidence to justify the institution of
     proceedings against any Officer in the South Yorkshire
     Police Force or any other person of any offence."

      The situation, sir, is this, in my submission, and we
shall look at further documents in due course, that the door
so far as Mr. Duckenfield and others is concerned is not
shut.   To use an expression that was mentioned to me some
time ago which I happily adopted, a line was drawn and
everything that has come above that line has meant that the
Director has taken the view there is insufficient evidence
to prosecute.    My concern so far as Mr. Duckenfield is
concerned, is that there should be nothing below that line
which might lead the Director to reconsider his decision.

     It may be said there is no real prospect of the
Director reconsidering his position and his decision so far
as this matter is concerned, but, sir, having regard to the
dicta that I have previously referred to, that, in my
submission, cannot be. right.

     I ask you now, sir, to turn to section 2, because after
the decision of the Director was announced those instructing
me wrote to Mr. Sharp, the Chief Constable of Cumbria who
was conducting an investigation into disciplinary matters,
and it may be that those instructing me perhaps
                                                                  37




    misunderstood the situation so far as the Director's
    decision was concerned.   At that stage they indicated that
    Mr. Duckenfield would then be prepared to make a statement,
    or might be prepared to make a statement, for the purposes
B   of the disciplinary proceedings.   They received by letter
    of the 6th September, 1990, this reply:

         "You are correct when you say that the DPP has decided
         that there is insufficient evidence to prosecute your
         client for any criminal offence arising out of the
         Hillsborough tragedy.   It is also correct to say that
         the disciplinary issues now have to be considered by
         South Yorkshire Police in consultation with the Police
C        Complaints Authority.   I believe you are also aware
         there are outstanding civil actions being brought by
         various parties with an interest in the matter and that
         there are ninety-five Coroner's inquests to be
         reconvened.

         I am aware that at the interview on the 3rd of July,
         1990, your client intimated that once the DPP had made
         his decision in respect of the criminal issues he would
D        consider being interviewed in respect of any
         disciplinary matters.   If that is still his wish then
         I am ready to conduct that interview, but it must be
         understood that the disciplinary matters are very
         closely related to the criminal issues so any interview
         would have to be conducted under a Police and Criminal
         Evidence Act caution and the transcript of the
         questions and answers would have to be sent to the DPP
         for further consideration of the criminal matters.
E
        That is the position in respect of any new or
        additional evidence which comes to light, for example,
        that which may arise out of the civil actions or the
        Coroner's inquests.   It is not for me to advise you or
        your client as to how you, or he, should proceed, but
        it seems to me that you should be aware of the
        foregoing information."
F        Sir, one could not have a clearer statement, in my
    submission, of it being said that anything that is said by
    any witness in these proceedings, but my concern is Chief
    Superintendent Duckenfield, who after all is the only police
    officer in this matter who was suspended and remains
    suspended as a result of this tragedy, that anything that is
    said by him will, as a matter of course, be sent to the
    Director and, who knows, it may be that the Director on
    receiving such information will reconsider his decision.

         In my submission it cannot be said that the risk   to
    Chief Superintendent Duckenfield is a fanciful one as   to the
    likelihood of proceedings taking place.   Indeed, one   knows
    that only a matter of days ago, and I ask you to look   at
section 8 now of the bundle, at two newspaper cuttings
dealing in the main with application for funds on behalf of
Mr. Duckenfield and other police officers, but at the bottom
of the newspaper cuttings there are two of them, this is
said:

     "Meanwhile, relatives of victims of the Hillsborough
     disaster handed in a 50,000 signature petition at the
     Home Office yesterday calling for those allegedly
     responsible to face criminal proceedings."

This was the Yorkshire Post of Saturday, 17th November.   It
is said then that the Director found there was insufficient
evidence to bring criminal charges against the police,
Sheffield Wednesday or Sheffield City Council:

     "But the Vice Chairman of the Hillsborough Family
     Support Group, Mr. Bill Pemberton, said the Group
     believed those responsible for the tragedy should be
     made legally accountable for their actions."

Something to the same effect was in the Daily Telegraph on
Saturday, 17th November, 1990.   You will find it, sir, at
the bottom of the article by Mr. Colin Wright.

     Here we have a situation where there is even before a
word of evidence has been given by any police officer before
you, sir, and this jury, there is pressure upon the Director
to reconsider his decision.   We know, sir, I know that you
know, that attempts have been made, albeit not against Mr.
Duckenfield but against, I think, Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club, to apply for judicial review of the
Director's decision to oblige him to reconsider and to bring
proceedings against a party whom he has previously decided
should not at this present time face prosecution.

     If such a step can be taken by Mr. Edey in respect of
Sheffield Wednesday, then of course it is open for others to
take similar action.   It may be that they will be as
unsuccessful, but who is to say?

     Sir, that is the risk so far as prosecution by the
Director is concerned.   The risk there is a real and
substantial one because one does not know what evidence will
come out of these inquests and if obliged to give evidence,
what may be said by Mr. Duckenfield which may, who knows,
tip the balance.

     There is also a risk, of course, so far as private
prosecutions are concerned because that is also a feature
that has entered the public domain and although perhaps it
is common knowledge all I can do in this regard is to draw
your attention to again newspaper articles dealing w ith the
possibility of private prosecutions.  Could I ask you to
loolc at section 4 of the bundle?  The first is a newspaper
cutting, again by the eponymous Mr. Wright who no doubt is
above us now, The Daily Telegraph, 31st August, 1990.   The
heading to this article is "Private Prosecutions Likely as
DPP Rules out Hillsborough Charges."   The first few lines
are:

     "Private prosecutions are expected to be brought by
     many of the relatives of the ninety-five football
     supporters killed in last year's Hillsborough Stadium
     disaster after the Director of Public Prosecutions
     ruled yesterday that no criminal charges should be
     brought against police or officials involved in the
     tragedy."

Further down that first column, dealing with the comments
made by Mr. Eddy Spearitt from Runcorn, he said:

     "My reaction is one of sheer disgust.  British justice
     is obviously something that has ceased to exist.   How
     can ninety-five people be squashed to death and no-one
     held responsible?   I will certainly be pursuing a
     private prosecution."

Of course, these things may have been   said in a moment of
anguish on hearing news which was not   welcome news from the
Director's office, but as far as you,   sir, are concerned,
there is clearly the possibility that   private prosecutions
may be brought.

     Then the second sheet in that particular section, an
article in the Yorkshire Post written by Mr. Mike Woodcock,
again dealing with the response of families to the
Director's decision, the first column, about half way down?

     "The Hillsborough Family Support Group Chairman, Mr.
     Trevor Hicks, pledged not to let the issue of
     prosecutions drop.

He is quoted as saying:

     "The first stage now is to take legal advice, but one
     thing I can say for certain, we won't let it drop."

That is about ten lines up from the bottom of that first
column.

     So it goes on, sir, all perhaps to the same effect in
the newspaper cuttings that you have in that particular
section.

     Finally, sir, so far as risk is concerned, and I say
this briefly but you, sir, do have the details, it is
something I mentioned earlier, and this is at section 3 of
the bundle:

     "Mr. Duckenfield, as with some other Officers, still
     has hanging over his head the disciplinary proceedings
     pursuant to the making of complaints under Regulation 7
     of the Police Disciplinary Regulations of 1985."

Though documents have been served on him pursuant to
Regulation 7 dealing with those matters.




               Of course, anything he says
cr
                                                                    41




         Of course, anything that he says in answer to any question
         could be used against him in relation to those matters.
         Sir, that is the third aspect of the submission I wish to
         make.
     B
              Sir, you could say, "I will call him" and he could
         give his name and rank and perhaps his address and we will
         see how we go, let him be asked individual questions and
         when they have been asked then I will advise him as to
         whether he has to answer that question or n o t .

              My submission to such a proposition, sir, is that each
         and every question that he would be asked, which would have
         any relevance to the matters which the Jury would have to
         consider, would be a question the answer to which is bound
         to have a tendency to incriminate.   May I ask you to look,
         sir, at the report of the case against Crown v. West London
         Coroner, ex parte Grev and others reported in the second
         volume of the All England Reports for 1987 and X hope on
         this occasion you have some numbers on the pages?

              THE CORONER:    I do.
     D
              MR. ISAACS:   I anticipate it is an authority which
         you are familiar with.

              THE CORONER:    That is right.

              MR. ISAACS:    Dealing   with the head notes then:

              "Following the deceased's death in police custody
              allegations were made against various police
              officers concerning their use of force against
              the deceased during his arrest and removal into
              custody and their failure to summon an ambulance
              promptly when he became unconscious.  At the
              inquest the coroner gave no directions to the
              jury as to the definition of unlawful killing or
              the requirements necessary for a verdict of
              unlawful killing."

         Then, sir, it deals with what happened with the Jury asking
         for help and the Coroner giving them that help in a rather
         unorthodox way.   Sir, that is not what concerns me.  One
         then looks at what the Divisional Court said in quashing
         the verdict and ordering a new Inquest for the following
         reasons:

              "(1) When directing the jury as to the standard
              of proof required, a coroner ought to direct the
              jury that they had to be satisfied beyond
              reasonable doubt if they wished to bring in a
              verdict which involved a finding that a criminal
     offence had been committed and that for other
     verdicts (except an open verdict) they had to be
     satisfied on the balance of probabilities.
     Furthermore, when directing a jury on
     manslaughter comprising unlawful killing alleged
     to have occurred because of neglect on the part
     of police, the coroner was required to direct the
     jury on four matters..."

I pause there.    My submission is this, against the
background of the submission I have already made, namely
that any question which Mr. Duckenfield was asked would
have the tendency to incriminate that in relation to those
four matters that the Divisional Court referred to, if any
question is asked of Mr. Duckenfield which touches upon any
of these four matters, or of any of the four ingredients of
the first matter to which the Divisional Court refers,
there will be a tendency to incriminate him in the very
nature of the question itself because these are questions
which would be directed to the possible commission of a
criminal offence.    Those matters are these:

     "...firstly that they had to be satisfied, on the
     evidence, of four ingredients, namely (a) that
     the police were under a duty to have regard to
     the health and welfare of the deceased..."

So any question to Mr. Duckenfield as to his duty in
relation to the spectators at Hillsborough, or those who
tragically died, would require an answer which would have a
tendency to incriminate.  It continues:

     "...(b) that in the circumstances there was a
     failure to do what should have been done for the
     health and welfare of the deceased..."

So any question asked of Mr. Duckenfield as to what he did
or did not do that day which touched upon the health and
welfare of the deceased would be a question which would
require an answer which would tend to incriminate him.   It
goes on:

     "...(c) that the failure amounted to a
     substantial cause of death..."

So any question asked of him - of course this is only a
privilege of self-incrimination - as to causation between
what he did and any death or deaths> or the deaths of those
who died in general terms, would be a question which would
tend to incriminate, that is, the answer would tend to
incriminate and:
                                                        43




    "...(d) that the failure amounted to
    recklessness..."

So any question as to his knowledge of any fact which would
tend to show that there was a risk or that he was
indifferent to it, or that he ran the risk, even
inadvertently, would in my submission be a question which
required an answer which would tend to incriminate within
the principles of law which I have previously addressed you
upon.   The head note actually deals with the test for
recklessness saying:

    "...secondly that the test for 'recklessness' was
    whether a police officer, having regard to his
    duty, was indifferent to an obvious and serious
    risk to the health and welfare of the deceased
    or, recognising that risk to be present,
    deliberately chose to run that risk by doing
    nothing about it; thirdly that a failure to
    appreciate that there was such a risk was not by
    itself sufficient to amount to recklessness; and
    fourthly that the jury could only return a
    verdict of unlawful killing if they could
    attribute the unlawful conduct to a single police
    officer but on no account should they name or
    identify any such officer."

I am not concerned with No. 4 or indeed perhaps with No. 3
but I anticipate now, sir, you have seen the thrust of my
submission in relation to this last section of the
submission that I made to you which is that it is difficult
to conceive of any question that Mr. Duckenfield could
properly be asked which would be relevant to this Inquiry
which would not in its answer have the potential to
incriminate him.

     Of course, from his point of view, and I make this
very clear so that there is no misunderstanding, he denies
any criminal behaviour, of course, but this privilege is
not there for that purpose.   It is there to protect him in
the way that Lord Denning said in the authority I cited
earlier that no man should have evidence brought against
him which is produced from his own mouth.

     If each and every question is potentially one the
answer to which will have a tendency to incriminate then,
sir, what is the purpose of calling him, with respect?    In
my respectful submission, sir, there is none.   There are
grave risks so far as the matter generally is concerned by
calling him and by saying to each and every question he is
asked either, "No, Mr. King, I am afraid that is not a
question which Mr. Duckenfield should be required to
answer" or if you, sir, do not take that particular point
on "that particular question Mr. Duckenfield or perhaps
myself saying, "Sir, I object to answering that question.
I rely on privilege".    The risk of prejudice so far as the
Jury is then concerned is overwhelming both in so far as
Mr. Duckenfield is concerned and indeed the position so far
as the South Yorkshire Police themselves as a body are
concerned (and here I intrude a little on to Mr. Payne's
territory).

     One can perhaps, no matter how carefully you are
directing, see the difficulty that would be in the mind of
the Jury if to every question the position of privilege is
claimed.  They would be bound to think, "What has this man
got to hide?" You, sir, know and my learned colleagues and
I know, that such a privilege is said not to be taken
against a man but lay people and lawyers are quite
different and there comes a time when they say to
themselves, "There is something funny here.  We are not
being told the whole truth and whatever".   My concern is
that even in the asking of a question that may be
disallowed by you there will be sufficient in the question
to prejudice the Jury against either Mr. Duckenfield or
others.

     I come back to the point I made earlier about the line
being drawn.   Everything at the moment is above the line.
I am concerned there should be nothing below the line which
may prejudice Mr. Duckenfield.    May I go back to the
analogy you drew as to the straightforward case of the
reckless driver and the fatality?

     I anticipate that it would be your practice — let us
say no PACE interview had taken place - that the driver had
relied upon his right not to answer any questions, as has
taken place in this case so far Mr. Duckenfield was
concerned, and you would not in those circumstances with
the driver facing the possibility of prosecution say to the
driver, "You must answer these questions as to what you did
and what you thought" etc.  You would not expect the driver
to answer those questions in those circumstances.   Mr.
Duckenfield is in exactly the same position.

     It may be said that Mr. Duckenfield is such an
important participant in the events of that day that
without him what is the point of going on at all but in my
submission that would be misconceived because the privilege
is only against self-incrimination.  There are many, many
people, both police officers and civilians who can give
evidence as to the facts and the factual decisions that Mr.
Duckenfield took on that day and so the Jury will not in
any way be deprived of the opportunity of hearing about
what happened.  They would just be deprived of not being
told by Mr. Duckenfield.
s
                                                                 45




             I come back again to the point that I made at the
        outset.   Whilst this is a high profile Inquest, it is
        important not to disregard the rights of any individual who
    B   has interests of his own and important interests which are
        affected by the law.

              I finally say this - and I know I have been on my feet
        for quite some time and I do not want to weary you
        further - that if it be felt necessary by you, and both you
        and I know, sir, that there are no PACE statements or
        interviews by Mr. Duckenfield, that the Jury must hear
        something about what Mr. Duckenfield said about the day
        then, sir, upon instructions - and it is only on this basis
        that I put this - I have no complaint with what Mr.
        Duckenfield said to the Taylor Inquiry going before the
        Jury.   I say that because that is all above the line as
        opposed to anything new below the line.

             That has already been considered by the Director and
        my concern is that there is something else.   It may be
        said, "We can ask him the same questions and if the
    D   Director has already considered those matters, well then,
        frankly what has he got to worry about?" Sir, the asking
        of the question (a) is unlikely to be in the same terms and
        (b) the answer is unlikely to be in the same terms and it
        does not have to be an answer which is an admission of any
        offence.   It only has to be, on the authorities, a step
        possibly towards this, and again, sir, you have the dicta
        where that is made abundantly clear.

             I fear, and I know you are mindful of this, sir, that
        this is really the last opportunity for the families (and
        one can understand their concern and I do not criticise
        them at all) through my learned friend, Mr. King, or Mr.
        Hytner who may well be brought in, as Mr. King mentioned on
        the last occasion to, cross-examine Mr. Duckenfield or
        other witnesses, to produce extra evidence to get that
        which they have, which we see, been pressing for.  It is in
        those circumstances that seeking to protect Mr.
        Duckenfield's interests, to be fair to him whilst being
        fair to others, and being mindful of the restricted area of
        Inquests as this is not a Public Inquiry, this is not the
        Spanish Inquisition, this is not the Star Chamber, not only
        should be the questions which he is to be asked that he
        should not be obliged to give evidence at all.  Those are
        my submissions, sir.

             THE CORONER:   Can I just make two small points before
        I call anybody else? Perhaps it was my fault, I do not
        recollect, but if I instanced an RTA where the driver was
        reckless then I made a mistake because if a driver had been
        reckless he would have been charged with causing death by
reckless driving and under Section 16 of the Coroner's Act
I would have had to adjourn it sine d i e . The point I was
trying to make was that under normal circumstances it was
the ordinary driver.

     MR. ISAACS:   Let us say, it is probably my fault,
careless driving or driving without due care.

     THE CORONER:   It makes no difference to the argument
but I just wanted to be clear that we were talking about
the same thing.

     MR. ISAACS:   It is important.  The seriousness of the
crime is neither here nor there.  It is a privilege, as you
and I know, against self-incrimination in any offence.  I
am obliged to you, sir.

     THE CORONER:   It is 1236 and in twenty minutes we
will be rising because at two o'clock we are starting with
the Jury.  Can you indicate whether any of you feel you
wish to address me on the point which Mr. Isaacs has made?
What you are saying is that there is clear authority that a
person does not have to answer questions which tend to
incriminate him, to use the text of the rule, and you cited
the rule plus several cases.  Do any of you feel you want
to address me on the point which Mr. Isaacs has made? As I
understand it, what you are saying is that there is clear
authority for saying that a person does not have to answer
a question which may tend to incriminate him and you cited
the rule plus several cases.  It is exceedingly difficult
to formulate questions where people are in danger of
prosecution which are meaningful and in the circumstances
what is the point of getting the man or the witness to come
into the box at all? You are not suggesting that a PACE
statement, if there is one, or anybody else should be
excluded?

     MR. ISAACS:   No, sir, not at all.

     THE CORONER:   Have I summarised very, very briefly
the heart of your submission?

     MR. ISAACS:   Indeed you have, sir.  To call him in
those circumstances would only serve to disadvantage him as
well as others in addition to the prejudice which would be
caused.  You have summarised it absolutely correctly.

     THE CORONER:   The fourth point you have made is that
the damage of refusing to answer the questions is out of
proportion to the benefit of having him here as a witness?

     MR. ISAACS:   There is no benefit in having him here
because any question he is asked is bound to have the
                                                              47


A


    tendency to incriminate him on the basis of the principles
    I have put before you.

         THE CORONER:   I  look to Mr. King, first of all,
B   because he is the most likely person to address me on the
    issues. Are you likely to address me on this?

         MR. KING:   Sir,   I would wish to. There are two
    matters.  One I would   wish to hear if anybody     else has
    anything to say in support and, secondly, in the light of
    what has just fallen from my learned friend’s lips as to
    the use of the transcript I would like to take certain
    instructions from those whom I represent.

         THE CORONER:   Mr. Isaacs, it seems to me that it
    would be wise, before I give a ruling on your submission,
    to allow other people to have their say so that I can hear
    different points of view and secondly, it gives me a chance
    to think about it as well.  If you do not think it rude,
    what I intend to do is not proceed with the point at this
    stage because we cannot deal with the submissions on what
    is quite an important point actually in twenty minutes and
D   we will deal with it either at four this afternoon, subject
    to your agreement, when the Jury go or if it is more
    convenient to you we can deal with it at four tomorrow or
    any other d a y .




E




F




G

                    /Mr. Duckenfield is not going...




H
Mr, Duckenfield is not going to be called in the immediate
future, so in that sense it is not urgent that we have got
to have a ruling this morning.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, save for this, that I am afraid -
and you may have gleaned this from some of the newspapers,
I think - that I will not have the privilege of being
before you on most days during this Inquest.

       THE CORONER:   I had not appreciated that.

      HR. ISAACS:   You had not, sir, but no, I am afraid
that is the position.   Without going into any details I am
afraid that the cost of representation would be so great,
and there is no sufficient funds for him at the present
time.   The Police Authority have unfortunately failed to
agree that he or others in a similar position should have
their representation paid for, so I am afraid that he will
not be represented during the course of this inquest, sir,
other than on the days when, if you do decide that he
should be called, he is actually giving evidence.

     THE CORONER:   And presumably on the days when any
statement - in fact, I think there is one,  it is not very
long but I think there is one - were to be dealt with?

     MR. ISAACS:    That may or may not be the case, sir,
but one can understand the difficulties.   May I say this,
in relation to what you said just a moment ago, and this
perhaps is a little special pleading?   You said a moment
ago you did not want to be rude - I think I can speak on
behalf of all ray learned friends, it is a long time since
we have been before a tribunal which is so courteous and
we are very grateful to you for that.   We are not perhaps
used to being treated so well.

       THE CORONER:   Will you be here this afternoon?

       MR. ISAACS:    I shall be here this afternoon,   sir,
yes.

     THE CORONER:    In that case shall we deal with it
this afternoon?   Is that agreeable to all of you?  I know
it makes it a longer day but I did say at our business
meeting that the lawyers have to put up with the strain.
I don't like to subject my jury to too heavy pressure,
because it is not fair on them, but we have just got to
put up with it, so to speak.   Is that agreeable to
everybody?  Good.

      Is there any other --- perhaps you could outline the
nature of your submissions, so I know what we have got in
store, so to speak.

       MR. MANNING:   The first thing I am going to do, if I
may,   is to pay tribute to the way in which my learned
friend Mr. Isaacs has put the matter before you, and the
second thing I am not going to do is to repeat it.  It
does not get stronger or better by repetition.

     You know that I represent Superintendent Hurray.  He
has made a statement under the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act.  I expect that in one form or another that
will be brought before this hearing at some stage, and
having done that I find myself adopting, and all the more
so, the views that have been canvassed before you.

       At the end of this hearing the verdict will be one
for the Jury and as learned as we hope we may be in the
ways in which a Coroner's Inquest is to proceed, the fact
of the matter is that the probability is that most of the
people who will be on the Jury have never been on any
jury, and I shall certainly be surprised if they have ever
been on a Coroner's Jury.    With the best directions in the
world, the fact of the matter, as we know from juries and
experience, is that some people can take one what seems to
be minor and inconsequential point and make that the
deciding and turning factor upon which everything else
f al ls .

     It is impossible, in the words that have been read to
you by my learned friend, for it to be conceivable that a
Jury will not in its mind's eye say, "What on earth is
going on here under this rule against self­
incrimination?", and "Why are we not being allowed to see
the person?", and therefore there is damage beyond measure
in even going to that stage which suggests that a person
should be called into a witness box, give their name and
address, and somebody, whether it is you or whether it is
the witness or the lawyer for that witness, referring to
the Rule, and whether then the Jury is asked to retire,
the fact of the matter is they have got the whiff of
something and when they have got that scent the brain
begins to run wild and we can have no control over what
part that is likely to play in the ultimate decision
making process.

     Therefore, in adopting the legal submissions and in
not seeking to put them before you over and over again, I
have to say that considering what questions may be raised,
and considering those criteria which have been put before
you as to the sorts of questions which clearly have to be
in the mind, and have to be enquired into, if those are
the questions which normally would be asked and there is
the Rule and the law, and that is what we, and you, sir,
are here to uphold, the law, if the law says that a person
should not be put in that position, categorically should
not, then it seems to me, with respect, that you should
therefore make a ruling that you are not going to have the
witness put into it, and you can make whatever explanation
you want, because you can simply read the law to the Jury
and, make them clear that they should dismiss that from
their minds.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King,     I will skip you,   if I may -
not out of discourtesy.

     MISS SINCLAIR:   Sir, I do not adopt the submissions
made by my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs, and indeed, I have
no other submissions to make at   this stage.

     THE CORONER:     You do not?

     MISS SINCLAIR:     I do not.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, can I say, on behalf of the
Officers of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, that we
came here prepared and expecting to see every witness
called to give evidence, subject to the normal rules, and
indeed, as I hope has been made clear, we are anxious to
help throughout.  I would like, however, to reserve my
position in the light of any ruling you may make.  If the
senior Police Officers are not going to be giving evidence
at this inquiry naturally that is something I wo u ^
to have the opportunity of discussing with my clients.    I
cannot predict what the outcome   will be of that, and if
necessary I will make an application   at a later stage.  At
present I have no observations actually on the
applications made by my learned friends.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, I would personally be very
pleased if Mr. Duckenfield would appear in this Court so
that I can put questions to him directly.  As he was the
main participant in the disaster I was looking forward to
meeting Mr. Duckenfield so that I would be able to meet
him face to face.  That is all.

     MR. CALLAGHAN:     Sir,   I have no observations to make.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Sir, as you are aware I represent
the Police Federation and the ruling that you are about to
make clearly will have a generalised application and apply
to certain witnesses whom I represent.   Sir, in short, at
this stage I would wish to say that in principle I also
echo and adopt those submissions which have been made by
my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs.   Clearly individual
decisions are going to have to be made by certain
individuals, dependent upon your ruling.

     What I would say, sir, in particular, is that in my
respectful submission it would indeed be preferable for
such individuals not to give evidence at all if that
indeed was your decision, rather than running the risk of
sowing the seeds of prejudice in the Jury's minds in the
way which has been described by my learned friend Mr.
Isaacs and my friend Mr. Manning, if I may say so, so
eloquently.
                                                               51




       / For my part I would submit that it must be right that
    there is very little indeed which could be asked of such a
    witness, the answer to which would not have a tendency to
    incriminate.  Sir, I won't repeat all the submissions
    which have been made by my learned friend but I would
B   specifically wish to reinforce those particular ones.

         MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, as you will recall I represent
    Superintendent Greenwood and I would endorse what-'has been
    said principally by my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs.   Sir,
    it may be that you would prefer me to add my two penny
    worth to thoss arguments at 4 o'clock.

         THE CORONER:   It depends how long you will be.  Yes,
    I think that might be wiser because I don't want to rush
    you.  Is anybody at this end going to want to ....

         MISS HAMPTON:   I have no submissions.

         MR. HALE:   I will say that in principle I would
    support Mr. Isaacs because his arguments are so very
    soundly based and based on precedent.  Whether I avail
D   myself of them will be a different matter.  Mr. Marshall
    may wish to give evidence but that, of course, will be his
    choice.

         MR. PAYNE:   Sir, the position of the Chief Constable
    is that he supports the position taken by individual
    Officers, and accordingly, therefore, supports the
    submissions made by Mr. Isaacs.

         THij CORONER:  Very well.  We will leave this
    submission tnen, at this stage, in order to particularly
    enable Mr. King to consider it and to put anything he
    wants to me.

         May I just ask whether you will have any other legal
    submissions which are burning and which need to be made
    today?   Please don't think that I wish to stifle you in
    any sense of the word.   I am just trying to assess
    timings.   No?  Good.

          We in this room - you know how to get in - as far as
         le
    the legal representatives are concerned there is quite a
    large room - it is called the safe and I think it has got
    steel doors - the key to it is under the control of the
    local authority and arrangements have been made for it to
    be open between 9 and 10 and 4 and 5, so that if you wish
    ■ and I stress if you wish - you can deposit any of your
    papers - this goes for you as well, of course, Mrs.»
    McBrien - in that room, but you cannot assume that the
     .ocal authority will take responsibility for them.    The
    room will be under the charge of one chap    with a key and
    ne will open and shut it, but you have to accept the risk,
    so to speak.   You don't have to use it.  It is a facility
    which we have tried to provide.
    ' S ec ondly, those of you who were here for Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry, we have been provided with the big rooms
on the other side of the main staircase - one is called
the Mandela Room, the other I have forgotten the name of.
The Mandela Room has been laid out with a big screen like
this, so if there is an overflow or somebody wants to know
what is going on but does not want to be in the Court,
they can go and watch and near.     As I understand it, if we
use, for example, a video, you will see the video but you
will not be able to see the Court, because we have only
got one camera.     In the normal course of events you will
be able to see and hear what is going on in Court but in
certain circumstances you may have a slightly limited
recording, because of the facilities - we have had to draw
the line somewhere.

     The other room has been laid out and is intended
really mainly for the families, if they want to withdraw
and sit and be quiet.  That is one half of it and in the
other half we have built small partitions, cubicles, so if
any of you wish to speak to your clients you have got a
measure of privacy but they are not soundproof, so you
have to judge how good they are and whether you want to
use them.  They are there for your use if you wish.

     At the back of the hall I think there is a list of
restaurants, which has not been put up by me, so if you
want to go and look and see what is what and where you can
go - and no doubt there are dozens of others as well - we
are right in the centre of town so it should not be too
difficult to eat and have refreshments.

     We have had quite a long session.  I hope you will
forgive me, but I wanted to get on with it.  We are going
to rise.  Is there anything - yes, Mrs. McBrien?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I just wanted to say something
relating to the other matter earlier in the day.  I was
wondering if the time limits could be extended, in the
individual inquests, the time limit of 3.15 for the day in
question could be extended for individual inquests but not
apply to the generic inquest?

     ^THE CORONER:  The answer to that is that I took Mr.
King s submission to incorporate that point and I have
said what I want and am not going to change my mind on it.
I am going to stick to what I have said, 3.15 or
thereabouts, so I am not extending it but-we did say that
if there are any specific errors which you were going to
bring to my attention in the summaries, that I would
consider it, and that would apply to you as well, of
course, as far as your boy is concerned.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you.
    / MR. KING:  I was just going to remind yourself, sir,
and therefore anybody listening, that you did indicate
that in any individual case it was open to the families,
either through^myself or representing themselves, to put
before you individual submissions relating to timings
which had to be sorted out.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, where there are errors which are
material, shall we say.

     MR. KING:   I think you did say, sir, if anything did
emerge in the course of the evidence which reflected on
the primary case of ray submissions, you would obviously
consider that too.

      THE C O R O N E R :  Yes, I think that goes without saying,
 I nope.  In order to assist you, my team is going to
 arrange for one member to stay in the room during the
 lunch hour, so if you, wish to leave your oapers here you
 may do so, but aa,-        .t        ,
    . .                ^ ln it has to be at your risk.  We don't
anticipate any problems and we are having somebody to
watch it, but we are not taking any responsibility.

     Shall we reconvene at 2 o'clock?

                    (Luncheon Adjour nm e nt )
                                                         54




                          (Jury Present)

     THE CORONER:   I should explain to you, ladies and
gentlemen, that we actually started this morning at 10 o'clock
and the reason why you were not invited to be here was because’we
were spending the morning doing legal submissions, and what would
have happened is I would have asked you to come in and then go
straight out again, and I thought you were prefer not to do
that, but this afternoon we will begin with the evidence and
anything else we need to do.

     I remind you that you that you have already been sworn.  You
remember that? It was quite some time ago.   If you think about
it, just treat the gap as a long weekend.  We are now proceeding,
but you are still on oath.  Your task is still exactly the same
as it was before.

     You will remember in April-May time we were dealing with
individuals, were not we.  We were taking each individual person
and listening to medical evidence and any other evidence which
was being presented to us.  To a certain extent what we are now
going to do is going to be a bit different, because what we were
trying to do then was to deal with the first three points that
Coroners deal with, who, when and where.  Now we are going to
start thinking about how did they come by their deaths.   In some
respects, that is more difficult, and I think you may find that
because it is more difficult and because it is a different
question, the form in which the evidence will be given will also
be different.  So be prepared that there may be a different
atmosphere, because although I don't want us to forget that we
are dealing with 95 individual people who lost their lives and
that we are dealing with 95 family groupings who are very
concerned and very interested, we are now in many respects, not
entirely, but in many respects dealing with sometimes
technicalities and may be a lot of detail, but it is because we
are looking at the how.

     You probably don't remember, but when I spoke to you before
and I think I did say this, how is not quite the same as why.
That is a different question.  There are loads of asking words,
who, when, where, how, why, whom.  We are supposed to be thinking
mainly about the word "how".  I have looked it up in the
dictionary, and the definitions are not very good and there are
pages and pages of it, but one of the definitions is "by what
means".  Included in the "how" there may be little bits of
elements of "why" and "who", but we are only going to go as far
as is necessary down that road to help us to establish the "how"
so at the end of the day you can reach, hopefully, a verdict
based upon the evidence.

      I will remind you of one or two of the rules which I have to
do even at this early stage, because it is terribly important,
but I want to say one or two domestic things.   You know where you
are.   It is a bigger room.  We have a bit more space.  Last time
you lived on sandwiches, if you can remember, for quite a long
time.   We are not doing that again, not that I was not very, very
grateful to the WRVS for doing it, but we are in the centre of
                                                                 55




town so there are plenty of facilities, including a restaurant
upstairs.  So we are going to say to you, fend for yourselves,"
and my Jury Officers will sort out the financial reimbursement.
There are rules and limits, but they will have told you that.   If
they have not, ask, so that you know how much you can spend
without being out of pocket.  It is adequate, you will find.

     One advantage of giving you sandwiches, was that we had you
nicely segregated from everybody else, and we won't have that if
we allow you to run free, but after all, you go home in the
evenings as well, d o n ’t y o u , so I can't see any good reason why
you should not do whatever you wish, but please remember the rule
is no discussion with anybody about the case.        It is very
difficult, but you must follow it, particularly in a building
like this where you can see there are quite a lot of people here,
I have met quite a lot of these people and I still d o n ’t
recognise most of them, and so it is very easy if you start
talking to strangers you may find you are talking to people who
you in no circumstances you should have opened your mouth to.         So
don't talk to anybody.     So will you please do that for me?

     If you find I am going on for too long, because we w o n ’t be
rising quite as frequently as we did at the Medico Legal Centre
because it is slightly different now, but if you think I am going
on too long you   are near enough now    toattract my attention and
to say, "Can we   stop and have a cup    ofcoffee", or something, an
of course, if any of you need to stop because you are not feeling
well or because   you were indisposed    insome way then obviously
you must let me know.   It is exceedingly important that you are
all here, because if we are not we have to stop.   We have no
control over our lives completely, but unless there is a really
compelling reason why you cannot be here please be here.    It does
not actually inconvenience me, because if I am not here I am
doing something else, but it inconveniences everybody else,
because we would have to adjourn it until we are back again, so
to speak, as a group.

        I think that is all I need to say on domestic matters.   May
I a s k , were any of you in Court this morning, because somebody
suggested that you were? None of you were in Court? That is
good, because we did not want you in Court.      That is right, none
of you, members of the Jury, were in Court in the morning? That
is important, because if we have legal submissions and I ask you
to go out you must stay out.     It may be when it is all over and
we have finished I will explain to you why we do that, but I
d o n ’t think I will do it now because we have not got much time,
and it can wait, I am sure.

     I am not going to tell you the potential verdicts which you
will have to consider because we are going to hear the evidence,
and when we have heard the evidence I am going to sum it up,
hopefully, and I will direct you with regard to the law and
anything else I need to tell you, and then you will retire and
take your time and so on.

     I do want to draw one or two rules toyour attention,
because it is exceedingly important that you should understand it
                                                             56




now and that everybody else should understand it.   This is not
actually a rule but it is a general point.   We are doing
Inquests.  There are 95 of them but we are doing them together.
This is not a trial. Nobody is accused of anything in my Court.
It is not a Public Inquiry, so we don't roam beyond my brief.   It
is not adversarial in the sense that the parties can introduce
their own witnesses and put them up to me to listen to and then
make a judgment.  I introduce the witnesses.   That is not to say
that if parties want to draw my attention to a particular witness
or witnesses whom they would like me to consider, they can do
that and have done because a lot of water has flowed under the
bridge since we last met, but in the final analysis it is my
decision whom we call, rightly or wrongly, and it is an
inquisition.

     The next thing to understand, and this is very, very
important, is that this is an inquisition not on behalf of the
relatives, not on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police, not on
behalf of the club, not on behalf of Eastwoods, not on behalf of
the supporters generally.   It is an Inquiry by me, and if you
like because I am called Her Majesty’s Coroner you may take it it
is on behalf of the State or Her Majesty the Queen.   So it is
important to understand that, and I have to keep on reminding
myself of this as well, because otherwise we get misled into
thinking we are doing this for others, and of course you realise,
and I am conscious and so are you and everyone else, of the
families, so it is important that the evidence which we call
should seek to be intelligible and relevant and answers as far as
one can some of the things which concern and worry them.   It is
very important to know that this is not done because they are
bereaved people.   It is because somebody has died and the Act
says that when that happens the Coroner should hold an
inquisition either on his own or with a jury.   Well, we are with
a jury, of course.

     I have already indicated to you the overall limitations of
an Inquest, so i am not going to repeat that, but there is
another very important corollary to this, and that is Rule 22.  I
am going to read this rule to you because you have got to
understand it, because it may be relevant at some point.   It
won't be relevant today, but I want to get it right at this
stage.   What it says is:

          "(1) No witness at an Inquest shall be obliged to
          answer any question tending to incriminate himself.

          (2) Where it appears to the Coroner that the witness
          has been asked such a question the Coroner shall inform
          the witness that he may refuse to answer".

Now, this is a fundamental principle of Coronal Inquisitions, and
it may well be a fundamental principle in a load of other courts,
but I am not interested in what happens elsewhere.  I am
interested here.  An important thing to understand is that if
somebody exercises their right it is a right.  It is not that
they may or may not.  They have a right not to answer questions
which may incriminate them.  You must not draw inferences from
the exercise of their rights.
   ✓

     That does not mean to say that you may not hear evidence
from other people which may tend to incriminate them.  That is
not the point, but you cannot expect somebody to stand up and
say, "I did it” . It happens in TV series, but it does not happen
generally speaking in real life, but it is part and parcel of the
overall structure of Coronal jurisdiction, and it is designed (a)
to protect the individual or individuals who may be involved, and
(b) to ensure that if it were to be that some other proceedings
were to take place in some other court we have not muddied the
water.




                         /So there is actually a dual
     There is actually a dual advantage, if you like.
One, it protects the individual from being forced to say
things which he does not want, or being forced to lie on
oath which is not very good and two, it facilitates other
proceedings if those are appropriate.   It is not for us
to say whether they are or they aren't.

     In addition to that there are various other rules.
There are rules about the sort of questions which may be
asked.   In fact I can disallow questions if I don't
consider them to be proper questions.   There are rules
about when you frame the verdict, as it is known.    You
mustn't name people whatever you do, but I will tell you
more about that nearer the time.

     Now you can see in front of you a serried rank of
desks and ladies and gentlemen who are solicitors and
legal representatives.   They have already introduced
themselves to me but would you mind just doing it again
so the jury knows who is sitting in front of them?

     MISS HAMPTON:   Alison Hampton of Counsel appearing
with Mr. Richard Maxwell of Counsel on behalf of the
Sheffield City Council.

     MR. HALE:   Vincent Hale, solicitor, on behalf of
Superintendent Roger Marshall.

     MR. PAYNE:   I am Richard Payne, Counsel, with
Patrick Limb, Counsel, and we are instructed by Hammond,
Suddart, solicitors, to appear for the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire Police.

     MR. ISAACS:   Paul Isaacs of Counsel, instructed by
Hepworth and Chadwick, solicitors, on behalf of Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield.

     MR. MANNING:   Richard Manning, solicitor, Walker,
Morris, Scott, Turnbull of Leeds, instructed on behalf of
Superintendent Murray.

     MR. KING:   Sir, and members of the jury, my name is
Timothy King.   I am a barrister appearing on behalf of
forty-three families of the deceased.

     MISS SINCLAIR:   My name is Fiona Sinclair, Counsel,
for Eastwood and Partners.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   My name is Stuart Catchpole,
Counsel.   I am instructed on behalf of Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club.
   7 MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, and members of the Jury, I am
Joan McBrien and I appear on behalf of our family in this
matter.

     MR. CALLAGHAN:   Andrew Callaghan,   solicitor, on
behalf of the Ambulance Service.

     MISS ADDELMANN:   My name is Andrea Addelmann of
Counsel.   I am instructed by Russell, Jones and Walker
and I represent the Police Federation.

     MR. RUSSELL:   I am Christopher Russell.   I am a
barrister.   I am instructed by solicitors called Barlow,
Lyde and Gilbert and I represent the interests of
Superintendent Greenwood.

      THE CORONER:  You might ask, having told you all
about this inquisitorial system and how I do it all:
what are they doing here?   The answer is that the rules
which I have already referred to permit interested^
parties to be present, obviously.   The rules permit them
to ask questions which is why Mrs. McBrien is there, and
the rules also provide that people can be represented by
their legal representatives and that is why they are
here.

     Of course, if it is correct and opportune they will
ask questions of the witnesses and within the limits
which I have outlined to you they will be permitted to do
so.

     Now without any further ado, all I will say is that
these inquests are concerned with a disaster which
happened at a football stadium known as Hillsborough
Football Stadium, on the 15th of April, 1990.   You will
learn as we go along more details about it.

     Now I think the first thing is we will call Steven
Brown.

                  STEVEN BROWN Sworn

                   By THE C O R ON ER :

Can you give me your full name? - A. I am Police
Constable Steven Brown of the West Midlands Police.

Is it right, Mr. Brown, that you have with you some^
overhead photographs of various scenes? - A. Yes, sir.

These are photographs mainly of the stadium and its
surrounds? - A. Yes.
                                       S. BROWN



     THE CORONER:      Ladies and gentlemen, I hope you have
got good eyesight, the model is   over there:

These photographs,   most of them  were taken after the
incident?   In fact all of   them  were taken after the
incident? - A. Most of them, yes, sir.

Can you put them up one at a time and we will number
them.   Let's put the first one up.   We are going to
give these all "C" numbers in our usual way.   This is
C.249.   That is what? - A. Aerial photograph of the
ground, sir.

Can you put the next one up?   This will be C . 250. - A.
This is a photograph of the south stand and the Spion
Kop.

Can you point on the model?   OK.   Next one.   What is
this? - A. This is a photograph, sir, of the north stand.
(C.251)

It is taken across the Leppings Lane terraces, is that
right? - A. That is correct, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, in
football parlance, apparently, the stand is a place where
you sit and the terrace is the place where you stand:

Yes, next please.    What is that?   (C.252) - A. It is a
photograph, sir of the west terrace and west stand.

(C.253) - A. This is a photograph of the perimeter gates
at Leppings Lane end of the ground.

Some of the perimeter gates.   In fact it is a photograph
in two bits, in effect? - A. That is correct, sir.

Can you put the second one up as well?   (C.254).   The
next one please.   This is another aerial view.   That
gives a better impression of the Leppings Lane end? - A.
Yes, sir.

(C.255).   Next please.   This is very similar to one you
have already seen, but what are we intending to see on
this one? - A. Sir, this shows the turnstiles 1 to 16.

Turnstiles 1 to 16?   (C.256).     This is what? - A. This
shows the turnstiles A 'to 6.

(C.257).   Can you see the A to G on there?   There are
the big "Bs" and then underneath it there are the
letters, A, B, C, D, E, F, G.    Next. - A. This shows
the courtyard area beyond the perimeter gates and also
                                         S. BROWN


tfye metal perimeter wall and turnstiles which have the
letters A, C, B,    from left toright.

Can you point to    the A, C and B? - A. A h e r e , sir.   C
and B.

That is how the turnstiles were numbered.   That was
C.258.    What is this? - A. Sir, this is gate B.

(C.259)

     THE CORONER:   Are you sure, Mr. Jones?         What is
turnstiles 1 to 16?

     DCC JONES:   C.256.   Two photographs, sir, C.255
and C.256.  Turnstiles A to G, C.257.   Courtyard and
metal wall C.258   and C.259 isgate B.  We have missing
turnstiles A, C and B.

     THE CORONER:    No, we had that.

Can you put that back?   That is turnstiles...   What is
that? - A. That is turnstiles A, C and B, sir, also the
courtyard and the metal wall.

I see, these are bracketed.   Now put gate B up again,
please.   That is one of the exit gates.  (C.259).   What
is that? - A. That shows gate C to the left of the wall.

Can you point at it? - A. Yes, sir.

(C.260). - A. Sir, this photograph shows the gate locks
and the observation panel in the gate.

The observation panel is that little square thing? - A.
Yes.

(C.261). - A. Sir, this shows a view of the concourse
beyond the turnstiles and a hole in the wall which leads
round to the north-west terrace.

(C.262). - A. This shows the tunnel leading to enclosures
3 and 4 and also shows the standing sign and the letters
B and A above the tunnel.

This is behind the turnstiles...    - A. Leading from the
concourse into the enclosures.

Down towards the terracing.   (C.263) - A. This
photograph shows the standing sign on a pillar at the far
right of the photograph.

Can you again point to it up there please?   If you had
followed that you would have finished up in enclosure 1.
                                        S. BROWN


(0^264). - A. This shows a double gate at the end of the
concourse end of the tunnel.

(C.265). - A. This shows the gates at the terrace end of
the tunnel and the radial fence which separates the two
e nclosures.

End on, of course,    the radial fence? - A. Yes.

(C.266).   This photograph was obviously taken very soon
after the incident.   What is it? - A. This shows the
gates at the rear of the enclosures giving access to all
of the enclosures in the Leppings Lane terraces.

Can you point where they are?   I can see them because I
know where they are.   (C.267).   Just point to the
tunnel exit.   Yes. - A. This photograph shows the
barriers in enclosures 3 and 4.

(C.268) Could you point out which is enclosure 3 and
which is enclosure 4? - A. This is enclosure 3 and
enclosure 4.

It is just an overview. - A. This photograph shows the
perimeter fences separating the terraces from the pitch.

(C.269).    The people on that photograph had nothing to
do with it.    It just happens that they were there. - A.
This shows the top of those fences where the wire bends
inwards towards the enclosures.

(C.270). - This shows the radial fences separating the
enclosures in the Leppings Lane terraces.

(C.271). - A. This shows the police control box and the
electric clock and display board above it.

Just show us where the clock is. - A. This is the
electric clock.

Switched off? - A. Switched off, and the display board
here.

The police control box is that building with the word
"Skips" written on it, or that structure? - A. Yes, sir.

(C.272). - A. Finally, sir, this is an internal view of
the police control box.

That will be C.273.

     THE CORONER:     Any questions of this Officer?
                                               S. BROWN


     MRS. McBRIENi   Sir, have you a photograph of the
area past gate C, the no man's land area, where people
were not supposed to go but they went for safety reasons,
I think?   Have you any photographs where they could have
gone in that passageway?

     THE CORONER:   I know what Mrs. McBrien is after.
We will have a look and see whether we have got a
photograph of that area.   It is in fact on the aerial
shots if you look.   We will see whether we have got one
which might show that area for you.

     MRS. McBRIEN:     Thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you, Officer.     PC Brown will
be   back probably tomorrow morning with the videos.

     Next Michael Layton if he is            here.    You are sworn
actually, Mr. Layton so you don't            need to be sworn again.

     Ladies and gentlemen, witnesses who have already
been sworn I can see no advantage in re-swearing.  Are
you happy with that or did you wish to hear him sworn?
I cannot see any point in it.

                 MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                     By THE C O R O N ER :

     THE WITNESS:   Sir, Michael        Layton, Detective
Inspector, collar number 9364 of        the West Midlands
Police.

Now you have prepared a summary on video and photographic
evidence? - A. That is correct, sir.

Would you please give it to me?   It will be perfectly in
order for you to read it to me because I don't expect you
to remember it. - A. Yes, sir.   Sir, following the
Hillsborough disaster, a video and photographic section
was formed as part of the main inquiry team to look at
all aspects of visual evidence available from various
sources.

As such, between the 19th of April, 1989 and the 9th of
May, 1990, I was responsible on a full-time basis for the
supervision of this particular team of officers.

Our primary function was the collation and examination of
such material initially for the judicial inquiry and
latterly for the Coroner's inquests.

Video recordings, both prior to the event, during and
ultimately showing the aftermath were obtained from a
                                                                  64



                                                M. LAYTON



      number of agencies.   This material which varied both in
      content, quality of picture and evidential value was
      viewed by members of the team, copied and scheduled.
B     Each film and photograph were given a unique reference
      number.   The schedules prepared were in themselves a
      precis of the events shown on film.

      Ultimately, sir, a composite film was prepared in
      conjunction with the Treasury Solicitor's Department,
      which was shown at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.   This
      film was designed to show what was felt to be the most
      important scenes and sequence of events.

       Sir,   that film was given the reference number MRE.2.

    Q. Is that the one that I... - A. That is the composite
       film, sir.

    Q. The compilation? - A. The compilation, sir, yes.

    Q. I think it is right - you have said it but I just want
D      you to confirm it - this wasn't prepared solely by the
       West Midlands, it was done in conjunction with the
       Treasury Solicitors? - A. That is absolutely correct,
       sir.

    Q. They had somebody there who was looking? - A. Physically
       present, yes, sir.

       Likewise photographic material was obtained from various
       sources which was examined and scheduled in the same
       manner.   Continuity in respect of all this material is
       not necessarily complete since the person handing over
       the material to the police is not necessarily the person
       originating that material.




                     In an effort to analyse,




H
t'iQ jd .'e *
                                                                                       65


                A


                                                                             M LAYTON

                    In an effort to analyse the contents of the visual evidence
                    for the purposes of the Inquest some of the material has
                B   been grouped into a number of key areas.  As such the
                    sequence of events as referred to here in this statement do
                    not run in strictly chronological form, rather it deals
                    with a number of specific points.

                       First of all, sir, having regard to the movements of
                    people at the Leppings Lane end of the ground I can make
                    the following observations with regard to the visual
                    evidence.   On a video film reference TB2 which was filmed
                C   on the South Yorkshire Police CCTV system using an operator
                    set database, in other words, this shows the date and time
                    on which the film was recorded, this camera has pan
                    facilities.

                       It should be noted that videos RJH1 and RJH2 have no
                    such time clock and these relate to Sheffield Wednesday
                    Football Club's own video system.  In order to try to
                    establish the times of events shown on these tapes a
                D   comparison was made from events that occurred on the RJH2
                    tape which are also shown on the video referenced TB2 taken
                    from almost identical positions and which show almost
                    identical footage.

                       To be specific at 14:47:38 hours on the tape referenced
                    TB2 a youth is seen to jump from the roof of Turnstiles A
                    to G into the concourse area.   This same scene can be seen
                    on the tape referenced RJ H 2. On the tape referenced TB2
                £   again at 14:52:30 hours a youth is seen standing against a
                    wall near to Gate C with his arm raised and an identical
                    scene is shown on the tape reference RJH2.   The timings of
                    other events as they appear on RJH2 can then be calculated
                    using what is called a real time counter on a video player
                    from either side of these fixed points.

                       THE CORONER:   Just pause for a minute.     (To the J u r y )
                    Have you understood what he is saying?
                F
                    Q. What you are saying is that two of these tapes did not
                    have a time clock on them? - A.    That is right, yes.

                    Q. Arv operator one?   - A.   Yes, that is right.

                    Q. Then you try to match scenes which were identical and
                       once you had got a time for that scene you could
                       calculate backwards and forwards? - A.    Yes, that
                G      is right, sir, using a real time counter.

                    Q. Please carry on?   - A.  By using this method of
                       calculation it is estimated that the tape, referenced
                                                           M LAYTON

   RJH2, would have been switched on at about 12:56
   hours.   The same will apply for all the tapes given
   the reference RJH because I understand they were all
   switched on at the same time by PC 1421 Guest of the
   South Yorkshire Police who I believe has since
   retired.

       On a video tape referenced TB2 at 12:00:48 hours,
   supporters are shown arriving in a slow trickle and
   entering the ground at the Leppings Lane end.   At
   13:40 hours on the same video a steady flow of
   supporters are seen entering the ground and at
   13:56:33 hours on the same tape the volume of
   supporters has increased.  At 14:35:30 hours there is
   a very dense crowd in the courtyard and the perimeter
   gate area.  A view of the courtyard is also shown on
   the BBC tape which has been given the reference
   number Map 9. This is a digital reference of 0602
   and the estimated time of that is at 14:35 hours.

Q. Can you just pause there for a moment?   -   A.       Yes.

   THE CORONER:  Members of the Jury, are you happy with
that? I just wanted to be sure that we know what we are
talking about.

Q. I want to turn to the digital reference now?      -     A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. The advantage of having the digital reference is that
   you can find the frame, the scene on the tape, but it
   does not tell you anything about times, is that
   right?
A. At a period of time which in fact I have covered at
   the bottom of this page but it does not show an
   actual time.

Q. Carry on? - A. Again on Map 9, digital reference
   0842 a crowd is gathered in the Leppings Lane end and
   the courtyard is full. At a digital reference of
   0906 Superintendent Marshall is shown amongst the
   crowd. At a digital reference of 1034 youths are
   shown climbing over a metal ribbed gate on to the
   roof of Turnstile 16. Between a digital reference of
   1212 and 1239 Superintendent Marshall is shown
   outside the gates in Leppings Lane, the whole area of
   which is heavily congested.  With regard to the tape
   reference Map 9, as I have said, there is an operator
   set digital database on the film.  In the initial
   stages only an estimated time can be worked out on
   the basis that the BBC cameraman, Ian Young, states
                                                 M LAYTON

that filming took place outside the ground at the
Leppings Lane end between 14:35 hours and 14:50 hours
and indeed there are also apparent breaks in the
filming.  In respect of subsequent filming inside the
ground it is accurately timed and time based between
15:03:30 and 15:16:58.


    On a video tape referenced RJH2 at an estimated
time of 14:46 hours a number of youths are seen to
climb on to the roofs of Turnstiles A to G from
outside prior to dropping into the stadium.   On a
video tape TB2 at 14:55:21, supporters are shown in
the concourse area moving towards the tunnel.   A
number of these changed direction towards a gap in
the wall which gives access to the north side of the
ground.

    On video tape RJH2 which gives an estimated time
of 15:05 hours, the turnstile area and outside
courtyards are clear of incoming supporters.   An
Officer in a flat cap and two Police Constables are
seen to run from outside Gate C along the perimeter
drive towards the south stand.  Seconds afterwards a
Police Constable runs through Gate C towards the west
stand closely followed from all the Officers in the
turnstile area.

    Sir, in respect of vehicle movement at 14:08:20
hours on a video tape reference TB1, a South
Yorkshire Police video, traffic flowed quite freely
and continued to do so until 14:33:08 where it can be
seen that no traffic is able to flow due to
pedestrian congestion in Leppings Lane. At 14:33:27
on the tape TB1 a bus and two cars are seen moving
slowly through the crowd in the roadway.

     At 14:35:56 hours on TB2 another bus moves
through the crowd and at 14:36:24 a car.  At 14:41:15
a coach moves through the crowd and at 14:45:01 what
looks like a white roofed vehicle is seen arriving in
Leppings Lane immediately behind a bus from the
direction of Penistone Road.  At 14:45:03 this bus
passes another one coming in the opposite direction
but the white roofed vehicle remains stationary in
the crowd.  Sir, from research of the written
evidence I believe in fact this vehicle was a Police
Landrover being driven by PC 1863 Buxton of the South
Yorkshire Police.

       THE CORONER:   He will be called in due course.
                                                 M LAYTON


Please continue.  - A. No further vehicles apart
from this one are seen until at 14:55:35 hours a bus
and a car are seen and a further vehicle at 14:57:25
hours.  These latter two vehicles come to a halt in
Leppings Lane and remain stationary.  In the tape
RJH2 the vehicle believed to be the Police Landrover
drove through the courtyard area passed Gate C on the
perimeter drive at an estimated time of 15:06:49
hours.

     In relation to the perimeter gate which
separates the turnstile area from Leppings Lane I can
make the following observation with regard to the
visual evidence.  At 14:35:22 hours on a video tape
referenced TB2 the perimeter gates are open giving
access to turnstiles and the area near to Gate C.

Can you point to which perimeter gates we are talking
about on the screen? Can you find the overhead and
put that up too? - A. Yes.      At 14:40:26 hours on
the same video all the perimeter gates appear closed.
At 14:52:57 on TB2 people can be seen to be climbing
over the closed perimeter gates. At 14:53:40 hours
this second gate from the left as you look at the
screen opens and supporters enter the turnstile area
in front of Turnstiles A to G.

I realise this is not the video you are referring to
as this is a still but is that the gate we are
talking about can you remember? - A. Yes, looking
at it from the opposite direction the video camera is
there.

From the inside out and so it is the one that is on
the right on this photograph? - A. That is right,
sir, y e s .

You heard the question from Mrs. McBrien about the
sterile area, is that the area where the van is
parked?     A.  I believe it is slightly further in
than where the van is parked.

Further in towards the ground are you saying? - A.
(to the Court Officer) If you could just perhaps
indicate Gate C for me I believe that the sterile
area was more or less to the far side of that gate.

    MR. HALE:   It is clear on the model, sir.
                                                  M LAYTON

     THE CORONER:   Could you please continue?  I am
sorry to have interrupted you.  - A. At 14:53:44
hours the left hand perimeter gates are open.  At
14:55:17 hours the right hand perimeter gates can be
seen open. At 14:56:32 hours the area in front of A
to G up to the perimeter gates appear clearer and
Police Officers can be seen holding the crowd back to
the roadside of the perimeter gates. At 15:02:11
hours there is a close up view of the perimeter gate
area which shows that they are open and relatively
clear with supporters entering the ground.

      Four photographs taken by Michael Warburton Lee
of the South Yorkshire Police show some damage to a
retaining bolt of the second set of perimeter gates
as you look from the groundside towards Leppings
Lane.   These photographs are referenced as DPP190.
There is no acetate available at the moment for you
to view.

     In respect of visual evidence relating to
mounted Officers at the Leppings Lane end of the
ground the video tapes that cover this area are South
Yorkshire Police CCTV and on tape referenced TB 2,
also Sheffield Wednesday Football Club's CCTV on a
tape referenced RJH2 and a BBC TV outside broadcast
on a tape referenced Map 9.

     At a digital reference of 0602, estimated time
14:35 on video Map 9, two mounted Officers can be
seen directly in front of Turnstiles A to G near to
Gate B.

Pause again.  Have we got the acetate plan of the
ground and if so put it up please? Carry on reading
but start again with "mounted Officers"? - A. At a
digital reference of 0602, estimated time 14:35 on
video Map 9, two mounted Officers can be seen
directly in front of Turnstiles A to G near to Gate
B. At 14:35:22 hours on video reference TB2 two
mounted Officers can be seen apparently talking to
supporters in front of Turnstiles A to G.

     Between digital references 0839 to 0847 on a
video Map 9, nine mounted Officers can be seen in the
courtyard area from the outer perimeter gates to the
Turnstiles A to G, At 14:38:08 on video reference
TB2 a mounted Officer can be seen attempting to ease
the crowd back from Turnstiles and Gate C. At an
estimated time of 14:48:23 on video reference RJH2 a
mounted Officer can be seen blocking the entry of
                                                 M LAYTON

supporters through Gate C. This can also be seen at
14:48:26 hours on vide reference TB2.

     At 14:49 hours on video referenced TB2 a mounted
officer can be seen outside Gate C controlling the
crowd. At 14:51:50 hours four mounted Officers can
be seen outside Gate C. At 14:53 hours four mounted
Officers can be seen controlling the crowd in the
area of Gate C. At 14:53:32 hours two mounted
Officers can be seen supervising the flow of
supporters through Gate C.

     In order to try and analyse the visual evidence
available in respect of the opening of the concertina
gates referred to as A, B and C, it is necessary to
refer to three video tapes.   Video tapes referenced
RJH2 and RJH1 are black and white video, of poor
quality and with no sound.   RJH2 refers to a fixed
site camera which overlooks the rear of Turnstiles A
to G and the concourse area.   RJH1 is also part of
the system and covers the area of Gate A and the
concourse area.  The particular reference to the
concertina Gate C, sir, it is apparent from visual
evidence on the day in question it was regularly
being used as an entrance and exit point for a number
of reasons i.e. the ejection of supports and the
movement of Police personnel.

     Being more specific on a tape referenced TB2
timed at 14:39:31 hours a boy is carried through Gate
C by Police Officers.  The gate appears to be closed
at 14:40:45 hours.  On a video tape referenced RJH2
with an estimated time of 14:48:04 hours Gate C was
opened to eject a support.




                       /At this stage
 At this stage a large number of supporters rushed
 through the gate into the concourse area.

 On the same tape, at an estimated time of 14:48:31
 nours Gate C is closed.  On the same tape at an
 estimated time of 14:52:06 hours Gate C is again
 opened, and a large number of supporters entered
 through it into the ground.  At 14:57:40 hours, as
 snown on the tape referenced T B 2 , Gate C is closed.

              tape referenced RJH2 at an estimated time of
   .
 1 4 j 9.12 nours Gate C is again opened, with supporters
 entering the ground.         In respect of Gate A on a video
 tape referenced TB2 it is apparently open at 14:58:09
 hours with supporters entering via it.         At a time
 estimated at 14:58 the same scene is shown on the video
 ?f‘.3?afo?ere?^ ed R J H 1 * ,0n video tape referenced TB2 at
            a line of Police are shown supervising the
 supporters through Gate A.

There is no clear evidence, sir, of openings in
relation to Gate B.  The video tape from the camera
that covers this area is one of two that were found to
be missing when they were originally taken possession
or*

Sir, I feel it is important to point out in respect of
ail the estimated timings, given that where seconds are
indicated there are always likely to be slight
variations and these are dependent on the individual's
interpretation of a particular sequence of film.

The events that occurred inside the ground leading up
to kick-off and until the football match was stopped;
were recorded by BBC television and a main recording,
together with individual recordings from separate
camera angles, was supplied to the Inquirv, as
previously referred to.

Haying viewed the main recording, referenced Map 1,
which is a BBC tape, and in particular the movements of
supporters m Enclosures 3 and 4 of the Leppings Lane
?/ jo /om ? ble   make the following observations.   At
14:38:48 there is a strong surge of people along the
dividing fence between Enclosures 3 and 4.   At 14:40:09
a youtn in a red top is seen standing on top of a
barrier in Enclosure 3.   At the same time a beach ball
is being pushed arou id by the crowd in the same
enclosure.

At 14:40:10 hours- there is a further surge of people in
Enclosure 4 along the dividing fence with Enclosure 3.
At 14:40:34 hours a youth in a blue top is seen on top
ot a barrier in Enclosure 3, near to the dividing fence
of Enclosure 4.   At 14:45:41 hours a youth in a white
top is seen dancing on a barrier in Enclosure 3.
                                                                 72


A

       f               hours John Motson, a BBC commentator, makes
       a remark about tae emptiness of Enclosure 6 At .
         :4/:33 hours a youth in a brown too is seen standing
       ton3 ^ r r i e r .ln Enclosure 3 and the youth in the white
       top as previously referred to, is pulled off at
       14:47:46 hours.
B
       At 1^:49:53 hours a hole develops in the crowd in
       Enclosure 3 and people appear to be looking down at the
           01 \        men Wno     fallen over are seen to get
       up.    At 14:50:26 hours there is considerable crowd
       movement m Enclosure 3 but still no apparent problems
       at tae front of the enclosure.     At 14:55:49 aours a
       strung sar,:e from the direction of the tunnel, into
       Enclosures 3 and 4, takes place.     In respect of
       Enclosure 3 the sur e is along the dividing fence, and
                                     • ‘o
       in tne case of Enclosure 4 the surge is down and to the
       right as you look at th    screen.

            At 15:07:09 hours

           _ THi': CORONER: _ You are talking about the video, of
       cou.^e.     Can you just turn round, and when you say to
       tne rignt, I think on the plan it would be towards the
       }' }» would that be right, in Enclosure 4? - A. As you
       loo.< at it, sir, it would be to the right.    It is to
       tne lett on tne plan, yes, but to the right as you look
       on the screen.

    Q- Yes, that is right,     The cameras are looking at it from
       tae otner end. - A. At 15:07:09 hours supporters are
       shown being pulled up from the rear of Enclosures 3 and
       4 into the seated area above.     At 15:07:15 nours a
       large s>:r z e takes place in Enclosure 3, from the left
       of centre to the     ight front as viewed on tne screen,
                vi^ o tape referenced TB1, which is again South
        orkshire .olice CCTV, at 14:59:04 hours, Gate 4 can be
       seen open, and at 14:59:20 hours Gate 3 can be seen
       open.

      At 14:59:51 hours Gate 1 was opened to allow supporters
      l om tiie track area into the enclosure.

      Froai a photograph taken by South Yorkshire Police at
      time shown at 15:03 Gate 3 can be seen open.
      Pnotograph referenc d PR1/10A specifically refers.    At
      a time snown as 15:04 hours Gate 4 can still be seen
      open and pnotograph referenced PR1/22A specifically
      refers, again taken by South Yorkshire Pol ice.

      I have been unable to establish, sir, any visual
      eviience to suggest that these perimeter gates were
      closed after these particular times.   It should be
      noted that tne times snown on these photographs was set
      by tne individual camera operator by reference to his
      own watch.  Tney were not synchronised, nor were they
Dowf*   i    other words, the photograph referenced
PR1/1A shows a time of 15:01, whilst a clock on the
photograph in the grouod shows 15:00 so there is a
variation, sir.

So that could mean that either he is a minute fast or
~ae clock is a minute slow, or both of them could be
wrong. - A. That is right, sir.   Having viewed the main
v'iceo recording referenced Map 1 I am able to give the
following information in relation to events on th“
pitch.

With regard to the     BBC films, the Ma.o Is and 9s, I
t h m k tae computer   set the times, is‘ that right? - A.
That is right, sir,     except for the outside.    We are
satisfied that the     t i e s inside would have been
correct.

The timings we are now getting to, on Map 1, these
would be accurate as far as you can tell? - A. Yes,
si_'.  At 14:51:03 the Liverpool team was announced,
followed at 14:51:47 by the Nottingham Forest team.
    se announcements caused obvious excitement amongst
tie supporters.   The Liverpool team came onto the pitch
at 14:54:08 hours, followed by the Nottingham Forest
team at 14:55:22.   The two teams were joined on the
pitch at 14:57:25 hours by the referee and linesmen.
Tie toss-up took olace at a time shown as 14:57:48
hour^ and it should be noted at this point, sir, that
tie Hsiabase actually stopped counting for a short
perio;.   I don't know what the explanation for that is
but it restarted again at 14:58:43 hours, and the match
kicke ; off at 14:59:30.

At lo:00:32 a corner kick to Nottingham Forest was
awarded at the north west corner of the pitch.       At
1 : 0 0 : 4 1 hours a large group of supporters are seen
being led by Police from the direction of Enclosures 3
and 4 towards the Nortn Stand.       At 15:00:43 hours
^upporters are seen climbing over the perimeter fence
from Enclosure 4 to the pitch side.       At 15:00:50 hours
tie corner kick to Nottingham Forest was taken from the
nort i west corner.      At 15:04:09 hours Gate 3 is open,
supporters are shown climbing from Enclosure 3 into
Enclosure 4 via the dividing fence, and people leaning
in over tae perinter fence in an apparent effort to
reach people in the enclosures.

P 1ay continued and at 15:04:52 hours a Peter Beardsley
shot hit the crossbar of the Nottingham 'Forest g o a l .
Shortly afterwards, at 15:05:24 hours, Superintendent
Greenwood ran ont   the pitch towards the referee and
toe match was stopped.

On video tape referenced Map 5, which is again BBC TV
coverage, but from a separate camera angle,
S u ;,er ntend nt Murray can be seen on the football
pitch, gesturing to Liverpool supporters at a time
referenced 15:05:35 hours.

With regard to the rescue operation, visually on a Map
1 BBC tape at 15:07:09 hours supporters can be seen
bei r, pulled from the rear of Enclosures 3 and 4 into
tie seated area.   At 15:08:54 hours Police Officers can
be seen at the perimeter fence motioning towards people
in Enclosure 3 to move back from the fence.   At
lD:0\::5i hours is seen the first sighting of a casualty
and this shows him being taken towards the Spion Kop on
an ambul nc   stretcher.

At I';: 10:03 hours on Map 9 a South Yorkshire Police
Inspector is seen and heard to request a serial of
Police Officers.     At this point he is on the perimeter
track near to Enclosure 2.     At 15:10:24 hours, Map 7,
wiii:h is also a 3BC tape, shows Police Officers placing
a ladder against tae perimeter fence at the Leppings
Lana end.    At 1;;:12:16 hours on Map 1 Chief
Superintendent Ne^bit is shown on the perimeter track
near to Enclosure 3.     At 15:12:50 hours on Map 7
supporters are shown sitting and lying on the pitch at
tiie Lepp ngs Lane end of the ground receiving
attention.

Th ; first sighting of a casualty leaving the stadium is
shown at an estimated time of 15:15:40 hours and is
shown on the tape referenced RJH2, when a casualty is
carried through Gate C by supporters to an ambulance.

At 1:14:51. hours on Map 1 Superintendent Greenwood can
be seen on the pitch using his personal radio.

At 1^:15:11 hours on Map 1 a casualty is seen being
carried from Enclosure 3 into the tunnel by a Police
Officer and a supporter.  At 15:15:33 hours on Map 9 a
St. John s ambulance is seen arriving on the pitch and
being driven towards the Leppings Lane terraces.

Is that 9, or Map 1? - A. Sorry, that is Map 1.     At
1 :1 :0 1 hours on Map 7 a group of supporters can be
seen pulling down t le perimter fence at the front of
Enclosure 4.   At -1 :lO :12 hours on Map 1 a large number
of Police Officers move from the Kop end of the ground
towards the Lepp'ngs Lane end.     On Map 7 at 15:19:24
supporters are shown at Gate 3 being carried out of the
enclosure by Police Officers.

On a video referenced TB2 at 15:19:58 hours
Superintend nt Greenwood is seen at the perimeter fence
of tae Leppings Lane terrace, apparently using a
louohailer to commuiicate with supporters in Enclosure
3.  A second ambulance arrives at the Kop end, this
being a South Yorkshire Metropolitan ambulance, which
is shown at 15:20:41 hours on a video referenced Map 1.
Evidenc  of the rescue operation, sir, continues for
some time and is snown on video and photogoraphic
fob age.

Video ev dence was also obtained from the FA 'Cup--.semi­
finals neld at Hillsborough in 1981 and 1983.   With
regard to the 1981 semi-final, this match was filmed by
Yorkshire TV.   There is no database on the recording.
However, at a commentary time, 15:11 p.m., the
commentator remarks about supporters being on the pitch
behind the goal at the Leppings Lane end, and
supporters can be seen climbing the perimeter fence
onto the pitch.   There than follows views of supporters
sitting on the touchline behind the goal, marshalled by
the P ol ice .

At half-time the supporters on the pitch ran up the
pitch towards the Spion Kop.  The Police cordon is
subsequently placed around the pitch and there are no
furtner points of interest.

With regar* to the semi-final held on 9th April 1988,
there is video evidence available from the South
Yorkshire Police CCTV referenced TB5/2 and TB5/3, and
also BBC television referenced JG1 and JG2.   The video
tapes are available and show extensive coverage of the
build-up and match coverage.   As a comparison exercise,
a composite video tape was prepare-1 which shows crowd
scenes at the Leppings Lane end outside the ground
between 14:00 and 15:02 hours on-botn 9th April, 1988
and 15th April, 1989.   This, sir, has been given the
referenc   number SDB1.

From this v.ideo it can be seen that at 14:00 hours in
1988 the perimeter gates nearest the River Don are
closer creating a sterile area along the side of the
turnstiles A-G, towards Gate C, whereas in 1989 these...
gates are open and people can be seen moving freely in
this area.   At 14:16 hours in 1988 there is a build up
of supporters in front of turnstiles A-G, and back
along Leppings Lane.   In 1989 the build up is more
severe and the area near to Gate C has become very
crowded.   In 1988 at 14:29 hours the roadway in
Leppings Lane remai -s relatively clear, although
crowded, whereas at 14:30 hours in 1989 the Leppings
Lane area has become very congested, with supporters
spilling into the centre of Leppings Lane and blocking
the road.

At 14:46 hours in 1988, altnough it is very crowded,
traffic is still able to pass and the perimeter gates
are still closed, whereas at 14:45 hours in 1989 the
area in front of the turnstiles and Leppings Lane is
totally blocked.
                                                                     76



    At 14:52 hours i\ 1988 the area adjacent remains
    sterile, whereas at 14:52 hours in 1989 the concertina
    Gate C was opened to allow supporters into the ground.
    At 15:01 nours in both 1988 and 1989 the crowd in
    Leppings Lane is ver ’ similar in size and under
    control.

B   Sir, during the course of the preliminary inquests I
    gave evidence in respect o f locations at which it was
    believed that the deceased were either alive or dead or
    both in Enclosures 3 and 4      Plans were produced in
    respect of individual dece ased.    Subsequently composite
    plans were prepared of som e of these locations, based
    on my evidenc , by Miss Da wn Goodall, senior plan
    drawer of the West Midland s Police.    Because of the
    problems associated with t rvi     to put all locations of
     eceased on tiese two    !an s, they actually only show
    the last position establis h     alive, and the first
    wiiere believed   ceased.

    Sir, I produce a composite plan referenced DRG9 in
    resoect of the location of the positions of deceased
    alive, and a composite plan r e f e r e c e d DRG10 where they
    were believed to be deceased in the enclosures.         Sir,
    there are over eads available of these two plans.
D




      /Q. Yes.   - A. There is one point




H
                                                                 77

                                                  M . LAYTON


         Sir, there are overheads available of these two plans.   There
         is one point which I need to raise in respect of one of the
         plans, sir.  Since the limited Inquests, Mrs. Traynor, mother
         of two of the deceased, has viewed visual evidence again.   At
         the limited Inquest a plan was produced which showed
         Christopher in enclosure No. 3 at 14:45, and that location is
B        reproduced on the plan DRG.9.  Since that time Mrs. Traynor
         has found Christopher alive at 14:45 outside the ground.   So
         in fact I would ask you to disregard the one location in
         relation to the deceased No. 60 as shown on that plan.

    Q. What time was he shown on the plan? Would you repeat the
       time? - A. 14:52 outside the ground, sir, and 14:45 was the
       original identification by Mrs. Traynor inside the ground.

    Q. So what you are saying is Mrs. Traynor has now reidentified
       him but alive at an earlier time than she originally thought?
       - A. In fact alive at a later time.    So in fact, the point I
       am making is on the plan DRG.9 we should disregard the
       location shown for that particular location.

    Q. We will deal with this again.

              THE CORONER:   This, Mr. King, is a typical example of
D        the corrections one would wish to make with regard to the
         summaries.  I did not know what Inspector Layton has just told
         me, but it is clear it needs amendment, and obviously we would
         want to get that right.

                THE WITNESS:   I can tell you the original plan which
         was produced at the limited Inquest was given the reference
         No. C.140.

           THE CORONER:   Before you put that up can we number that
         plan of the ground C.274.  The plan   of the ground is C.274.
         Can you put the next one up:

    Q. Inspector Layton, which one is this? - A. If we go
       chronologically as far as the statement is concerned it should
       be the other way round. I don't think it matters as such.

    Q. You mean the deceased first? - A. I am sorry, is this the
       first one, sir? This is the deceased alive.

    Q.   I think we will   have the people alive first. - A. This plan
         is DRG.9.

    Q.    That is C.275.  These are the people last seen alive as far as
         you can establish based upon the evidence which you gave at
         the interim Inquests? - A. That is correct, sir, and it is
         this plan which bears the identification which I have just
         referred to in respect of Christopher Traynor.

    Q. I don't suppose you know where he is? - A. It is to the top,
       just near to the top.  (Indicated on p l a n )

    Q. Can we get Miss Goodhall to delete it? - A. We can do, sir.



H
                                                                      78

                                                      M . LAYTON



    Q. And we will then reproduce it as an amended version.  It gives
       you a visual impression of where the people were when last
       seen alive on the visual evidence.  Put the other one up now,
       please. - A. This plan is DRG.10.

B   Q. That will be C.276.

              THE CORONER:   Members of the Jury, the purpose of this
         is just to give you an impression where the people were to
         save you looking at 95 individual plans:

    Q. That is right, is not it? - A. That is right.

    Q. It does not have 95 spots on it because we did not find
       everybody on the visual evidence? - A. That is right, sir.
       Finally, as I have already stated, the events outlined in this
       statement are not actually in chronological order, and to
       assist with this particular aspect a schedule has been
       prepared which has been referenced SB.1, which seeks to place
       some of the events into chronological order.  I produce that
       schedule.

    Q. Have we got that on an overhead as well, perchance?          - A. I
D      understand the quality is not..

    Q. It is too difficult to read.       C.277.

               MR. KING:      Would it be possible   to havephotocopies      of
         it?

              THE CORONER:       We will do that.    Tomorrow morning you
         will have them.

               THE WITNESS:      Sir, that completes my evidence.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   What we are trying to do with that
         schedule is to pick out some of the major events.   You have
         given us an awful lot of detail which is useful, but that
         picks out some of the major events in chronological order as
         to the outside of the ground and to the inside? - A. That is
         right, sir, and where there is an "E” , that is estimated time,
         sir.

              THE CORONER;   It is supposed to be an aide memoire so if
         somebody says, "What time did that gate open?", we can tell.
         It is difficult to follow because there are so many numbers,
         but basically he was telling us events which he and his team
         found either on photographs or videos, and relating to various
         things.  When you see the schedule it will be shorter.  We
         will have them available tomorrow morning.

               Any questions of Inspector Layton?




H
                                                                79


                                                 M. LAYTON


                         Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

    Q. Y'ou referred at a point about quarter-of-the-way through your
       evidence, to a photograph taken by a photographer called
       Warburton Lee.   I just did not get the reference. - A. The
       reference given is DPP.190
B
    Q. What was that of? - A. It is in relation to damage to a
       retaining bolt of the second set of perimeter gates as you
       look from the ground side towards Leppings Lane.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   Can you point? - A. It is the second set
         of perimeter gates as you look from the ground side towards
         Leppings Lane.

    Q. We will put the overhead on.  Show us which one it is?
       (Indicated) - A. That is right, sir, the second set of
       perimeter gates from the ground side towards Leppings Lane.
       Exactly where Mr. Brown is pointing.

    Q. That is C .254.

                         Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

D   Q. Mr. Layton, could you help me with just a number of matters.
       How many   people in your team? - A. It varied initially from at
       its height I think 12 to as a norm an average of 6.

    Q.    Let us put to one side for a moment the accumulation of the
         evidence.   I am only concerned with the looking at the
         evidence, particularly of the video evidence, and you have
         told us something of your observations, and when I say "you” I
         mean you and your team, of, for example, outside and then
         inside the ground of certain parts of different videos.    Could
         you help   me with this against that background.  Taking, for
         example,   what was seen on the videos inside the ground, for
         example, the BBC film that was being taken, in order to
         produce the observations which you have produced how long
         approximately would the film have been looked at for? I d o n ’t
         want it 5 minutes, 10 minutes.    How many hours? - A.
         Countless.   The process was never ending.   I think it would be
         fair to say every time you view a video you see something
         else, because there are so many images on the screen that it
         is not possible to take them all in at one viewing.    It was a
         continual process right up to the time of the limited
         Inquests.   Indeed, I have no doubt since then it hascontinued
         as well, albeit on a more limited scale.

    Q.    So could you help us, have you done any of the watching
         yourself? - A. I have done some of i t , ‘yes.

    Q. But are we talking about a video, for example, inside the
       ground where you tell us that certain things were taking
       place, being watched over 20 hours or 40 hours or 100 hours or
       more than that? - A. It would be impossible to put a figure on
       it.  As I said at the beginning, the initial process after
       retrieving the original video tapes, was to copy them.



H
                                                               80

                                                   M. LAYTON


         Once they were copied the copies were viewed and a
         schedule, which is a precis of events shown on the film,
         was prepared.  From that schedule really the continual
         process then was, as part of our brief, to try to locate
         the deceased either outside or inside the ground, and as
         part of that process we were continually viewing.
B
    Q. To see what events were occurring, any incidents that occurred
       and the like? - A. Primarily our brief was, having scheduled
       the tapes, to locate the deceased for the Inquests.  There
       were other specific areas which were dealt with as the inquiry
       progressed, but because of our brief to locate deceased it was
       a continuing process.

    Q.    But as you were saying, as well as doing that you would see -
         when I say "you" - you and your team would see different
         incidents taking place on virtually each and every occasion
         you were looking at the tape? - A. That is right.   One scene
         on one video could show numerous people.

    Q. As opposed to, for example, someone who was looking at that
       scene as part and parcel of the events of the day which would
       be quite different? - A. I am not sure I follow you.

D   Q.    Let me indicate exactly what I mean. We have on the one hand
         Police Officers for the purposes of Lord Justice Taylor's
         Inquiry and for the purposes of this Inquest looking over and
         over and over again videos taken of for example a certain
         section of the ground, whether it be outside or inside, and
         seeing something different perhaps or something else in
         addition? - A. Yes.

    Q. On each viewing, and then we have an individual who may be
       looking at the Leppings Lane end for a fraction of a second as
       part of the day's events? - A. Yes, I accept your point.
       There is a difference between our brief, which was to view the
       videos to either obtain evidence or to schedule them so as to
       become a sequence of events as to what to what took place,
       there is a difference between that and purely viewing it
       perhaps on a monitor.

    Q. And it required from your point of view repeated lookings at,
       if I can use an inelegant phrase, in order to get a complete
       picture? - A. Depending on what we were seeking to establish.
       Certainly in relation to the deceased, yes.

    Q. Thank you very much.

                         Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

    Q. Arising out of that last question, if one is looking for
       precise details, a particular individual, you need to look at
       a video over and over again? - A. Exactly, yes, sir.

    Q. If you are looking for a general impression, a build up of
       fans, emptiness of a pen, the fullness of a pen, the first
       time is sufficient for that, is not it? - A. Yes, sir.



H
                                                                 8U

                                                   M. LAYTON



                       Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

    Q.    I would like to go back to the point where the fans entered
         the ground at 2:48 p.m. Could you read that    part out, please?
         - A. Yes, if you can just bear with me a second, please.     Did
B        you want the whole section again?

    Q.    The wording you used? - A. Page 10, I think, sir.   On a video
         tape reference RJH.2 at an estimated time of 14:48:04, Gate C
         was opened to eject a supporter.    Is that the bit?

    Q. Yes.        Do you want me to go further?

    Q. Yes, just a little. - A. At this stage a large number of
       supporters rushed through the gate into the concourse area.

    Q. Yes, thank you.  It is the part that they rushed in, and it
       was established at the preliminary Inquest that the fans were
       actually allowed in at that time, as Police Officers there
       mistakenly thought that Gate C had been opened in response to
       Superintendent Marshall's request.

              THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien,   I will phrase your question
         for you:

    Q. Mrs. McBrien is asking you whether this was the incident or
       the timing as far as you can establish from the video
       evidence, where the gate was opened as a result of an order as
       opposed to not? - A. No, that is not that particular opening
       of the gate, not the one you refer to.

    Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   The transcript of Superintendent
         Marshall's evidence at the Taylor Inquiry.....

              THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien,   I am sorry:

    Q. Inspector Layton, read the whole section through again, or if
       you like specify the openings, because it may assist you.

              THE CORONER:   I think you may have your timings wrong.

              MRS. McBRIEN:   We brought this point out at the
         Preliminary Inquest, and it was altered in the Preliminary
         Inquest.  It was altered to "allowed", "they were allowed".
         "They were allowed in".

              THE WITNESS:   The timing you are referring to is the
         occasion on which a person was ejected from the concourse
         area via Gate C and out.  Certainly it 'is apparent when you
         view the video, and that is why I have differentiated with, as
         it were, the official opening when people walked through, it
         is certainly apparent on the video for this earlier opening
         they did not go in in the same fashion.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   This was at 15:52, was not it?    So 14:48
         was one opening? - A. That is right, sir.
                                                               81 A

                                                M. LAYTON



    Q. What time was it closed then? - A. At 14:48:31.

    Q. How long was it open? It was only open for 27 seconds? - A.
       That is right, sir, yes.

B   Q. And then it was reopened at 14:52.    Is that right? - A. That
       is right, sir.

    Q. And then it stayed open for how long? - A. At 14:57:40 the
       gate is shown closed.

    Q. That is about 5 minutes? - A. Yes     We are talking about two
       distinct openings there.

    Q-         MRS. McBRIEN:  I was firmly under the impression that
         fans were encouraged through that gate at that particular
         time.

              THE CORONER:   We will be hearing evidence.  Inspector
         Layton has told you what he has seen on the visual evidence.
         He can't say any more than that.  It may be - it may be;   I
         say no more - that some of the other witnesses might be able
         to give you some more help on this.  I don't think Inspector
         Layton can.

              MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you very much.

              THE CORONER:   When you say, Mrs. McBrien, there was a
         correction made at the interim Inquest, are you talking about
         the interim Inquest relating to your son?

              MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes

              THE CORONER:   I will have a look at it.  I will check it
         and see what is actually said, but not now because I have not
         got it here.  Any other questions arising out of Inspector
         Layton's evidence?

              Tomorrow we will give you a copy of the abbreviated
         schedule, and I think everybody will find it is a lot easier
         once we have that to look a t :

    Q. Inspector Layton, as always I am exceedingly grateful to you.
       Thank you for your help.   The only thing I would ask you is if
       you could arrange to have that plan redrawn with the
       amendments, and also let me have a short statement regarding
       this matter, and we will either deal with it by way of
       documentary evidence or I will have to bring you back,
       depending on what I think.   It is a point that has got to be
       corrected. - A.. I think P.C. Brown should be able to assist,
       sir.

              THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, we are aiming
         timewise to start at 10, rise about quarter-to-1, 1 o'clock.
         Obviously we can't be absolutely sure.  We know that from
         experience already.  Start again about 2.  It depends what



H
                                       M. LAYTON


time we rise for lunch.   Then aim to finish about 4, and again •
there will be a little bit of flexibility.   You may think that
ife not too bad, but you will find it is quite sufficient if
you said and listen to evidence for five hours.   Inspector
Layton's evidence is interesting but jolly difficult to
follow, not because he is difficult but because of the numbers
and maps and goodness knows what.   A lot of the other evidence
which you will hear will be easier to follow because they will
be ordinary people.   I don't mean he is an extraordinary
person - he may be - but it will be just people telling us
about things.

     Now, it is quarter-to-4. I don't think we will start
with anything further tonight as far as you are concerned, and
I also have some more legal submissions to deal with we did .
not quite finish.   So I am going to rise.  You can leave.
Please be here on time so we can get cracking at 10 tomorrow
morning.   What we will do tomorrow in the morning is we will
look at the videos, this compilation tape, which is about two
hours.   So we will watch for an hour and then stop and have
coffee and watch the other half.   Then we have two short
videos.   One has two screens.  It compares 1988 with 1989 as
best one can, and then I have had another short compilation
made of 1981 and 1988, I think, which shows the events. We
thought if we did the words today you would follow the videos
that much better tomorrow.   Is that satisfactory to you? In
the afternoon we are starting with some real live witnesses.

    Can we rise for five minutes or so.

                    (Short Adjournment)
                                                          83




                (In the absence of the jury)

     THE CORONER:   Yes, Mr. Isaacs?

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, before my learned friend Mr. King
makes such submissions he wishes to make in relation to the
submission that I made this morning, may I just take this
opportunity to draw to your attention the city late edition
of The Star.   If I hand my copy in - you, sir, have not had
the benefit of going out to the local news vendors.   If I
could be handed another copy.

     First of all I would ask you to read it.  First of all
against the background of the submission that I made this
morning my argument is this that nothing could be more
designed to add fuel to the submission I made than what,
sir, you will now read.

         THE CORONER:   Well, Mr. Isaacs, I have to agree with
you that it was an unwise - if the quotation is correct and,
of course, I can't say whether it is or whether it i s n ’t, I
think it was an unwise comment, bearing in mind that we are
sub judice here and it is a matter for this court, or my
j u r y , if you like, to take decisions on what will happen.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, that is another aspect of the matter
which perhaps I can refer to in a moment and which I know
others will refer to and that is the question as to whether
The Star, rightly or wrongly, have been party to an attempt
to influence the jury to bring in a certain   verdict. That
is certainly one aspect of the matter.

     The aspect I would seek to address you upon in relation
to the contents of this article is this, that clearly,
however you see these inquests, and, of course, you are in
control, those who represent...   I put it another way.   The
families quite clearly see these inquests as an evidence^
gathering exercise in order to produce fresh evidence which
will, they hope, enable them to persuade or enable the
Director to take the view that criminal charges should be
preferred.

     In my submission, so far as Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield is concerned he should not be put in a position
- should not even be put into the witness box where he could
be put in a position where, by asking him questions which
would then be disallowed, then be disallowed, then be^
disallowed in the manner that I referred to this morning, so
as to increase the possibility, probability, what you will,
of the jury returning a verdict of unlawful killing.

     In my submission, sir, this article and the contents of
it do add a great deal of fuel to the submission I made and
the, dangers inherent in calling Mr. Duckenfield to give
evidence.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.    Mr. King, I will listen to
you now.

     MR. KING:   I understood, sir, that those acting on
behalf of Officer Greenwood still had submissions to make to
you, sir.

     THE CORONER:   You are quite right.    Thank you for
reminding me.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, happily in supporting my learned
friend Mr. Isaacs I need not rehearse his very articulate
submission and exposition of the rule.   I adopt his
exposition of the rule without gloss.

     As far as Superintendent Greenwood is concerned, there
are four areas from which further action might come, from
which he requires protection against any conceivable self­
incrimination which might flow from his giving evidence.

     If I can list them briefly, it is further action by the
Director.   Second, a judicial review of the Director's
decision.   Third, a private prosecution.   Fourth,
disciplinary proceedings.

     Sir, the depth and the strength of the feelings of the
families of the bereaved was perhaps spoken in words louder
and better than I can select when my learned friend Mr.
Isaacs outlined what was the nub of his submission, and you
will remember the reaction that that took.   We now have on
the front page of the newspaper what is a transparent use,
or intended use, of these inquests before you.

     As far as disciplinary proceedings are concerned, I
prefer to dwell on that to the exclusion of the others
because my learned friend Mr. Isaacs has mentioned the
position of the Director.    It is, of course, sanction which
could lead to the dismissal of long-standing officers,
including Superintendent Greenwood, whom I represent.     Sir,
you may well be familiar with some of the publicity that
surrounded the application to the Police Authority for funds
for not only Superintendent Greenwood but the other senior
officers concerned and that has been prompted by the fear of
there being no funds for such proceedings as the
disciplinary proceedings.    It is not merely an empty
threat.  These proceedings are on foot and what happens to
them will, to an extent, be coloured by what happens within
these four walls over the coming weeks.

     Sir, it is important perhaps also to envisage the wide
scope of the offences and they are offences under the Police
                                                           85




Discipline Regulations 1985, that constitute those
disciplinary proceedings.   Perhaps I could invite you
briefly to consider the nature of the complaints that have
been made against Superintendent Greenwood because in my
submission they show that the wider the scope of the offence
the more difficult it is to conceive questions the answers
to which will not tend to incriminate Superintendent
Greenwood or anyone else in a similar position.

     The allegations of complaint come from two
complainants, both of whom I note from the contents of
letters and other documents put before you this morning, are
represented by my learned friend Mr. King.   Mr. Jones -
Leslie Jones - the father of Richard Jones, makes four
allegations which constitute his complaint against
Superintendent Greenwood and I say at the outset these are
allegations which are, and will be, refuted by
Superintendent Greenwood:

     "A. You failed to carry out your assigned duty by
     placing yourself in a position by the players' tunnel.
     Using your radio and your eyes you should have been
     aware of the dangerous situation and controlled your
     officers accordingly.

     B. You failed to give instructions to your officers to
     monitor the pens for over-crowding in relation to the
     crowd safety at your briefings.

     C. You were totally ineffective in mounting a rescue.
     That is, you made no attempt to organise the police
     officers in a way which would have helped to bring
     about a successful rescue operation.

     D. You failed to send officers to the rear of pens 3
     and 4 to relieve pressure when you were in control of
     the area.   This was when you knew that gate C was
     being opened to allow supporters in."

     Sir, Mr. Trevor Hicks, who also instructs my learned
friend Mr. King, is the other complainant.   He makes three,
perhaps broader, allegations in his complaint:

     "1. You failed to prevent a dangerous build-up of
     supporters outside the gates.

     2. You failed to control the movement of supporters
     subsequent to the opening of gate C..

     3. You failed to respond to the developing tragedy and
     were slow to effect a rescue operation."

     I say again the totality of each of those allegations
is refuted, but they do serve to show the wide nature of the
#



    A


        position of Superintendent Greenwood and the way in which
        his position will have to be protected should he give
        evidence.   I just invite you to consider the prejudicial
        effect that the constant challenging of questions asked and
        the jury being told that the officer need not answer them,
    B   if matters are dealt with on a question at a time basis.

             Alternatively, if there is dispute about whether the
        answer to a particular question might tend to incriminate
        Superintendent Greenwood when such argument, if there is to
        be such argument, takes place in the absence of the jury,
        the effect and the impression that that will have upon the
        members of the jury.
    C        In those circumstances I invite you to adopt the course
        that has been suggested by Mr. Isaacs, that these officers,
        certainly Superintendent Greenwood, should not be asked to
        give evidence at all because of the prejudicial effect of
        having to deal with each question on its merits and in
        circumstances where it is difficult to conceive any question
        which will not produce that response.

    D




    E




    F


                           MR. KING:   Sir,   the families...



    G
                                                         87




   *THE CORONER:   Yes, Mr. King.

    MR. KING:   The families would have liked each of the
senior Officers to have come to give evidence here
voluntarily.   That is what they would have liked.  They would
have wished that the truth of the events which led to these
deaths could have come from their lips voluntarily so that
the Jury could hear it.   The families are mindful of the law
as much as anybody else and I have advised them what the law
is.   They know and appreciate that it is within the right of
any of those senior Officers that if any question is asked
tending to incriminate that he can refuse to give it.   To
this extent they are in a dilemma because what they want, and
have always wanted, is for this Jury to hear the whole of the
facts.   It would be a very unreal world which this Jury would
be living in if they did not hear in some way from the
principal players in these events, by which I mean the senior
Officers.

    One could make trite examples.  The one going through my
mind was hearing Julius Caesar but we did not hear from
Brutus and the whole of the Senate.  That is not meant to be
trivial because these are vital witnesses.

    A few weeks ago, sir, I submitted to you matters relating
to the Taylor Inquiry Report and the transcripts.  You know
if agreement were possible the families would wish that the
whole of the Taylor Report and the whole of the transcripts
should be before the Jury.  Indeed, they would wish they
would go there without agreement but again they accept
advice, as they must, that that is not possible without
agreement.  If my learned friend on behalf of Mr. Duckenfield
is saying to this Inquiry he will agree and consent to the
whole of the transcript of Mr. Duckenfield's evidence being
read out aloud to the Jury so that they can hear it and
assess it then that in fact from the families' point of view,
much as they would like Mr. Duckenfield in the witness box to
be cross-examined, will be far better in the effort they
generally have, not in making noises to the outside world, in
bringing the facts to the attention of this Jury.

    Sir, if that is the position, then much as they would
like Mr. Duckenfield here, and much as I would say to you
that he ought to come into the witness box and be heard to
say, "I will not answer", if there is that alternative
genuinely being put forward, then I would say on behalf of
the families I represent that that is a course which is, in
fact, preferable as the lesser of two evils from their point
of view.  I say that not in any way reflecting on the right
of Mr. Duckenfield to take the stance he has but from the
point of view to prejudice of all the matters being before
the Jury.
   ' I do not know, sir, what the position is with regard to
the other Officers, that is to say Mr. Murray, Mr. Greenwood
and Mr. Marshall.   I do not know whether I have the agreement
of those who represent those Officers to the transcripts of
their evidence being read aloud to the Jury.    If I do have
that, sir, then my position will   be different than if I do
not and it might be helpful from my point of view if an
indication could be given in that respect.

   THE CORONER:   Mr. Hale is not here and so he cannot
respond.  Do you wish to respond or take instructions on
that?

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, for my part I would like to take
instructions and perhaps I could do so overnight.

   MR. KING:   In those circumstances, sir, perhaps it might
be better if I postpone my final words until I hear what
those instructions are.

   THE CORONER:     Iwould prefer to conclude this now. You
have heard what   Mr. Isaacs says.If he says no and Mr.
Isaacs says yes, perhaps I may think again but assume for the
moment that everyone will fall in line behind Mr. Isaacs.

   MR. KING:   If everybody falls in line behind Mr. Isaacs,
as I say, sir, much as I would prefer a different course - it
almost sounds like a bargain but it is not meant to be - if
that is the means by which the families can get facts before
the Jury it is the means they would adopt.

   MR. ISAACS:   I wish to make one thing very clear, sir, so
that there is no misunderstanding.  The offer that I make is
this; that the transcript of Mr. Duckenfield's evidence both
in chief as it were and in cross-examination before Lord
Justice Taylor can be read to this Jury as being a report of
that evidence he gave on that occasion.  So far as my learned
friend is concerned he understood me correctly and I just
want to ensure, sir, that you understood me correctly as
well.

   THE CORONER:   What you are trying to say is that you are
not putting it forward as evidence of the truth of it but
purely of what was said?

   MR. ISAACS:   That is what was said because that is
exactly the point you were making this morning, as it were,
with a Criminal Justice Act statement when, of course, the
witness would be asked, "Is that the statement you have
made?" On this occasion he would not be asked this but it
would be said on his behalf or by you, sir, by agreement,
"This was the evidence that he gave before Lord Justice
Taylor".
   MR. KING:   I understand the point my learned friend is
saying on behalf of Mr. Duckenfield as to the quality of that
evidence but it is certainly evidence which can go before a
Jury otherwise we would have no function, sir.  I am not sure
now if I understand the distinction being made.

   THE CORONER:   This is the problem.   Mr. Payne.

   MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I was rising to make the point which was
mentioned by Mr. Isaacs simply as a matter of clarification.
If this Inquest is to proceed, as has been suggested, then it
should be on the basis that the evidence, and we are only
speaking for the moment about Mr. Duckenfield, that he should
not in fact give evidence but there should be read out at the
Inquest what he said at the Taylor Inquiry, not as his
evidence before you but as a report of what in fact he said
on that previous occasion.  That is what Mr. Isaacs said to
you just now and I was rising to ensure that that was what
was being agreed.

   THE CORONER:   I have not agreed to anything yet, Mr.
Payne.

   MR. KING:   So far so good.  The next question was the
purpose for which the Jury could use that evidence and
certainly, sir, as I understand it, it should be capable of
being used as evidence of that which is stated in it, in
other words not as evidence to you, sir, but as evidence of
what was said on previous occasions.  Otherwise it would have
no value.  I am not sure if my learned friend is trying to
say, "It can go before the Jury but the Jury must be told
that they cannot put any truth on that which is being
asserted".

   MR. PAYNE:   I think Mr. King can be helped by the fact
that the ordinary rules of evidence as we tend to know them
do not apply in these proceedings and certainly for our part
we can see no objection to the Jury being informed that what
was read out was a true report of what was said before the
Taylor Inquiry and the Jury could take it into account in
that context.

   THE CORONER:   Can I just put this to you because I think
I can understand the problem but you will appreciate that if
you say to the Jury, "here is a statement which has now been
read.  It may or may not be true because we have not asked
Mr. Duckenfield but it is true that he said that because it
is a report of what he said.  You, ladies and gentlemen, must
decide whether you believe it or whether you do no t " . Are
you in effect inviting me to view that statement in that
form? Have I understood you correctly?
   M r . PAYNE: Yes, I think that is right.  What is being
said is that the statement can be read out as a true account
of what was said at the Taylor Inquiry and the Jury can take
it into account and make what use of it they wish.

   MR. KING:   On that basis I am content as long as my
learned friend realises the import of what is being said.  It
is not simply a record.  It is being put to the Jury as
material which they can assess and use and, if necessary and
they think fit, accept as truth.

   THE CORONER:   I take it what you are saying is that
because this statement is in the public domain, so to speak,
because it has already been given - whether it has been given
on Oath or not is neither here nor there - it is there for
anybody who wishes to get the transcripts out.  That is
really what you are saying, is it not?

   MR. ISAACS:    That is certainly right and in making that
concession I did it so not because I felt there was any
weakness in the submission I originally made to you but in an
attempt to be helpful to meet the demands of you, sir, and
the Jury and perhaps the legitimate demands of my learned
friend's clients.   If I could put it this way, if the offer
which is made is unacceptable then it can be withdrawn and I
rest on the submission that I have made which is still a
strong one, in my submission, but I hope to try and assist
the Court by saying that here at least is an account which
has been given by Mr. Duckenfield, in the circumstances it
was given, first of all, in chief and then under cross-
examination for a number of days.   That to some degree will
assist the Jury in determining in this particular instance in
this Inquest where the truth lies, that is, how the deceased
met their deaths.

   MR. KING:   On that basis I am content and would be
content in respect of any other senior Officer who allows his
transcript to go forward in that way.

   MR. MANNING:   I have been able to use the intervening
period to talk to Superintendent Murray who instructs me on
the same basis as that put forward by my learned friend, Mr.
Isaacs, on the part of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, that
so far as his evidence to the Taylor Inquiry is concerned it
may be used in exactly the same way.   It was evidence that
was received.   He answered questions in chief and in cross-
examination in detail.   There it is.  It will be received and
read in that way and on the same basis under the same caveat.

   THE CORONER:   May I put in my view for what it is worth?
I had listened with considerable interest to your submission
and I have to agree with you because this is a regular
occurrence in Inquests that whenever you get the situation
where a person is potentially liable to be charged with some
criminal offence, be it careless driving or even speeding, it
does not matter what, it is next to impossible to construct a
question which is not incriminatory.  That has been my
experience and in a sense I am encouraged that that seems to
be your experience as well.  I thought it was just my failure
in constructing questions.  So far as that goes, I agree it
is exceedingly difficult to formulate questions which
actually advance the matter if a person is in a situation
where an answer may incriminate him.

     Secondly, because I realise that that is so, my practice
has always been to call the driver, or the person whose
conduct is being called in question, to ask him things like,
"What is your name?" (which is not I think incriminatory) and
then to pause.  If questions are asked and if they are
incriminatory that is pointed out straight away and my
experience generally speaking is that the matter draws to a
close very quickly because people realise there is no point
in proceeding.  It does have the advantage that the witness
who is a player in whatever it is one is enquiring into is
there, is seen to be there and is also given the opportunity
of saying something if he wishes to say something whereas if
you do not call him you do not give the witness that
opportunity.

     Now, of course, you might say to me, "I am telling you
that we do not want that opportunity, thank you very much".

   MR. ISAACS:   That is exactly what I am telling you for
the purposes of this submission.

   THE CORONER:   The fact that somebody does not give
evidence is also prejudicial.  In a sense the problem has
been made more difficult from the decision point of view
because of the exchange that has just taken place as to what
is to happen with regard to the transcripts of Lord Justice
Taylor's Report and Mr. King, who has the primary interest of
a good number of the bereaved, feels that this might be a
better bet than having somebody say, "I am not answering
questions" and you obviously feel that as well.

     I am a little bit concerned about it, in fact, because
quite a bit of the evidence of Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield, and we think about him simply because you took
the lead in this matter but it applies to others as well I am
sure, there is quite a lot of his evidence which is not
germane to an Inquest.  It will be ever so interesting but it
is not germane to an Inquest.   I could allow it if you, as
his representative, say, "I do not mind, let us read it all
and have done with it".   I am a little bit concerned about
that aspect of the matter.
   MR. ISAACS:    There are two ways of looking at it, with
respect.  First of all, it can be edited by agreement and
indeed on your direction because you will have read his
evidence that he gave some time ago now to Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry. Alternatively it can go before the Jury
and you can give directions as to those parts which are
germane to the Jury's task in this particular Inquiry.    I
should point out, sir, that the offer I made was made On the
basis that he was not called.   I think my learned friend
understood that and it was not in the way of holding a gun to
your head at all.   It was a view to being helpful.

   THE CORONER:    Mr. Isaacs, may I ask you this because it.
seems to me that it might be possible to achieve the best of
all worlds in this situation bearing in mind the point which
you have made and the acceptance of the issue? It is my
reluctance in a sense to make a ruling that we were not
calling him because I am a little bit reluctant, despite the
very persuasiveness of a lot of what you said to me, but it
seems to me that your client would not be in any particular
danger of prejudice if the solicitors, Mr. King in
particular, were to agree that if we were to put Mr.
Duckenfield in the witness box having either read his
transcript either in toto or edited by agreement, that he
would agree not to pursue questions which clearly were
incriminatory because that would then give the advantage of
having Mr. Duckenfield here and yet without having the thing
which I perceive to be your main fear is that he will have to
answer hundreds of questions all of which he will answer by
saying, "I am not answering that question because it is
prejudicial".   What do you feel about that?

   MR. ISAACS:    What will happen is this, let us say it is
my learned friend and he will ask a question which he
believes does not have the tendency to incriminate.   Either
yourself or Mr. Duckenfield or myself will say, "We take the
view that it is".   The Jury will go out.  There will be some
legal argument.   There will be some reference perhaps to some
parts of the evidence he has given.   That matter having been
resolved the Jury will come back in.   The next question will
be asked and exactly the same thing will happen.   I can
foresee unfortunately that one will have a morning, a day,
two days or three days and after every question that is asked
the Jury will go out, there will be legal argument and so it
will go on.




                      /With respect, sir
With respect, sir, that cannot be right, and however much
you, sir, would like to see him here, unfortunately the
very nature of the difficulty that he is in,     I stress
against the background that he does not accept that he has
committed any wrong-doing, but that others may take a
different view, that in those circumstances, and I say
this advisedly, the compromise that seems to have been
accepted is one which should commend itself to you, and
overcome what I appreciate to be your natural reluctance
not to call, even to say, "What is your name? , a chief
player.  Sir, that is the only way that I can put it, but
I do hope that perhaps both myself and Mr. King can manage
in the event to persuade you to take the course which is
now being put forward, both of us no doubt for different
reasons but, having said that, reasons that are to each
other reasonably cogent.

        Til . CORONER:         Did you want to say anything more, Mr.
King?

        MR. KING:        No.

     THE CORONER:              Did you want to say anything,   Mrs.
McBrien?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I think it would be useful to use the
transcripts from the Taylor Inquiry but we all know that
the Taylor Inquiry was never to blame anybody, it was a
different sort of inquiry to this one, but it would be
better than nothing, I think.   Rather than have nothing at
all I would be happy with that.

     THE CORONER:   You are going along with what is being
proposed as the best?

      MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes, but I really would prefer Mr.
Diickenfield to appear    in person so that I  could put
questions to him, not     in an incriminatory  way,just to
speak to him.

     THE CORONER:   I think I ought to say that I know
Lord Justice Taylor said that he was not going to blame
anybody.  In fact, it   is only fair to say   that an inquest
is in exactly tne same situation.   We are not here to
blame people we are hare to enquire into how a deceased
person died and, in fact, the rules I have already
referred to expressly say that you must -not give a verdict
which in any way blames somebody, and I would follow that
ruling exceedingly strictly,, I can assure you of that.        I
appreciate that you may want to ask the questions as
gently as possible but that is not, in fact, the issue.
The issue is not whether you are asking a question nicely
or nastily, but wnat is the content of the question, and
does it tend to increase the risk even by a l i t t l e b i t
that a person might be prosecuted.   That is the point.       It
                                                               94




    is not how you ask the question, which I am sure you will
    do in a ladylike manner, but that is not really the issue*

B        MRS. M c B R I E N : I think that he would be able to give
    us far more information about that day than anybody else
    as he was trie prime actor.

         THE CORONER:   Yes, but Mrs. McBrien, I think it is
    only fair to say, as I have already indicated, it is, in
    fact, practically impossible to frame a question, to put
    tne question where a person is in the position of Chief
    Superintendent Duckenfield, which is not incriminating.
    It may not be incriminating but it is almost impossible to
    frame it and the point is that he does not have to answer
    that question.  Whether it is incriminatory or not, you
    cannot draw a conclusion from it.   If I ask a driver,
    "Were you doing 40 miles an inour in a 30 miles an hour
    area?", he can say, "This is an incriminatory question, I
    am not answering it".   You cannot draw the conclusion that
    he was doing 40 miles an hour from that.   He might have
    been but he might not.   He might just not want to answer
D   the question and there is no way of finding out, not in
    this Court, and that is tie difficulty in this situation.
    It is a difficulty which is almost insoluble I think.

         MRS. McBRIEN:   If I formed some questions and handed
    them to you for you to look at ...?

         THE CORONER:   You could do it but it won't make any
    differenc . You would be a very clever lady if you could
    think of a question which actually gave you an answer.

         MRS. McBRIEN:     I would not be recriminatory.

          JIE CORONER:    Thank you, Mrs. McBrien.

         You will have guessed that my inclination had been to
    turn your request down from what I have said, but on trie
    other hand I have to take into account what Mr. King has
    said, and I have heard, of course, what Mrs. McBrien has
    said and I have to take that into account as well, though
    it is clear, I a in sure, to you that my experience is
    similar to yours, that it is exceedingly difficult to
    actually formulate the questions in a meaningful sort of
    way.

         I know you won't be here tomorrow .but I am still
    going to defer a decision for a day or two.   We are not in
    a hurr. in the sense that he is coming tomorrow.   It will
    be, I am afraid, several weeks before we actually get to
    the crucial situ tion but I will think about it quite hard
     ecause obviously if it is acceptable to everybody tnen
    that may well be the most convenient way irrespective of
    my normal -ractice.  I appreciate it is a little bit
    inconvenient for you but I don't think I can do anything



H
                                                             95




    about it.    I do think it is something that I need to
    consider.

          MR. MANNING:   Perhans just to follow from that, you
B    n .icate that you will give the decision when you f eel
    able to do so.  Can I ask a backwards way round assurance,
    it as not my intention to come tomorrow morning because
    the videos are soraethi g with which I am familiar.    Gould
    I be assured by you that you would not give that
    adjudication at 10 o'clock tomorrow morning, it would he 4
    o'clock?

          TilE COR ONE R: You can be assured of that and, in:
    f   ct, if it will nelp you I will say that I won't give a
    d cision at all and that I will let your instructing
    sol: i tors of tbe Off icers involved 'enow w.ien I am ready
    t make an annoucement, so that your instructing
    sol : itors and others can be here...

         MR. ISAACS:   I am very grateful, sir, because I was
    ju?t going to ask if you could give us notice then
    c rtai ly some arrangement would be made to ensure that
D   your decision on this matter will be heard by somebody
    representing Mr. Duckenfield.  I also ask this, that I_
    assume therefore that you will bear no further submissions
    on this particular matter without somebody being in
    attendance.  I assume there will be no more in any event
    now?

          THE CORONER:   The only submission, if you like, that
    I would like to near, and I don't think this will
    prejudice your client, will be from the representatives of
    : ie otner people who are in trie same boat, shall we say,
    as to whether or not they would go alo g with the
    proposals which have been made.

         MR. ISAA S :       Clearly that cannot affect Mr.
    Duckenfield.   I was only concerned that you may hear - and
    I tnou ;ht you w o u l n not, but may hear submissions about my
    application.in my absence or in the absence of any otner
    representative of Mr. Duckenfiel‘*.

         THE COROWER:   No, that would not be my intention
    because I quite und rstand this is an exceedingly
    important matter for you and for the other Officers.

         MR. ISAACS:    Effectively submissions on this point
     an now be r: varned as closed until you make your
    d cision?

                CORONER:   Ye:   that is right.

          MR. PAYNE:    I wonder if I might just mention'that
     tnere is another potential passenger in the boat wno has
       t been mentioned so far and that is Assistant Cnief
     Constable Jackson.   I j us t mention this so that you know


H
that he may be a d ed to the group whose submissions you
will be c nsid r ng in due course, wnen the decision is
made "bout   ~e position of Mr. Duckenfield.

       THE CORONER:   Can we ju t make sure that we know who
,.,e are 1 Iking about.   I know Mr. H.ile isn't here but the
p tc :t ia people wc are talking about is Mr. Marshall, is
that right?

      MR. P a YI.E: Yes, the list is Assistant Chief
C .stable J ckson, Superintendent Greenwood,
Su .er nt nd nt Murray, Su^eri nt endent, I believe, Mai: snail
and, of course, Mr. Duckenfield.

      THE C O R O NER : And you   would want to add Mr.
Kernings.,orth and Mr. Smith,     I take it?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:     That is right.

      RdE CORONER:     what about you?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    Sir, as I said before, at the moment
-11 I can say,    sir, is that we would like to reserve our
position.   It   may well be that for thepurposes of Mr.
King and the families it would be better all round if all
toe statements went in from the principal players but we
need to , 1 k to our clients direct and also to have
discussion between ourselves.

       THE CORONER:         You will appreciate that in respect of
quite a few of the names that have been mentioned tnere
ace very comprehensive PACE statements which, of course,
w i 11 be read a n y w a y , whatever we do about it.   What do you
say t that, Mr. King?           Suppose for a rainute_that all
these colleagues of yours said, yes, they think it is a
splendid idea       of your.- and Mr. Isaacs, we will apply it to
  11 of    em.Would you accept         it?

      MR. KIRG:   Sir-, my position is I would have liked to
h eve read out the whole of the Taylor Report and the whole
of tie transcript and just submitted to law on you, so to
that extent, sir, I would not object to that course.

      TilE CORONER:    Thank you.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   There was one point you mentioned
tnat tnere woul  be some live evidence tomorrow.  That
certainly took me somewhat by surprise and I think those
aroucd me as w_ll.  I wonder if you ....

      THE CORONER:   Sorry about that.  Wnen I decided to
scr :
    ;p, if tnat is tae right word, the summaries, or the
speecnes or whatever you like to call them, I thought we
woul   hace a bit of time, so we are going to take the
first four people on the list for Wednesday morning and
t at will give us a slightly easier day on Wednesday, and
we have put it up at the back actually.  It is there.
That is where we are going to put the list.  We intend to
put tne list up at the back so that it is visible,  y

     So the plan tomorrow is morning, videos, afternoon,
four witnesses whose names I can't quite remember at the
moment.

     MR. KING:     The four witnesses at the top of the list
for Wednesday,   sir?

     Til : C O R O N E R : Yes, I think so. Certainly three of
  em but we may have had to shift the fifth and the fourth
arou d.    It is the top end of the Wednesday list.

     I just ..'ant to check one other thing.     You remember I
mentioned the transcripts to you at the business meeting?
We have henrd from three firms.       One said they did not
w-nt one, two said they did.       Is that correct?  It is^no
use turning up tomorrow morning and saying, "Yes, I did
went a transcript".       As I explained to you, it is entirely
up to you.    It does not make any difference to me whether
you have the:.; or n o : .

     MISS HAMPTON:   I thine we would be a third firm that
would require a transcript.

     THE CO i<O N E R : Thank you.  Ladies and gentlemen,
thank you very much indeed.      It has been quite a long day,
as Mr. Isaacs said - interesting, in many respects.       We
will adjourn then.

 (Tne Inquests were adjourned until    t^e following m o r n i n g )
