 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                 Date and tim e raised                          Number
                                                                                                               ttf-
                                                                ^            Pao -v-
  Include source and any document number if relevant)
%
, , Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/N o   ____
                                                                                                                 Receiver




                                                                                                                  Indexer
  Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

  No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                             S tatem ent Reader
 Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                  Indexer
  Indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised

 Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                 S IO




 Further action No(s)                                                                                             Indexer



 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master N um ber Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                   PAUL CLARK




                     Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                       At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                       On

                 24th April 1990



           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors’ Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                    A


                                                 INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                    B



                        OPENING BY THE CORONER

                        DR. JOHN CLARK Called

                           By THE CORONER

                        DETECTIVE CONSTABLE PETER GATBSY Called

                           By THE CORONER
                           Cross-Examined by MRS. NORCLIFFE
                    D
                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                           By THE CORONER




                    E




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        uesday,   24th April,   1990

                                       THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                                                   PAUL CLARK

                    B           MR. FRASER:   Sir, the next case you will hear
                          relates to Paul Clark.   His parents are in court, sir,
                          They travelled up this morning to hear the evidence
                          presented.   I appear for them both in a personal
                          capacity and as a member of the steering committee,
                          sir.

                                THE CORONER:   Thank you, Mr, Fraser.   Mr. and
                          Mrs. Clark, I am just very briefly going to tell you
                          what is going to happen, because I assume you d o n 11
                          know.

                                First of all, I am going to read the evidence
                          which was taken on the 18th of April, 1989.   I read it
                          as it was taken, whether it includes mistakes or not,
                          and in fact this one does have an error in it, so don't
                    D     worry, we will correct the mistake next.

                                 Having done that we are going to listen to the
                          pathologist and al so deal with the blood alcohol
                          levels, then we wi 11 listen to the police officers of
                          the West Midlands Police who will present their
                          summaries and then we will conclude the hearing at this
                          stage.    When you hear the summaries read you will hear
                    E     reference numbers,   Don't worry about those.   We need
                          those for the reco rd so we can understand what we have
                          done later on, but don't let it break your
                          concentration.

                                This then is a resumed inquest which was opened
                          on the 18th of April, 1989.   On that occasion Neil
                          Anthony Parkin, acting Coroner's Officer said:

                                  "The body which is the subject of this inquest
                                  has been identified by PC 1100 Fojut of the South
                                  Yorkshire Police as that of Paul Clark, by
                                  Kenneth Clark, his father.   He was 18 years of
                                  age, had been born on the 12th of March, 1971, at
                                  Holbrooke. Derby.   He was a single man and he
                                  lived at                      Swanwick,
                                  Derbyshire.

                                  He was an apprentice electrician by occupation.

                                  He died at Hillsborough football ground following
                                  an incident there on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.

                H                                  -   1   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                PC 1100 Fojut caused the body to be removed to
                                the Medico-Legal Centre and there he identified
                                it to Detective Constable Simon Weigold, who
                                subsequently identified the same body to
                                Professor Usher and Dr. Clark.

                                 It is the family wish that the body should be
                    B            buried."

                          Fallowing that we circulated a form to you, I don't
                          know if you remember, but you, Hr. Kenneth Clark,
                          actually signed it on the 27th of April and you
                          confirmed that we had got the name right but the
                          address should be              ~~| Swanwick in Derbyshire.
                          The place of birth was Holbrooke, Derbyshire, or is it
                          in Derby itself?

                                •MR. CLARK:      It is a village near Derby.

                                 TfIE CORONER:  We will say Derby.   The alcohol
                           levels were estimated by Dr. Forrest and he gave formal
                           evidence regarding everybody on the first day.   In
                           respect of Paul the level which was measured was
                    D      67 mg/100 ml.

                                 Now we will turn to Dr. Clark.

                                              DR. JOHN CLARK Called

                                                 By THE CORONER:
                    E            THE WITNESS:   I am Dr. John Clark, forensic
                           pathologist, University of Glasgow.

                        Q. Dr. Clark, this relates to a young man whom you knew as
                           Paul Clark and is case number 58? - A. Yes, sir.

                        0. Can you tell me what your findings were? - A. I
                           established that the cause of death was 1(a) inhalation
                           of stomach contents and this was due to 1(b) crush
                           asphyxia, so inhalation of vomit brought on by crush
                           asphyxia.   This was based on finding signs of asphyxia
                           in his face, the blueness of the face and petechial
                           hemorrhages on the skin and internally, in keeping with
                           his chest having been crushed, preventing him
                           breathing.   This had brought about vomiting and some
                           of the vomit had gone down into his lungs and caused
                           hemorrhage there, but this probably happened after he
                           was unconscious and just in the terminal stages as he
                           was dying.

                          There was little else to find.   There were one or two
                          surface injuries.   One on his cheek, one on the
                          shoulder and a small bruise on his right leg, but no
                H
                                                   - 2 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                          internal damage at all.   There was no natural disease
                          at all which could have contributed to, his death.

                          Would I be right in thinking that although you have
                          given as the cause of death the inhalation first and
                          crush asphyxia next, that from a practical point of
                          view the crush asphyxia produced the inhalation? - A.
                    B     Yes.   The main event has been the crush asphyxia and
                          as a complication of that that has caused him to vomit
                          and some of that vomit has gone down into his lungs and
                          that has just precipitated, hastened, his death really.

                        ). That does not necessarily mean that he was conscious
                           when all this happened? - A. No.   It is very likely,
                           in fact, that he was unconscious because a conscious
                           person would probably not inhale, it would probably
                           come out.   It is almost certain that he was
                           unconscious when he vomited.

                        D. In fact we have already established in cases your
                           opinion that people lose consciousness in this
                           situation within, what, ten to fifteen seconds? - A.
                           About ten or fifteen seconds he would lose
                    D      consciousness and then he would probably die within
                           three or four minutes, about that period of time.   So
                           very quickly in the process of events.   He would not
                           know anything about it.

                                 THE CORONER:      Mr. Fraser, do you have any
                           questions?

                    E             MR. FRASER:     No, the family have no questions,
                           sir.

                                  THE CORONER:     Thank you, Dr. Clark.

                                  DETECTIVE CONSTABLE PETER GATSBY Called

                                                 By T H E CORONER:

                                 THE WITNESS:   I am Peter Gatsby,    a Detective
                           Constable in the West Midlands Police.

                                 THE CORONER:   I forgot to tell you in the
                           beginning, all these people who are giving evidence
                           have already taken the oath on an earlier occasion in
                           respect of all the inquests:

                        0. Yes, officer. - A. At about 1000 hours on Saturday,
                           15th April, 1989, Mr. Andrew Booth left his home with
                           Paul Clark and travelled to Chesterfield to meet Paul's
                           father, Kenneth Clark.   They then all three travelled
                           together in Mr. Clark's car to Sheffield to attend the




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                           FA Cup Semi Final football match at the Hillsborough
                           S tadiurn.

                           Mr. Kenneth Clark separated from his son and Andrew
                           Booth as he had a ticket for another part of the
                           ground.   Andrew Booth entered the stadium via the
                           Leppings Lane turnstiles with Paul at about 1430 hours.
                           They went into enclosure 3 of the terracing where they
                    B      met a friend, Jonathan Fitzpatrick.   At about the time
                           of the kick-off, 1500 hours, the three men became
                           separated due to the crowd pressure and Jonathan
                           Fitzpatrick saw Paul pushed forward by the pressure
                           towards the front of the perimeter fencing.   He did
                           not see Paul again.

                           At about 1530 hours following the severe crushing in
                           the West Stand terracing, Police Constable Fojut was
                           given responsibility for Paul's body which was lying on
                           the floor of the gymnasium.   It has not been
                           established who carried Paul from the terraces to the
                           gymnasium.

                           At 1607 hours Dr. Curpen examined Paul in the temporary
                    D      mortuary and certified life extinct.

                           At about 0040 hours the following day, Sunday, 16th
                           April, 1989, Paul's father Mr. Kenneth Clark identified
                           Paul's body to Police Constable Fojut at the temporary
                           mortuary.d

                           The same officer later escorted the body of Paul to the
                    E      Medico-Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
                           Detective Constable Weigold.

                           On Sunday, 16th April, 1989, following identification
                           by Detective Constable Weigold, Dr. John Clark- carried
                           out an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of
                           death.

                           Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                           blood sample from the deceased where the presence of
                           ethanol was detected.   The witnesses proving
                           continuity of the blood sample are Detective Constable
                           Thomas Bardell, Detective Sergeant John Turner and
                           Detective Sergeant Norman Fletcher.   Dr. Alexander
                           Robert Forrest carried out the analysis.

                                 MR. FRASER:   Paul's family have no questions.

                                    Cross-Examined by MRS. NORCLIFFE;

                        0. Officer, I just wondered if there was any evidence as
                           to what time this group actually arrived at the ground?
                           - A. They actually talk of entering the stadium via the
                H
                                                - 4 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                          Leppings Lane turnstiles at 1430.   Hr. Andrew Booth
                          talks of, "I think it was about 2.30 that we arrived at
                          the ground and came through the turnstiles."    lie does
                          not actually differentiate between the time of arriving
                          there and going through the turnstile.   lie describes
                          them both in the same paragraph as 2.30.

                    B     I think if you look at the bottom of page 10 in the
                          statement of John Fitzpatrick where he clearly says
                          that he arrived inside the ground at 2.15 and it was
                          some fifteen minutes later that he was joined by his
                          friends Paul Clark and Andrew Booth, which clearly
                          makes it 2.30.

                                 THE CORONER:     Yes, any other questions?    (No)

                                 Mr. Fraser, this is another one of the cases
                           where fir. Bardell features where we need to make an
                           amendment.    Do you want me to mention it every time I
                           spot it?

                                 MR. FRASER:   No, I don't think so, sir.   I am
                           ahead of you in that respect.   I have already
                    D      identified them.   I will mention it to the families.

                                 THE CORONER:   I have already explained to you
                           why I think the error has occurred.

                                DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                                                By THE CORONER:

                                 THE WITNESS:   Michael Layton,    Detective
                           Inspector, West Midlands Police.

                        0. Yes, officer. - A. Sir, an examination has been made of
                           visual evidence available, both video and photographs,
                           but unfortunately at this stage it has not been
                           possible to find Paul on that material.

                           Mr. and Mrs. Clark again at this stage have not felt
                           they have wished to view any visual evidence.

                           Sir, Andrew Booth, has signed a plan of the terraces
                           and that does confirm that Paul was in enclosure number
                           3 and the plan indicates the point at which he last saw
                           Paul in enclosure number 3.

                           Sir, if I can refer you to that plan,    it is referenced
                           AB.l.

                        Q. We are going to call it C.68 and if you would be good
                           enough to show us where it is. - A. Sir, if we look at
                           the large scale terrace plan, this is in enclosure
                H
                                                  - 5 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
number 3, and the point at which Paul has been
indicated is in this location here.   That is the point
at which he was last seen.

      THE CORONER:    Any questions?

      MR. FRASER:    No thank you,   sir.

      THE CORONER:    Hr. and Mrs. Clark, thank you for
coming.   Don't worry that you did not want to look at
the visual evidence.    We are all different and we must
all do what we want and it is entirely proper that that
is your choice.    I don't want you to feel that we
would have wanted to push you into that at all.

      I am very, very sorry indeed that you have lost
Paul in this incident.   Unfortunately, we can only use
words to express that and I wish one could do something
different but we can't.  Thank you for coming this
morning.  That is all we are going to do at this stage
and no doubt we will be in touch with you through your
solicitors as and when something else needs to be done
and needs to be said, but thank you for coming.

      (The inquest into the death of PAUL CLARK was
      adjourned to a date to be fixed)
