HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE
  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 19S9




                 Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                   At
             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

            21st March, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                  SEVENTY FIFTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                     THURSDAY. 21st MARCH 1991

                            SUMMING UP

   THE CORONER:     This is the part of the proceedings which

from my point of view I have dreaded most.       I am not saying I

have not dreaded other parts but this is quite different for
me anyway.   What I have to do is sum up what we have heard

over four months if you think about it because not only have

we been sitting since November with a break for Christmas but

we were together in April and May time as well.      So it has

been a very, very considerable period of time.

   When we first began you will probably remember I said

something to the effect that you had been catapulted into a

niche of history.    I do not think I quite realised how right

that was and I certainly had not anticipated that it would

take as long as it has done but it has and that is how it is.

   Before we go on I would just like to say, and I hope to
say it again at the end, you have been an extraordinarily

good Jury.   The fact that we have not lost a single day due

to any illness of yours, Iknow there were one or two

children who were ill, but when you think about it that is

fantastic and I am exceedingly grateful for being here.       I

know once or twice some of you have not felt exactly 100 per

cent but you have still been here.     I appreciate it, the

families I am sure appreciate it, and so does everybody else.
Thank you very much indeed for that.

   What I have to do according to the rules is that Ihave to
sum up.   Rule 41 says:
      "Where the Coroner sits with a jury he shall sum up the
      evidence to the jury and direct them as to the law
      before they consider their verdict and shall draw their
      attention to Rules 36(2) and 42."


      The first point that I want to make is that this rule

which applies to me uses the words 'summing up'.       It does not

use the words 'shall present a summary of the evidence'.        It

does not say that I have to read 100 days odd, not quite, of

transcripts.     The way I interpret the words 'summing up' is

that if I am given a column of figures and am asked to sum

them I add them up and look at the figure at the bottom.        In

other words, I tell you what the total of 3 plus 7 is, equals

10.     I do not have to tell you that it is composed of 3 and
7.     I just tell you 10.   That is the way I am going to
approach this summing up.

      That is not to say, of course, that I will not refer to

the evidence.     I will.    I have to because otherwise I cannot

make sense of it but I have no intention whatsoever of

repeating the evidence of each and every witness whom we have

heard.     There may be a few whom I will have to deal with in a

little bit more detail but there will be many who it will be

possible to group and there will be others who I may not even
mention.

      The important point about that is that although it is my

summing up it is going to be your decision on the facts.

You, of course, have been here just as I have and have heard

the evidence.     It follows, therefore, that simply because I

have not stressed a particular matter which you may consider

important that it is of no importance.      On the contrary, it
/




           may just be I have not spotted what you have seen.      That is
           the reason why we have a Jury rather than me sitting on my

           own.    It is to enable you to make a judgment on the facts and
        B j to come back with a verdict.     I will explain some of these
           words to you as we go along.

              I do want to make it quite clear that merely because I

           happened not to have mentioned a particular person or perhaps

           emphasised something in a particular way does not necessarily

           mean you are not allowed to think about it.      On the contrary,

           I want you to clearly understand - and I will probably repeat

           this several times as we go along - that issues of fact are
           for you.

                  Questions of law are for me.    If I were to say to you,

           the law is this or that, you may think the law is an ass for

           all I know.     You may disagree with the law but as far as this

           Inquest is concerned you must accept the law as I state it.

           If I make a mistake with the statement, and if it is

           sufficiently important, then there are means for it to be

           corrected in other places.      It is not for you to correct it.

           That is the law.    So when I say that this is the law you have
           to accept it.

                  When I express my views on the facts in the way I have

           already indicated to you then the position is different.        It

           may be I will express my view on some facts, maybe strongly,

           maybe too strongly you may think, and although I will attempt

           not to stray too far out of the bounds of reasonableness it

           is possible I may do so.     You may say, "We are not impressed

           with his stress on this particular question of fact".      Is




    H
that quite clear?   I want you to understand the distinction
between law and fact and your privileges and powers, if I can

use those words, with regard to the facts because at the end

of the day when you come back with your verdict it has to be

your verdict.   I will sign the inquisition because that is

the way it is done but in the end it is your verdicts.

   Before I go on I also want to remind you that we are

dealing not with an Inquest.   Everybody has tended, including

me, from time to time to use that word.   It is not the

Inquest.   We are dealing with 95 Inquests.   This was much

more apparent last April and May when we did each individual

case and we actually paused between each individual person

for various reasons.   One of the advantages, if you like, was
that we were clearly dealing with one important person.     We

happened to deal with 95 important people.    They were

important to their families, important to their friends,

important perhaps to society, I do not know, but certainly to

their kith and kin important and we have to remember that
throughout.




                                  /Since November.
      Since November we have still been dealing with 95

Inquests but bearing in mind that we have taken four

months when we have been taking the evidence so to speak

together, you can imagine that if we had to repeat all

this evidence 95 times, if we had had every single witness

come in and say the same thing 95 times over it would not

have helped us and it would not have advanced our knowledge

and it would have been disaster in fact from an inquest

point of view.

      Nevertheless, the evidence which you have heard has

to be related individually to each of the 95 deceased and

your job is to find four things basically - I will read

you the rules in a moment but I will just tell you briefly

now, you know them anyway because I have told you many

times already - there are four things which you do.        You

decide who the deceased person was; when he died; where

he died and how he died, and how means by what means,

the circumstances.   It does not mean why.   It does not

include determining questions of civil liability.     It

does not include even finding out who is to blame.     On

the contrary, that is not actually part of Inquest

proceedings, but I will come back to that again in a moment.

      These are the limits of what we are doing, who,

when, where and how and in fact an inquest is what is

known as a fact finding situation, not a fault finding

one and this has been clearly said by people more able

than me on several occasions.   I will read you a little
                                                             6




bit out of one of the judgments if I can find it.

      This is a quotation from a judgment by Lord Chief

Justice Lane and in fact it is quoted by another Judge

and he says, and I am reading you a little bit:

      "Once again it should not be forgotten that
      an Inquest is 6 fact finding exercise and
      not a method of apportioning guilt.   The
      procedure and rules of evidence which are
      suitable for one are unsuitable for the
      other.  In an Inquest it should never be
      forgotten that there are no parties; there
      is no indictment; there is no prosecution;
      there is no defence; there is no trial,
      simply an attempt to establish facts.   It
      is an inquisitorial process, a process of
      investigation quite unlike a criminal trial."

It is worth remembering that when one thinks about what we

have heard.

      In another case, it is colloquially known as

ex parte Spooner, don't worry about the name, one of

the Judges says:

      "It is his duty ___" talking about the
      Coroner "... to guide the jury to a correct
      verdict but his responsibility is to conduct
      a fact finding exercise, not to apportion
      blame and not to decide civil liability."

So I have read you those two extracts because it is

important for us to understand what our limits are.

      Now you might possible be excused for saying if

he knew that why did he allow   (a) the Inquest to take so

long and (b) to deal with so many questions which appeared

to deal with the question of who is to blame?

      This is in fact not an easy question to answer,

but the reason why I allowed it was twofold, we will

start off with two anyway.
      (1) Because I perceived that it was important

that if we had a fact finding exercise I should,

particularly with a highly emotive and large matter

such as a major disaster, to allow sufficient time and

scope for people to be able to ask the sort of questions

within the overall limit as far as I could keep it of

an inquest, so that at the end of the day within those

limits we had done a thorough fact finding exploration.

      The second reason why I allowed it is because

although we are not a fault finding body, one of the

potential verdicts which a jury can bring in is a verdict

of unlawfully killed and I could not see how you could

sensibly think about that verdict if you had not heard

the sort of matters which might enable you to contemplate

it and as a result I felt it was right to allow questions

to be asked which did go towards fault because in a sense

that is part of the facts of the circumstances, it is a

question of how a person died, as to what had happened

in those situations, and the corollary of course is that

if you allow somebody to ask questions which point in

one direction then you must also allow people to give

their responses.   It therefore was inevitable, I think,

that we had quite a lot of evidence which did go and

did explore, in many cases at considerable length and

in considerable depth, the isssues of whether or not

there was a fault which would be of a nature which would

allow you to consider that verdict.
        The third point which perhaps I should mention is

this:    that the rules in fact provide that people whose

conduct may be called in question have a right of

representation and so there is implicit within the

coronal system this concept of criticism and perhaps

I ought to say at this point that a person whose conduct

may be called in question does not necessarily mean

somebody who necessarily might be found to have unlawfully

killed somebody.    A person's conduct may be called in

question if he has been negligent say, which is a

completely different category as you will discover in a

few moments, to the sort of criteria which have to be

met before you can even consider the possibility of an

unlawfully killed verdict.




                             There are
     There are those various strands which makes it

sometimes difficult to know where to draw the line and as

I say in the end I drew the line where I have done, and

whether I am right or wrong that was my decision.

     Now two further points with regard to this matter

and it is this:     you have to remember that what you are

considering is the evidence of the witnesses.      You are

not interested in the questions from either me or the

lawyers.     Now that is a very important point because we

have had on occasions from different people, quite firm

and strong questioning.      I make no complaint about that

because if I had wanted to make a complaint I would have

done it at the time.      However, the crucial matter you

have to consider is not the question, but the answer.

What is the witness really saying?      What did he see?

What did he hear?      What did he think?   What did he do?

That is what you are interested in.

     That brings me on to the point of the quality of the

witnesses, or if you wish, the quality of the evidence of

the witnesses.      It is wrong to say the quality of the

witnesses.    The witnesses are all of very high quality

because they are all human beings so I make no criticism

of any witness with regard to him and it is of no concern

of ours what they are, who they are, what their jobs are.

That is neither here nor there.      However, what we are

interested in is the quality of the evidence.      When you

consider this you can consider it in at least four
aspects.      The first one is you can look at the witness

an you can hear what he says and you can come to the

conclusion, "This chap is telling the truth.      I believe

him."      Not only is he telling the truth, he is telling

the whole truth as far as he is able.      That, of course,

is the ideal and should apply, of course, to every single

witness in theory, and it would be nice to think that

that were so.

        Human beings being what they are, on occasion the

witness may be what is known as economical with the

truth.     They are not exactly telling lies but they are

not quite finishing off the story.      Therefore you have

to assess, as you think about the various witnesses, "Was

he truthful?     Was he telling us the whole truth?      Was

he perhaps rounding the corners a little bit?      Not

actually telling lies but just not quite there."         If you

come to that conclusion obviously you have to take that

into account, not only with regard to the answer which is

given in respect of that particular matter but in your

assessment as to the value or weight that you can put on

the rest of that witness's evidence.      Be careful.     Just

because he is economical with the truth in one regard

does not necessarily mean that he is being economical

with the truth in every regard.      It is a matter for you

to assess.

        The third possibility is, of course, that the

witness is untruthful.      That is a different class
altogether, that this witness is not just being

economical, he is actually telling you something which

you do not believe.      Obviously is you were to come...

I have just fallen into the very trap which I do not want

to fall into - I have used the word "obviously".      I will

try and avoid using that word because it is an important

word in these Inquests and I do not want to confuse you

by using it in sentences.      If you were to take the view

that the witness was untruthful, in respect of that reply

you clearly could not accept it and you might well have

great difficulty in accepting other matters which he has

said.      However, even there exercise a degree of caution

because a witness may well be untruthful in respect of

one or other matter which to him is important, or where

the truth to him is something he cannot or will not or

must not or should not say.      I am not saying any of

those are good excuses but to him that may be the

motivation.      It may still be right that everything else

he said is correct and very often it is possible to test

the evidence of the witness by comparing it with what

other people have said in relation to the same incident,

circumstance, fact or what have you.      It may then be

possible for you to make a value judgment as to the

quality of that particular evidence.

        Then the last possibility that I want to mention on

this score is that a witness may be genuinely forgetful.

In fact there are two, forgetful is the first word I want
to mention.   That is clear.      We have had I don't know

how many witnesses.     We have had well over two hundred

since November and nearly all of them, I think, in some

respect or other could not remember something.        If you

think about it if you had been in their shoes you would

not have remembered all the details either.      The chances

are if you asked me what I did last week on a particular

day I might not remember it at all or if I did remember

it I would have already forgotten quite a lot of the

detail.   The fact that somebody    is forgetful is   not a

criticism of that person.      It may be unfortunate from

our point of view because we want him to remember that

very thing, but it is not something that you can actually

complain about but    you must take into account when you

consider and weigh the evidence.

     The other thing that happens to witnesses, and again

we had plenty of examples of this, is that witnesses get

muddled, either because of the passage of time or because

of the stress of the situation at the time or because

sometimes they may wish to suppress certain information

for their own personal - I am not talking about

suppressing information because they do not want to tell

the truth but because they need to live with themselves.

They may become muddled in what they say.      We had

several examples of people who were in that category.

Some were more obviously muddled than others and some did

not think they were, but they may have been.
     Therefore, when you think about the evidence which

you have heard from the witnesses you have to sort out in

your mind, is it true, is it correct, is it complete, is

it muddled, has he forgotten something which we really

need to know but which we might be able to supplement,

has he made a mistake even?   I include that under the

term "muddle".   Has he confused two issues?   I may at

some point give you one or two illustrations of this but

at the moment I am really talking about principles.




           Apart from listening
       Apart from listening to their words, of course, you

see them.    They are sitting over there, and when we were

at the Medico-Legal Centre you saw them as well, didn't

you?    You can sometimes judge what the position is by

looking at their demeanour.     How did they come over to

you?    What was your impression of them with regard to

their evidence?    That is, of course, a subjective

judgment.    I may think he was entirely truthful; you may

think you did not like his demeanour, there was something

there which was not right, and amongst eleven of you there

may be eleven different opinions with regard to any

particular witness, but it is nevertheless a factor you

have to take it into account.

       Do not allow prejudice as to position in life, social

strata, accent, status, do not allow prejudice of that

nature to influence your opinion on demeanour because that

is not the witness's fault.     If the witness happens to be,

as we had one, a general manager, for instance, of a

health authority, that is a very senior job.     If you

happen to hate health authorities do not be prejudiced

against him because of his job.    Nor, on the other hand,

be so impressed by his status that everything that he says

must be true, as against a witness who may have had a very

humble position in our social strata.    That makes him no

less a person, no less reliable, no less anything.        It is

a matter of judging each person on his merits, and do not
be prejudiced by outer circumstances relating to the

individual.   It is not easy that actually.     We all tend to

have pre-formed views but beware of it.

     The second thing that you can take into account when

you are making your assessment is, of course, the question

of bias.   Did the witness have a particular, I will use

the term axe to grind?   Did he want us to believe or

accept a particular construction of the events, and if you

were to think that the witness was biased then of course

you must treat his evidence with considerable caution,

certainly in those respects where the bias is real.      As I

have already said to you, one of the real problems with

witnesses is where do you draw the line?      If you feel that

there is a bias do you reject everything he has said, do

you accept some of it, do you accept it with caution?

That is a matter for you; I can merely draw your attention

to the sort of matters which you have to keep in your head

when you are thinking about the witness.

     The last point on this matter is what I have already

alluded to, namely corroboration.    This is not a trial so

in that sense we do not have to have corroboration but it

does make it easier if you hear the same view from

different people whom you believe.    Of course if you do

not believe any of them it makes no difference but if you

hear a view from "a" and you are not quite sure, but you

hear the same view from "b", and a similar view from "c"
whom you believe, then it may help you to say, "Well, I

think on reflection that must be right because of the

corroborative effect of the evidence from other

witnesses".

      I repeat then, what matters are facts and I have

already stressed to you that it is the replies of the

witnesses, it is their answers which are the crucial

thing.     I know we had lots of answers which were yes and

no, and so if you take me literally and you only look at

the answers you do not know what on earth the witness has

said, so I am not saying that you must not look at the

questions where the answer was, "Yes".     If I said to you,

for instance, "Is it true that at night the moon sometimes

comes out?", and you were to say, "Yes", that would be a

meaningless answer because it could mean yes to anything.

You have to look at the question as well.     What I am

trying to stress is that you have to sort out the heart of

the question and what the witness is actually responding

to.

      The next matter which arises is the question of

opinion.    We have had quite a lot of opinion evidence from

a large number of people and maybe I was remiss in not

sometimes intervening at an earlier stage, but it is

difficult sometimes to know where to draw the line, and

for the reasons which I have already given you and which I

am not going to repeat, I felt on the whole it was better
to allow more extensive answers rather than less extensive

answers.     But in the final analysis issues of opinion by

people who are not experts do not carry very much weight,

if any.     You can form an opinion, you can draw inferences,

that is different.     You can say here are the facts, what

do they mean?     That is your job really but be very, very

careful in drawing conclusions based simply on the

opinions that people may have expressed, and this is

particularly true in cases where we have had a lot of

opinion evidence, where we have had hypothetical

propositions put to people - if this had been, what would

you have done or said or thought?      You might agree with

what they are saying but the very real problem with

opinion evidence, apart from the fact that it does relate

to facts, is of course that it is all or nearly all

tinged with hindsight.      It is exceedingly difficult for

anybody, including me or indeed anybody, not to exclude

from their mind what we all know that happened, namely

that 95 people died at Hillsborough on 15th April.

          Therefore opinions which are expressed you have to

be very, very cautious with because the only thing we are

really interested in, if we are going to look at an

opinion at all, is what would have been that person's

opinion on 15th April, 1989, prior to the match, on the

assumption that he knew and knows nothing of what has

happened?     Do you see?   So be careful.
                                                             18




     We did have a few people who did have opinions and

whose opinions you may well give more weight to.     I

instance, for example, the pathologists.   You might think

the pathologists do nothing but express facts.     They do

give you facts, because when they say there is a subdural

haematoma, in other words there is a bit of blood within

the skull upon the brain, that is a fact because they have

seen it but when they say he died from that, that is

actually an opinion.   But it is an informed opinion and it

is a specialist opinion and although I think I said we

only had consultants, in fact, that was not quite right.

We did not use only consultants but I am quite satisfied

that the quality of the pathologists whom we did have was

high and therefore you may feel that you can more readily

rely upon their opinion, particularly when they give you

the causes of death.




                                           I will deal
      I will deal with some of the other matters.     For

example, they were asked on many, many occasions how long did

it take before somebody lost consciousness?      How long does it
take before irretrievable damage is done?     You will

remember - this happened at the interim Inquests - we had

expressions from every single one of them and I will not go

into the evidence but they did have opinions and those

opinions you can weigh and decide upon.     Obviously the more

who say the same thing the more strong, if you like, the
opinion becomes.

      We also had opinions from Dr. Nicholson.    He was the HSE

man, do you remember?    You can weigh those opinions but you

may feel that they are fairly strong.     First of all, they

were based on data as far as he was able to obtain it and use

it.   Secondly, he came in with the specific purpose of

investigating and finding out so far as he could certain

questions.    He did a lot more work actually than what we

dealt with but we dealt with more than enough for our

purposes.    Here is a man who expresses an opinion which you

may well find acceptable.

      Dr. Nicholls, the statistician, also expressed opinions.

You may feel that on the statistical side there is not much

one can argue with but you can weigh it.    It is for you to

decide the strength or otherwise of the opinion and what

weight, if any, you put on it.   We also had opinions from

several Police Officers and there were some where I felt it

was right we should listen to their opinion because they were

relatively senior Officers and one would hope on the basis of
                                                                     20

their experience they could express views which might help

you in judging some of the issues which are before you.

       There are other people.     Dr. Eastwood,   for instance,    in

many cases might well be called as an expert to give

evidence.     He was not called as an expert here but he was

called as a witness to fact but nevertheless one should not

too lightly discount his opinion.

       Opinions are one thing.     Conclusions are even worse.      So

where witnesses drew conclusions and said, "This is what

caused it”, I think on the whole it would be wise to treat

that with exceeding caution because that is actually your

job.    You have to draw the conclusion and not the witness.

The witness tells us the facts and where appropriate might

express his views and even give his opinions but the

conclusions in the final analysis is yours.        I am very slow
and I will try and speed up.

       Am I being clear?   That is actually more important than

speeding up.    Is it clear?     I want you to understand that you
should exclude matters which are not evidence in this Court

and they are obvious things.      You may see things on

television.    You may read matters in the paper.       You may hear

people discussing things in the pub or wherever you happen to

be.    None of that is evidence and you ought to exclude it.

You should also exclude what I call non-verbal communications

from anybody, me, the lawyers and indeed the general public.

That, of course, includes the people who are in this room

from time to time.    We have all I think, because I caught

myself at it, occasionally given non-verbal clues as to what
we thought about certain matters but it is not evidence.          Do

not allow yourself to be swayed.    When I say all, I include
the lawyers in this.

      It is not easy not to do it in fact.    We all tend to do

it.   Do not allow yourself to be swayed by it.      It is not

evidence.   It does not matter - and I will use the lawyers as

an example - whether lawyer A does not like what is being
said and shows it on his face or lawyer B thinks that is

great and a good point there.    It does not matter and it is

not evidence.    The evidence is there.   Exclude it from your
consideration.

      It is a very important point because it goes to the

whole route of Jury hearings namely that you must return an

unbiased, truthful, correct verdict based on the evidence

without fear or favour.   Whether it is popular or unpopular,

whether it will please some, all or none is neither here nor

there.   That is why when you retire you are locked in.      That
is not quite true but it will do.    You take your

deliberations on your own.    There is nobody there.     None of

us will ever know what you said or thought or how you came to

your conclusions.   It is your decision and none of us will

know what any of you felt or thought.     I think that will do
on this point.

      I now want to turn to what you are going to take with

you when you go into the room for retirement.     What we are

going to provide you with is, first of all, a complete set of

exhibits.   You know what I mean by the exhibits.      You have

already got quite a lot of them but I am going to give you,
or ask for you to be given, either my set or another spare

set, which is complete and contains all the plans which

people put crosses on and, in fact, I have arranged for the

plans which we used at the interim Inquests to be brought

over as well so that you have got one complete set.     It is

three big files.    You may find you do not need to look at all

the plans in great detail but we will give you a set made up

like the witnesses had where we extracted the plans so that
we could get it into one folder and so that it was easier to

find exhibits and indeed for you.     We can give you that as

well and you can use what you wish.     It is entirely up to
you.

       One of my legal colleagues drew my attention yesterday

to the quality of some photographs in our exhibits which are

not as good as the quality of some of the original properly

printed photographs.   We are going to try, if we can, to

extract the original photographs.     They will be no different

apart from the fact that they will be easier for you to see.

       We will also supply you, because they are part of the

evidence, with five video tapes which we have seen.     There is

what is known as the compilation tape, which is a two hour

job, do you remember that?    There is a split screen

comparison between 1988 and 1989 which we abandoned in a

sense because it was not ideal by any means but it was the

best we hadat the time but it is still there and you     can

look at it.    It is an exhibit.   We will give you the third

one which is our effort to make sense of that split screen

video where we took little segments at different times and
join them up so that you get a comparison between 1988 and

1989 and that is very much shorter.

     You will also have the BBC film which we have seen a

couple of times, once right through and the first time only

partially through or at least right through to the point

where we cut it off.     Lastly, there are the shots of Leppings

Lane terraces which you saw a few days ago.     In addition to

that we will supply you with a play back machine and we will

teach you how to use it.     We will show it to you.   You will

know how to do it but we need to show you which are the

buttons and then you can take it into your room and you can

do with the exhibits as you wish.     We want them all back, of
course, at the end.

     I want to just say this;     Hillsborough is most unusual

in many respects but it is certainly unusual in that there is

such a lot of visual evidence, photographs, videos, there is

an enormous amount of visual evidence and that has proved to

be in many respects very, very helpful and I do not wish to

decry that.   It is not the only evidence we have got at

Hillsborough and you have to treat what you look at with

caution.   We have had this many, many times.    We have shown

people photographs and I know that you spotted one particular

example and I will use that because you picked it up but you

will see what I mean.     It is the picture taken from the West

Stand where you can see the whole of the West Stand and

virtually the whole of the terracing.     You were not entirely

happy as to whether somebody sitting in the stands could

actually see that.     That is, of course, because you paid some
visits, did you not, three in total I think?     I suspect you

did the same as me.     You sat down in the stand and you had a
look.

        That is the important point about the visual evidence.
When you look at the photograph remember each time, "Where

was it taken from?    What is the angle?   Was it the view the

person could actually see?"     That particular photograph is

quite useful because it gives you an over-view of the whole

set up as long as you understand its limitations.     I think

you do understand that and so there is no need for me to
stress it any further.

        The same applies to the videos to a slightly lesser

extent because the videos are moving things but in the end it

is still only a picture from one point where that camera

happened to be pointed at and so whilst it may well be a very

accurate representation of what we can see at that location

you have still got to make the necessary adjustments in your

thinking with regard to that.    So be careful with the use of

the photographs and do not base everything that you decide
simply on the visual evidence.




                                              /The one.
                                                          25




      The one real useful thing on the visual evidence,

not "the one" there are many, but one of the real useful

things is the fact that there are times and particularly

on the BBC tapes it would appear that the times are

accurate and even on the others the times are pretty

accurate.

      You know on many of the still shots there is an

error on the clock and we have said you have got to make

an adjustment by one minute, but be careful with that,

the little tiny bit, because if you don't have seconds,

which you don't on those particular prints, we have just

adjusfc&d to a minute but it could actually be one second

or 1 minute and 59 seconds, we don't know that.   As a

rough guide a minute is good enough but bear that point

in mind.

      Shall we pause for ten minutes and we will press

on.

                     (Short adjournment)


      Perhaps I ought to just make one other thing clear.

Although you are getting all the exhibits and all the

videos you are not getting a copy of the transcripts.

I think you will be relieved to hear that but I am not

going to do that, that would be madness and not normal

practice either.

      Nov/ what you actually have to do is to complete

what is known as an "Inquisition" form and what I am
                                                                    26




going to       do now is I am going to ask Mr.Griffiths to     hand

you a blank      one.   (Form handed to jury) This is a

standard form.       It has got two sides.   This side, the

back of it, for practical purposes you can ignore.           On

one side you insert dates, causes of death and so on.

It is really when you look at them you can tell at a

glance.       The notes you can ignore as well because I will

be telling you the conclusions that you can reach.           It

is the front of it that matters.

         It    is going to be your inquisition   and you will bo

expected       to complete it for 95 individuals.   Now that

is a big job because there is a lot of writing to be done

so what I intend to do is to give you about 95 or 100

of these, blank ones, so that you can do it that way if

you wish.

         In addition to that we have pretyped these

This is an example.       This is Colin Wafer's.    We have* u..c

them for everybody.       (Form handed to jury)

         What we have done, it actually falls into two

parts.     There is the section at the bottom under

paragraph 5 where it says:       "Particulars for the ti.ne

being required by the Registration Acts to be registered

concerning the death" and that is really the sort of

information which will appear on the Death Certificate

and it is formal really but it is a way of conveying to

the Registrar,      in fact the form does not go to the

Registrar, I fill out another form and copy this on to
another form and that goes to the Registrar, but you don't

need to worry about that.

      The top half from 1-4 is what is the inquisition

proper, so to speak, and you will see that the first line

is merely a description of the location, that it is a

Coroner's Court and where it is, that it is in South

Yorkshire and it is the West District.

      The next line is on the 18th of April it says on

this particular one, 1989,    "And by adjournment" and I

have typed in but you don't have to use the typed version,

you can write it out yourself if you wish, the        typing

is what is supposed to be simply all the bits which it

is unlikely that you are going to have any difficulty

with and it is intended simply to save you handwriting,

but if you don't like it you can screw it up and amend

it or you can re-write it, you can do what you like, it

is your inquisition, but the third line       says:   "And

by adjournment" and I have typed in "on various dates up

to and including the" blank day of 1991.

      Now don't insert a date     there when you are in the

room because   the date that is going to go in there is

whatever happens to be the last date of the Inquest,

so if for example you were to come back with your verdict

at an hour when I am able to complete the matter there

and then then we will insert that date.       If we have

to come back   the next morning we will insert whatever

date it is.    All right?    Is that clear?
                                                              28




        Because of the way the Inquests have been done,

because they have taken such a lot of time, we have had

to say "on various dates" because we have been going for

four months, haven't we?      We can't list them all.

        The next section merely describes me.    It puts my

name.   After that it says:     "(and the undermentioned jurors)

it says before me "One of Her Majesty's coroners"       and

"(and the undermentioned jurors)     touching on the death

of" and in this particular instance it is "COLIN WAFER"

but it will be a separate form for each individual.

        So up to there that is just to tell us who we are

talking about and where it happened.

        We then turn to paragraphs 1-4.    Number 1 is the

"Name of the deceased" which is just a repetition.

        Number 2 is the "Injury or disease causing death"

and that is in fact what the pathologists told us and

you will remember that that happened at the interim

Inquests and I will remind you, it will actually be in

front of you because I am going to give you these but

I will still remind you in open Court what the causes of

death were so that everybody knows what it is that you

are thinking about.

        Paragraphs 3 and 4 you will see are blank because

those paragraphs I want you to complete.

        Paragraph 3 says:   "Time, place and circumstances

at or in which injury was sustained" and what you insert

there is your decision as to the date and the time and
the place and the circumstances that you think are necessary

that ought to go into this gap.

        Before I give you some guidance with regard to that

I* want to hand out something else which is a list basically.

It looks like this and there are 16 pages of     it because

there are 95 deceased and if I take Colin Wafer simply

as the example because he happens to be the first person

on the list, the first column has a number.     That number

is if you like our registration number in respect of Colin.

The next of course is his name.     The third column is his

age, not terribly relevant but it happens to be on this

form.     The next two columns are the times and the doctor

who certified the death.     I will explain what I think about

this in a moment, but with regard to Colin Wafer it says:

"15.40" and it has got the name of "BYRNE" and then the

last column says "Date of hearing" and that is in fact the

date when we did the Inquest last April or May because it

might just help      to bring the case back to ^ou if you

happen to know which date a particular case was done.

        The list in fact is in the order in which we heard

the cases in April/May.     There is no significance to the

orders.    At the time we did have some idea as to why we

chose them because we wanted to fit it in with pathologists'

times and getting the families together, family groups

together and various things like that, but I decided not

to try and reshuffle it and put it into alphabetical order

or anything else because it may be much easier for you if
we stick to the sequence which we are familiar with.

It also avoids any suggestion that anybody is more important

or less important because from the point of view of the

names it is entirely random as you can see from the

numbers and the alphabetical order, we start with 'W',

not with 'A', and the same applies to every single person

here.

        Now can you hand this up?   (Forms handed to jury)

This again is simply as an aid to you.    You don't have

to use this if you don't want to, but it saves you

writing names and matters of that nature.    It is also

double checked because when I hand you the Inquisitions

they are here.    I can give them to you now but I don't

think there is any need because you don't actually need

them at the moment.    If by some misfortune a form was

left out you will be able to - I don't think it is likely

- but if it were to be, anything can happen, you will

be able to pick it up because as you do them you need to

apply your mind to each and every single person.




                           Now what do you
     Now what do you put in section 3?      I am going to

give you a number of suggestions but these are simply

suggestions.     You don't have to accept these.    These

are simply intended to give you some idea that if I were

sitting in, say, a road traffic incident - well, I will

give you that as an example.     If I were dealing with a

road traffic incident and I was writing that section, I

would say the person died on the 15th of April, 1989, as

a result of a collision between two private motor

vehicles in such-and-such a road in Sheffield.

Sometimes I might say a private vehicle and a heavy goods

vehicle, if that happened to be the case.     In other

words a relatively brief account, but I look at it and

say, "Oh, yes, that was a road traffic accident."        It

tells me the place.     It tells me when.   It tells me

whether it was a motor bike, a car, a heavy goods vehicle

and so on."     That is the way I normally do it.

     On that basis I am going to give you one or two

examples of what you might like to think, but you are not

tied to this.    With regard to the deceased all of them

died on the 15th April, 1989, except for Lee Nichol, who

died on the 17th of April, but I am just going to use the

15th, but you must remember that when you get to Lee.

     Example 1 - they are all very similar - "Died on the

15th of April, 1989, as a result of crush injuries

sustained at Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield."

My normal practice is not to put a time because it is
very difficult in most cases to know exactly when a

person died     and we have had plenty of examples in these

Inquests.       Youknow, when did this person die?      If you

remember Dr. Gumpert came along and gave us a very

erudite lecture on death on the last day, I think the 4th

of May, and     Dr. Slater, who we sawa few days ago, also

did a jolly     good job at explaining to us what the word

"death” means.      It is not quite as easy as some of us

might think, so I tend to pick the date rather than the

time.

        On the other hand this section does not actually ask

what time they died.      It says, "Time, place and

circumstances at or in which injury was sustained."

That makes it a trifle easier in fact because with Lee

Nichol we know that the injury was sustained at

Hillsborough.      He was not certified dead...      In fact he

is the one example where the certification was actually

important with regard to establishing a time of death

until the 17th, because in his case if you remember brain

stem death criteria were used.      I will talk about him

later.

        You could, for example, as an alternative, put "Died

on the 15th April, 1989, between..." whatever time you

wish in the light of whatever evidence you heard,

"...and..." - you know give two periods.      I will pick

fanciful periods now.     You could say between 6.00 pm and

8.00 pm, for instance.     We know that is not right.      I
have deliberately chosen times which are not right so as

not to confuse you.      It is a matter for you to decide

when the real problem, in the light of the evidence

occurred, and you may, if you wish, take a slightly wider

bracket if you want to be on the safe side.      However,

you do not have to do it.      I would be quite content with

the date.

     Therefore that would be, "Died on the 15th of April

between 6.00 pm and 8.00 pm as a result of crush injuries

sustained at Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield."

     Now another possibility would be, which I do not

particularly favour, but it is a matter for you.        You

could say that and you could then add if you wished,

"Certified dead by Dr. Byrne at 15.40", or whatever it

says there.      It does not tell us very much more but if

you would be more content with that, so be it.     That is

the reason why I have left those two columns in there so

you can use them if you wish.     You will notice there are

one or two places in this where there is no certified

time of death.     To take the second one, Stephen O'Neill,

it is Dr. Doore and that still blank.      It is a lady

doctor and there is no doubt that she certified people.

These were all people at the hospital, but there is very

grave doubt with regard to her timings.     Strangely

enough there is one case where we actually do give a

timing for her.     We say four o'clock.   It is on the

last page, Barry Sidney Bennett, and we have got 1600
hours, with a questionmark.     In that particular Inquest

we actually said that Dr. Doore certified at about 1600

hours, but in all the others we merely said that

Dr. Doore certified.     I am inclined to think that if you

were going to use this method that you should be

consistent and treat her without a time, but it is a

matter for you.

       You have got the possibility of inserting times, and

as I say, my recommendation is a bracket because the

evidence is not available for you to say that anybody

died at a particular minute or other.     You can if you

wish go on to add some reference as to when death was

certified.    That is a matter for you.

       I will give you another example of what you might

say.    They are all basically the same but there is

slight variance.    You could say, "Died on the 15th

April, 1989, as a result of crush injuries sustained..."

and you could add, if that is what you thought the

evidence said, "...following overcrowding and/or crowd

movement and/or following the opening of concertina

gates," or anything else that relates to the

circumstances which you feel have been found in relation

to that death and which you think ought to be included.

Instead of simply saying at Hillsborough Football Ground

you could simply say, "On Leppings Lane terraces at

Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield," if you wanted

to pin it down a little bit more accurately.
     That is the way I would tackle it but I do want to

stress to you that in the final     analysis it is your

decision.    So long as    you bear in mind the rules which I

will be telling you about in a moment, and basically

which are that under no circumstances must you identify

anybody, nor must you appear to be determining civil

liability.

     I think that is reasonably clear.         If, when you

have retired, and I say this now, and you are sitting

there and think, "Goodness me, I don't know what to do,"

if you just bang on the door and the usher will arrange

for you to come back.       We will reconvene. You tell       me

what the problem is.       If I can help you with further

directions I will.      You are not abandoned.

     Now the last one, number 5, is what it says,

"Conclusion".      This is what is colloquially known as the

verdict, but in fact the verdict is the whole lot.            All

this is the verdict.      In colloquial language, when the

newspapers report an Inquest they do not report it all,

they just report the conclusion.      In this particular

instance I have come to the conclusion there are three

possible conclusions or verdicts which you might be able

to return.      These are unlawfully killed,

accident/misadventure - I will explain this to you in a

moment - and thirdly, an open verdict, and I will explain

that to you as well.

     At this point I am now going to turn and give you
what I believe to be the law on this matter because I

think the time has come for you to hear it.          I regret

that the law on this subject is not the easiest          in the

world and I am bound to take a little while over it.              I

hope I will be clear and that you will be able to

understand it and follow it.        It is exceedingly

important that you have a proper grasp of it and also

that you accept my directions on the issue of law.

     I am going to turn to give you a number        of

directions on this matter.     As    you will see   in a moment

the majority of my time will be occupied with aspects

relating to the possible verdict of unlawfully killed.

You are not to construe this as meaning I am directing

you towards this verdict, or, indeed, away from it, or

that I am directing you in respect of any particular

verdicts simply because I am spending more time on this

topic.   It is simply that the legal concepts and aspects

which go to the verdict of unlawfully killed are both

numerous and complex and important and they differ in

many respects from those applicable to the other possible

verdicts which will be open to you.

     I want to draw to your attention for a moment a

couple of sections from the Coroners Act 1988.           I have

already told you about these but I am going to read them

straight out of the book, so to speak.        I ought to make

it plain that although this Act is the Coroners Act of

1988, it is in fact what is known as a consolidating Act.
You might think the law is bang up to date, but it isn't.

A consolidating Act is merely an Act which draws together

all the previous legislation and puts it into one piece

of paper, so to speak, to save people thumbing through

huge books finding little snippets here and there.      It

should have been - and this is simply an aside - in 1987,

but a General Election intervened.      The reason why it

was being done then was because it was supposed to have

been the hundredth anniversary of the Coroners Act 1887,

which was the cornerstone of what one might call the

modern Coronal practice.      That is why we have got a new

Act.

       Section 11, sub-section (5) says:



       "An inquisition:



       (a) shall be in writing under the hand of the

           coroner and, in the case of an inquest held with

           a jury, under the hands of the jurors who concur

           in the verdict;"



That is this form which you have got lying in front of

you.



       Then:
     "(b) shall set out, so far as such particulars have

         been proved:



       (i) who the deceased was;     and



      (ii) how, when and where the deceased came by his

           death;"



Sounds familiar, doesn't it?      Then:



     "(c) shall be in such form as the Lord Chancellor

          may by rules made by statutory instrument from

          time to time prescribe."



That is the reason why I am using that form.




            I also want to read
                                                              39




        I also want to read to you sub-section 6 of that same

section:

        "At a coroner's inquest into the death of a person
        who came by his death by murder, manslaughter or
        infanticide, the purpose of the proceedings shall not
        include ...

- shall not include -

        "... the finding of any person guilty of the murder,
        manslaughter or infanticide; and accordingly a
        coroner s inquisition shall in no case charge a
        person with any of those offences."

So that is the statutory basis.     Until 1977 or thereabouts

it was possible and indeed did happen that coroners'

juries actually named people and said, "He did it", or

"She did it", as the case may be, but for reasons which I

do not need to go into Parliament decided that was not

what coroners' juries were supposed to be doing, and we

don't do it in the circumstances.     I wanted to read to you

the actual section of the Act.

        I am now going to turn to the Rules because certain

rules have been made and the current Rules are, in fact,

1984.     I say '84 and the Act is '88 but I have already

explained that to you.     I want to remind you, as I say, as

I have already done, that I have to sum up and that I have

to draw your attention to various rules, and in particular

Rule 36(2) and Rule 42.     Rule 36, I will read it all

because it makes better sense, although it is a bit

repetitive.     Rule 36(1) says:

        "The proceedings and evidence at an inquest shall be
        directed solely to ascertaining the following matters
        namely -
       (a) who the deceased was;
       (b) how, when and where the deceased came by his
           death;"

- that is a repetition of the Act -

       "(c) the particulars for the time being required by
            the Registration Acts to be registered
            concerning the death."

and this is the bit that I have to draw to your attention:

       "Neither the coroner nor the jury    shall express any
       opinion on any other matters. '

What   that means is that we cannot add riders;     we cannot

add recommendations; we cannot add things which we think

could, should, ought to be done better.       The rule is quite

clear:

       "Neither the coroner nor the jury shall express any
       opinion on any other matters. '

So that is Rule 36(2) and      while we are here we will read

Rule     42 as well.    This is headed "Verdict":

       "No verdict shall be framed in such a way       asto
       appear to determine any question of -

       (a) criminal liability on the part of a named person,
           or
       (b) civil liability."

So you have to be careful in the wording that you do not

frame it in such a way that it appears to determine civil

liability, and with regard to criminal liability you must

not name anyone.       If a verdict of unlawfully killed were

returned then that may determine, or at least it may

indicate your views as to the possibility that there is

some criminal liability but you must not name names, nor
must you put   anything in which might indicate who you have

in mind.   Is that quite clear?

     Whilst I am on the Rules I want to draw your

attention to another Rule which we have mentioned once or

twice in thecourse of these proceedings.        It is actually

Rule 22 but it is an opportune      time for me to draw it to

your attention.   It says:

     "(1) No witness at any inquest shall be obliged to
     answer any question tending to incriminate himself.

     (2)   Where it appears to the coroner that a witness
     has been asked such a question, the coroner shall
     inform the witness that he may refuse to answer."

This is, in fact, an exceedingly important Rule and it is

fundamental to our present system of justice in the United

Kingdom as we understand it today.      You will have noticed

that some of the witnesses were told of the Rule and of

the privilege to which they were entitled, and some

exercised their rights.      Very few in fact exercised their

rights but some did.

     If you like, we can put the Rule another way, and

that is that the witness has the right of silence.       It

would be grossly unfair and quite contrary to the

intention of the Rule, and indeed to justice, if you were

to construe a refusal to answer a question under the

privilege - and I remind you that some people did do that

to a greater or lesser extent - but if you were to

construe such a refusal to answer a question under the

privilege as an admission or an indication of guilt, to
construe the privilege in such a way would not only run

contrary to the whole principle of the Rule but would in

effect place the person who exercised the privilege in a

far worse position than if he had in fact answered the

question.     Can you see that?

     The position is simply this, that you may not

construe silence as constituting any part of the evidence

on which your deliberations are based.      You have to be

satisfied from the evidence which you have heard and not

from the evidence which you have not heard, nor may you

draw any inferences from the exercise of the privilege.

Under no circumstances must you turn this privilege into a

noose.     Think about it; it is self evident, isn't it?

     Before I go on to discuss possible verdicts there is

one other Rule which I perhaps should just mention very

briefly.     It is an aside.   I have already told you that

you may not add any riders, nor may I for that matter, but

I do have a small advantage over you because under Rule 43

if I believe that action could be taken which might

prevent the recurrence of similar fatalities I can write

to anybody who I think might be interested and who might

be able to do something about it.      So it does not

necessarily mean that just because we cannot add riders

that nothing can come out of it but it is my privilege not

yours.     That is the way the Rules are.
     Now, I turn to the verdicts and I remind you of what

I have already said, that there are three basically which

I am going to leave with you:    (1) unlawfully killed, (2)

accidental death or misadventure, and I will tell you now

that as a matter of law there is no difference between

these two terms - we will deal with this a little later

when I get on to actually explaining it but as far as you

are concerned these are the same - and then the third

option that you have is what is known as an open verdict

and again I will come to that.

     Before you are able to reach any verdict at all upon

the evidence you have got to be satisfied on the evidence

that is appropriate and therefore you have to know what

standard of proof has to be applied.   In considering the

evidence you obviously will have to be satisfied that the

necessary standard of proof has been achieved, in order to

enable you to reach one or other of the verdicts which I

have mentioned.

     Different standards of proof are required for

different verdicts.   In respect of the verdict of

unlawfully killed you have to be satisfied to the standard

which can be described as the criminal standard of proof.

In respect of accidental death or misadventure the

standard would be that of the balance of probability.     In

the case of an open verdict there is in a sense no
standard, for the reasons which will become apparent as we

go through it.

     Now what is meant by the words "criminal standard of

proof"?   We will deal with this in a little more detail,

and this is the standard that has to be reached or that

you have to be satisfied on if you are dealing with the

possible verdict - I use the word verdict but it strictly

should be the word conclusion - of unlawfully killed.

Before you are able to bring in this verdict you have to

be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt, or to put it in

slightly more modern language you have to be satisfied so

that you are sure, that the evidence which you have heard

and which you are considering satisfies you that both the

act and the necessary mental state of the criminal offence

which you are considering has been made out.      The

balance of probability, in respect of the other verdicts,

except of course the open one, is simply a lower one,

described as the balance of probability, and I will refer

to that again in a few moments.

     Because of the differences in standards of proof you

have to take the verdicts in the correct order and in

effect what you have to do is you have to start with the

verdict of unlawfully killed, because that has got the

highest standard of proof.   You have to consider that

verdict in respect of each of the deceased.    It would not

be right for you to take an example, so to speak, and just
say you will only think about one and that is it.     You

have to think about all 95 individually and you have to

apply the facts within the context of the law, as

explained to you, to each one of those 95.     That does not

necessarily mean, of course, that you have to spend

identical amounts of time on each case.     Just as we have

not repeated 95 times evidence which is common it may be

possible for you to apply the evidence to them, but at the

end of the day because you have got to sign 95 of these,

you have to apply your mind to each and every one.     It may

be, as you will see in a moment, that it might be possible

to look at some of the people, not as groups, but there

are similarities between certain members, if you like Pen

3 and Pen 4 deaths, but in the end you have still got to

think of each one individually.

     Now, what do we mean by unlawfully killed in the

context of these Inquests?   What are the legal parameters

and requirements that you have to meet when you are

considering this verdict?    I am not going to take you

through the whole of the law on murder and manslaughter

you will be relieved to hear, but for the purposes of

these Inquests the criminal equivalent of the verdict of

unlawfully killed is one of the forms of involuntary

manslaughter and I can tell you, just so that there is no

misunderstanding, infanticide clearly does not apply and

murder does not apply either.     We have heard no evidence
whatsoever which could possibly enable you to consider

that verdict so we are talking about manslaughter and we

are talking about a particular variety which I have

described as one of the forms of involuntary manslaughter.

     The legal requirements for this type of manslaughter

have been considered in various cases and in particular a

case known as Regina v. West London Coroner ex parte Gray,

but there are other cases which have dealt with this.      I

am not going to bother you with all the cases.   In that

particular case, and I am not giving you all the story,

but in that particular case it happened to deal with an

alleged unlawful killing by a Police Officer by neglect.




                        Lord Justice Watkins set out
     Lord Justice Watkins set out the matters - he was the

judge in that case - which the jury have to be satisfied on

before they can reach an appropriate conclusion.    Before I go

through all the points that he has raised I should add that

although in that particular case the issue related to the

alleged neglect on the part of the Police the fundamental

principle is the same however one might be thinking.       Before

you can reach a verdict of unlawfully killed in the

circumstances of this case you have to be satisfied of

several things and I am now going to tell you what they are.

I am then going to tell you again with some elaboration.

     You have to be satisfied of the following points in the

first instance (1) that the person whose conduct you are

considering had a duty to have regard to the health and

welfare of the deceased, or as is said in other places and I

will be using the term and I say it now, had a duty not to

cause injury to the deceased.   So, the person whose conduct

you are considering had a duty not to cause injury to the

deceased.   Lord Justice Watkins used the term 'health and

welfare'.   Others have used 'injury' and others have said

that you can sum all that up into the word 'safety'.       The

sense is clear.

     First, that is point 1 and I will repeat it, that the

person whose conduct you are considering had a duty not to

cause injury to the deceased;    (2) in the circumstances there

was a failure to do what should have been done for the health

and welfare of the deceased;    (3) that that failure amounted

to a substantial cause of death;    (4) that the failure
amounted to recklessness;    (5) recklessness means that there

was an obvious and serious risk to the health and welfare of

the deceased that injury might be caused and that the person

whose conduct is being considered, having regard to his duty,

was either indifferent to such a risk or, recognising that

risk to be present, he nevertheless deliberately chose to run

that risk by doing nothing about it; (6) it must be clearly

understood, however, that the failure to appreciate that

there was such a risk would not by itself by sufficient to

amount to recklessness; (7) you can only return this verdict

of unlawfully killed if you can attribute these ingredients

to a single individual whose conduct is being called in

question.     Such an individual should on no account be named

or otherwise identified.

        That was the way Lord Justice Watkins set it out.    I am

going to come back to these points in slightly more detail

later but before I do that I want to say a word or two about

what is known as causation because causation in a sense

precedes anything.     If something did not cause something then

you cannot be thinking about it, can you?     You have to be

satisfied that the act or omission complained of was a

substantial cause of the injury which led to the death in

this particular case.    Not every causative act would give

rise to liability.    For example, it could be argued that

nobody would have died if the game of football were not

played in the United Kingdom and but for the fact that we

play football here in the United Kingdom nobody would have

died.    I do not think you have too much difficulty in saying,
"That is nonsense.     It is far too remote".    If you bring it a

little bit nearer home you could say, "But for the fact there

is an FA competition nobody would have died" and again you

might say, "Yes, but that is too remote".       Bringing it a bit

nearer you could say, But for the fact that Hillsborough was
chosen by the FA as the venue nobody would have died".

      All these in one sense are causes but with none of them

I think you will have particular difficulty, even with the

last one, in excluding them as causes in relation to these

deaths because you would exclude them on the basis that they

are too remote.   They are not direct.     When you come to think

about this you will first of all have     to decide what, in

fact, is the cause to which one needs apply one's mind.        This
may in the end as we go along turn out not to be quite as

complicated as I make it sound at the moment but I am merely
stating the principles.

     You have to be satisfied then that the act or omission

which you are looking at is, on the one hand, sufficiently

close, sufficiently related to the event as to be logically

classifiable as causative.    In other words, but for that

event and that it has got some proper     proximity to it and in

addition to that, that it was directly connected with the

death of the person and, for good measure, that it is a

substantial cause of the death.    If it is not substantial it

cannot be causative.    That is all I am going to say to you at

this stage on the question of causation.

     If I turn back to what Lord Justice Watkins said, the

heart of his seven points with regard to unlawful killing is
the issue of recklessness and so I am going to repeat for you

what I have already said.    The kernel of his conditions is

recklessness and what he said was that there has to be an

obvious and serious risk to the health and welfare of the

deceased.    If that is established then the person whose
conduct is called in question was (a) indifferent to such

risk or, recognising the risk, has decided to go on to take

it.   That is the kernel.

      Before you come to the definition of recklessness, if

you think back, there were several other things he said and

there are in fact what I perceive to be three preliminary

steps, or gates if you wish, that you have to go through

before you can even come to the issue of whether or not

recklessness applies.    I have called it involuntary

manslaughter but if you wish we might call this reckless

manslaughter, the equivalent criminal offence.     We are not,

of course, dealing with that.    We are merely trying to decide

how people died.    Were they killed unlawfully?   To decide

that you have to decide whether the criminal offence has been
made out.

      Step one that you have to traverse; that there has to be

a duty of care.    That in many instances is not too difficult

to determine and you may take it, as a general rule, that if

somebody undertakes to perform a task, eg stage a football

match, organise it, supervise it, they can be assumed to have

a duty of care towards the people with whom they come in

contact.    Slightly more difficult but I think relatively

straightforward is the issue of whether or not fans who
attend also have a duty of care to each other.      I can see no

reason why if, for instance, road users have a duty of care

to others using the road pedestrians or fans attending do not

also have a similar obligation towards each other but you in

the end have to decide on the facts that there was a duty of
care.

        Step two, failure to do what should have been done or

that something was done which ought not to have been.        That

is the second gate.     Have you understood that?   Simply

because something goes wrong does not mean that there has

been a breach of duty or that there has been a failure.

Beware of that.     There are two major aspects which you need

to think about and the best way of doing that is to look at

it from the point of view of ordinary individuals and from

the point of view of professional people.     I will deal with

the professional person first.     You have to be satisfied that

in the case of a professional, who is required to exercise

special skill, knowledge or experience, the standard of care

which he is expected to achieve is that of an ordinary,

skilled member of that profession and which such ordinary,

skilled person would have exercised or professed to have had

in respect of that special skill.

        We are not talking about some paragon of virtue, nor

somebody who is particularly bad.     It is an ordinary, average

member of that profession or class.    This is to really get

into the heart of the matter, the standard of the

professional and you measure that in relation to the standard

which an ordinary, skilled member of his class will have
exhibited in the circumstances and with the knowledge that

that person had, not with hindsight and everything else but
as it was.

     With regard to ordinary individuals in respect of people
who do not profess to have special skills you apply the

standard of an ordinary prudent person as exemplified by

yourselves, for example.   If, when you come to apply these

tests, you were to come to the conclusion that there has been

no breach of duty in respect of the person whom you are

considering then, of course, there is no need to consider any
other points in the definition because you have not got

passed this stage.   That was the first point.

     The second point that you have to consider is what I
would describe as a dilemma or crisis situation.   In an

emergency the fact that in the event a wrong decision is

taken need not constitute a breach of duty provided that a

decision was not unreasonably taken in the circumstances

which prevailed and taking all the aspects into account.    If

you come to the conclusion from the evidence that there was
an emergency situation you have to decide whether the

response to that situation was or was not unreasonable.

     You may, of course, come to the conclusion that there

was no emergency situation at all or alternatively that the

situation itself had been caused or precipitated by a breach

of duty by the person whose conduct you are considering.    You

must have it clearly fixed in your mind that the breach of

duty has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt from the

evidence and it must be attributable to one individual and
not be a summation of the acts of different people.

        A third point, a preliminary point, is that it must

amount to a substantial cause of death.       This is important

because in this Inquest we have been looking at the

activities of all kinds of people from the most junior

people to the most senior and from people right in the

centre of the stadium to people miles away, or hundreds

of     yards away if you like, some very small cogs, and

they may well have made mistakes some of them for all

I know, but it should not be too difficult for you to

be able to exclude the vast majority of people whom we

have been thinking about on the basis of whatever they

may or may     not have done isn't the substantial cause

of the death of anyone, quite apart from any other

consideration.

         You should give the word "substantial" its usual

meaning.     It is an English word.   There is no legal

definition.     It is what you understand it to mean.

         Now I am going to pause again because I need five

minutes and then we are going to get on to the recklessness

bit.

                        (Short adjournment)


         Now then, if a person whose conduct you are considering

does not pass these first three preliminary steps, you

do not of course have to proceed to consider the question

of recklessness in respect of him, but even if he does

get through here, the very most that you have established
                                                              54




will be that he had been negligent.    That would be the

highest that you would have got to him, so to speak,

and it is perfectly clear that mere negligence or if

you might prefer to use the word mere carelessness is

not a sufficient ground for you to bring in a verdict

of unlawfully killed.    You have got to be crystal clear

in your minds.

      It simply seems to ms to be in this     particular

type of unlawful killing it is the opening of the door

which enables you to consider, as     I have already said,

the heart of the matter, namely whether or not there-

has been recklessness as defined and I am sorry I will

have to remind you again of what the definition is

because the only way to learn it really is to keep on

repeating it.

      I remind you that there are three basic matters*

in respect of recklessness:

      (1)     That there is an obvious and serious rish

of injury.     Of course there has to be some act or

omission.

      (2)     That the person was indifferent or had not

given any thought to such a risk.

      (3)     Or recognising that risk had decided to go on

and take it.

      Now the first thing that you must notice is that

this definition includes two words.     It says that there

is, or was,    "an obvious and serious risk of injury" and

you have to be satisfied on both.     It has got to be
                                                               55




both "obvious" and it has got to be "serious".     It is not

terribly easy to know, particularly the word "serious" is

a difficult word but nevertheless you have to weigh them

and give them their appropriate meaning.

         In considering these you have to put yourself into

the position of the people with their state of knowledge

on the 15th April 1989 or you have to put a reasonably

prudent professional man into their situation with their

state of knowledge and with their particular circumstances

and exclude the benefit of hindsight and you have to ask

yourself the question whether on that day there was an

obvious and serious risk of injury?

         Recently in the Crown Court one of Rer Majesty's

Judges Mr. Justice Turner was dealing with a prosecution

which had arisen out of the Zeebrugge disaster and you

will remember that was a ease where a ship sailed with

its bow doors open and not surprisingly went down, but

we are not. interested in the facts of that case, but he

was talking in a long judgment in fact, but in one place

he said:

         "Obviously we are talking about a risk and
         nobody denies there was a risk.  It is the
         application of the word 'obvious' that is
         troubling me and has been troubling me for
         a long time.  Obvious if it operates that
         it will be a serious risk,  I quite follow,
         but obvious that it will occur is the problem."

Now this is a complicated sentence actually but it is I

think a very helpful one so I am going to read it

again.
                                                                    56




        "Obviously we are talking about a risk and
        nobody denies there was a risk.  It is the
        application of the word 'obvious' that is
        troubling me and has been troubling me for
        a long time.  Obvious if it operates that
        it will be a serious risk if it happens, I
        quite follow, but obvious that it will occur
        is the problem."

And if you think about the cases which we are dealing with

it is precisely this problem which      you are faced with.

        You may feel, and this was in fact canvassed before

the same Judge, that the word "obvious" means something

like perfectly evident, staring one in the face and there

were other attempts at explaining what that word might

mean.    Immediately apparent.    These are definitions of

that word which you    may find helpful.

        You should beclear in    your mind, as indeed

Mr. Justice Turner was,   that "obvious" and "serious"        are

not merely synonyms    for what is reasonably foreseeable.

Just because it might be possible to foresee something

does not necessarily mean that it is obvious.         There is

a big distinction.    It may well be that what is obvious

is reasonably foreseeable but the other way round it

does not follow.

        You may ask yourself:    "Obvious to whom?"     "To

whom should this obvious and serious risk be obvious?"

        Clearly in the first instance it has got to be

to the person whose conduct you are considering but in

assessing that you apply the test of the ordinary skilled

professional, as I have already described, or if you are

thinking of a non-professional person an ordinary prudent
individual as exemplified by yourself and who might find

himself in the same position and in the same circumstances

as the conditions were on that day.

      I want to make it clear that obviousness    011   its own

is not sufficient,   it is not enough.   The definition

clearly includes the word "serious" and you have to give

that its appropriate weight,   in other words there must

be an obvious and serious risk of injury.

      If you are satisfied that there was such an obvious

and serious risk you are not yet home and dry because you

then have to ask yourself the next question namely:       was

the person whose conduct you are calling in question

indifferent to the risk or having recognised the risk

decided to go ahead and take it?

      Remember those were the other two limbs, and in

order to avoid any misunderstanding Lord Justice Watkins

then adds:

      "It must be emphasised that mere failure to
      recognise the presence of such a risk is
      not sufficient of itself."

Mere failure to recognise the presence of such a risk of

itself is not sufficient.

      In other words he is drawing, as I see it, a

distinction between a person who may well be negligent

and in that sense liable to say civil damages but whose

state of mind does not meet the criteria required for

recklessness, and which despite repetition,    is either

a recognition of an obvious and serious risk and a decision

to take it or indifference to such risk.
      It is also possible to imagine or postulate a

situation where a person perceives a situation, assesses

it as not constituting an obvious and serious risk situation

at all.

      I don't want to deal with the particulars, I just

want to deal with the principles, but if you were to find

that this applies, in other words an assessment is made

and one feels there is no obvious and serious risk, then

that person would not fall within either of the two limbs

of the definition of recklessness because he would have

applied his mind to the risk situation,   in other words

he would not have been indifferent to it and having

decided there was either no risk at all or that it was

not bbvious and serious, could not be described as having

seen it and deliberately gone on to take it.

      In considering all these matters you have of course

to take the totality of the evidence into account including

any explanations of the state of mind of the person whose

conduct you are considering.   That is obviously commonsense,

isn't it?

      You have to be satisfied before you bring in such

a verdict and you have to be satisfied beyond reasonable

doubt that the recklessness and indeed all these points

have all got to be beyond reasonable doubt so that you

are sure, that the recklessness which you are considering

is attributable to one single person.

      What this means is that you may not aggregate or
add together the acts of different people and then

attribute all the failures and all the acts of several

people to one individual.   Each person stands on his

own and you have to be satisfied on the evidence that

the ingredients have been made out.

      This is not to say that you cannot in fact have

more than one person who might be liable to the finding

of unlawfully killed.

      For example, to give you a simple example, if three

people attack one individual and they all individually

inflict wounds which are sufficiently severe as to

constitute a substantial cause of death, the fact that

there may be three wounds, each one on its own would have

been sufficient to kill the victim, does not absolve the

other two assailants.   All three for their individual

act may be held responsible because each one taken on

its own would satisfy the definition of murder or

manslaughter as the case may be.

      Finally, and I don't need to spend much more time

on this because I have already said it, if you were to

find a verdict of unlawfully killed under no circumstances

must you name or identify the person.   You can think about

people, obviously you must, but this thing here no

way must name or identify the person and I again remind

you that we are dealing with an Inquest so we are not

dealing with persons to be blamed and we are not here

to charge anybody, in fact I read you the section out of
the Act, you are actually looking at the victims or the

people who died and you are bringing in verdicts in

respect of their deaths and what you are saying is, if

you were to bring this verdict in:   "I think this person

was killed unlawfully" but you are not saying anything

else or any more than that.




                         If you were to decide
                                                               61




        If you were to decide that the verdict of unlawfully

killed is inappropriate in respect of some or all of the

deceased - obviously it is a matter for you in respect of

each one - then you would be able to proceed to the other

conclusions which I have mentioned.

        Before I deal with those and more especially for

completeness on the issue of law I should mention that it is

in fact now clearly established that a company or

corporation can, in law, be charged with the offence of

manslaughter.      You could prosecute a company for

manslaughter.      In fact it was done in Mr. Justice Turner's

case.     From a legal point of view a company is no different

to anybody else.      It is just a person.   Before you could

decide that a company had liability you would have to be

satisfied with all these points I have told you about which

Lord Justice Watkins said.      The only real problem is how

you decide the company is made responsible and the answer to

that is you would have to be satisfied that the directing

mind and will of the company knows about it.      In other

words, a mere employee, somebody fairly low down the line,

cannot, however wrong he may have been, affect the mind of

the company, but a company director might in appropriate

circumstances, but the rules of aggregation are exactly the

same, everything is the same.      You cannot add different

directors' knowledge together and make it one big plus, so

to speak.

        I mention it for the sake of completeness because as we
go along we may find this is not quite as relevant as you

otherwise might think.

     I now turn to the other verdicts.     If you come to the

conclusion that unlawfully killed is inappropriate, then you

may go on to decide whether the verdict of accidental death

or misadventure is the right one.     In this case the burden

of proof is entirely different.     You may bring in such a

verdict if you are satisfied on the balance of

probabilities.     In other words, if you are satisfied it is

more likely than not that the deceased's death was due to

accident or misadventure.

     There is no difference, as I have already told you, in

these two words.    You may choose whichever one you prefer.

If you cannot make up your mind which one you prefer, and if

this is the verdict you have in mind, then choose the word

"accidental", but it is a matter entirely for you.     What I

am trying to say to you is do not spend hours arguing which

of these two words is better.     In law they mean the same.

There are different overtones, or undertones, people

perceive them differently, but there is no difference.

     You should understand, and this is very important, that

the word "accident" straddles the whole spectrum of events

from force majeure or Act of God.     In other words, from

something over which one has no control - an earthquake, for

instance, where most of us would take the view that no-one

could be blamed - to a situation where you are in fact

satisfied there has been carelessness, negligence, to a
greater or lesser extent and that someone would have to

make, for instance, compensation payments in civil

litigation.      It straddles a whole range of events and the

fact that the jury brings in a verdict of accidental death

does not mean to say that nothing has not gone wrong.         In

other words, bringing in this verdict does not mean that you

absolve each and every party from all and every measure from

blame.      You cannot, of course, specify parties because we

are not allowed to determine aspects of civil liability, but

you should understand that when you use that word you are

not saying, "I have decided that everything is perfect."

     What then does accident and misadventure mean?      It

means an unforeseen event arising out of a situation which

was intended to occur.      Most of us understand the word

without too much difficulty.      I will give you a very simple

example, both of what you might consider to be an accident

and also the differences in using that word with different,

if you like, blameworthiness.

     You may, for instance, be washing up glasses and whilst

you do so you drop one and it breaks.      It is an accident.

Now whether or not there is any culpability will depend on

all the circumstances.      For example, supposing you were

washing up these glasses as carefully as you could and

because of the soapy water one slipped out of your hand.

You might well say, "I have broken it but it is not really

my fault.     Maddening, but not my fault."    You would not

blame yourself and you would be a bit annoyed if other
people blamed you.

      Supposing, on the other hand, you were washing up these

delicate glasses in total darkness and one of them broke,

you might then say to yourself, "Well, that wasn't very

sensible of me."      It is still an accident but the level of

responsibility has changed.

      Now then, open verdict.     If after due deliberation you

come to the conclusion there is insufficient evidence to

enable you to reach either of the other verdicts to the

standard of proof required beyond reasonable doubt in the

case of unlawfully killed, balance of probability in the

case of accident, then an open verdict is appropriate and an

open verdict means what it says.      It means that you are not

satisfied that the evidence which has been put before you

enables you to reach a conclusion.

      There is nothing wrong with an open verdict.     Some

juries might feel, "Oh, if I bring in an open verdict I have

failed."      I always try and tell my juries that that is not

so.      Of course it would be entirely wrong if you went in

and said, "Let's not bother to think about this, call it

open."      That is not what I am saying.   You have to do it

the right way round.      It is when you have given the matter

proper consideration and if at the end of the day you feel

the evidence is not there to enable you to reach one of the

others, then it is perfectly proper and you would not have

failed in your duty in bringing in such a verdict.
                                                         65



     Now this is a convenient point for me to stop.   It is

virtually lunch time.   We will break now and come together

again at two o'clock.




                   (Luncheon adjournment)
       THE CORONER:    You will be pleased to hear that I am

not going on with all that legal stuff now, we are moving

on to something else.     It is very, very important but a

bit heavy going in places.

       I have already told you that you have to deal with

each case on its own.     That is because they are all

individual people, but there are one or two things which

do make life a little bit easier for you and I have

indicated one already, that everybody in fact died on 15th

April, 1989, apart from Lee Nicol who died on the 17th.        I

will remind you with regard to Lee, this was the young lad

who donated his organs, who had signed a donor card, do

you remember him?     He was certified as having been brain

dead on the 17th, and his organs were taken, those which

were used, on the 18th.     So although, of course, it was

very, very sad that his life should have been lost it was

good that he had signed a card and it was even better of

his mum, in the agony of that decision, to have said yes,

that they would do what he wanted, and for all I know

there is somebody walking round happy today because of

him.

       The second way which will help you is because there

were two pens you can split people between the two pens.

In fact, there were only at the most nine people who died

in Pen 4.    There is Stephen O'Neill where there is a

little bit of doubt actually, with regard to him.     The
                                                               67



doubt arises when there either is not a very good

photograph or where there is not anybody who was with

them, and I think in Stephen's case he was identified but

Inspector Layton said that it was not the world's best

photograph, but it was the best we had.     Then there was

somebody called David Hawley, Adam Spearritt, William

Pemberton, David Rimmer, Gordon Horn, John Anderson, Paul

Carlile and Steven Robinson.   Those are the Pen 4 group.

Of those, just as a matter of interest, two actually got

to hospital, for what it is worth.

     All the rest were almost certainly in Pen 3.      There

are three where there is a little bit of doubt.      Alan

Johnston is another one where the identification is poor

and David Thomas was not identified at all but     he was with

the Traynors and they have been identified in Pen 3, so

the chances are that he was with them.     It is a matter for

you to decide whether   you wish to classify him   as Pen 3.

The last one where we   found no visual evidence or indeed

any other evidence was Francis McAllister and he was in

fact a friend of Nicholas Joynes, and you remember one of

the last witnesses, Mr. Thomas who came along, told us

that he saw Nicholas and Francis going down the tunnel.

They had turned round and were coming back out.      So we

know that Nicholas was in Pen 3.     It is a matter for you

whether you think that there is enough evidence there to

satisfy yourself that he was in Pen 3.
     It may not be terribly relevant except when you fill

in this form.   If you want to put the pen, then the ones

where you are doubtful you have to think whether that is

sufficient or whether in those cases you merely want to

say Hillsborough Stadium or Leppings Lane Terraces.     That

is the way to deal with that.   So Stephen O'Neill probably

Pen 4; Alan Johnston and David Thomas and Francis

McAllister probably Pen 3, but with the doubts which I

have told you about.

     I have already told you that you can have different

verdicts for different people, both between pens and even,

if you think the evidence were to show it, within a pen.

The only reservation I would make is that if you were to

decide, say on an accidental/misadventure verdict, try and

use one of those words rather than both.   Although they

mean the same if you use different words - if you say

accidental here and misadventure there - it is an

unanswerable question but it merely raises a question

which need not be raised.

     You will of course have noticed that on the whole -

we took evidence from November to March - we did not take

much evidence after 3.15, in fact hardly any, and that was

a deliberate decision of mine, because I took the view

that we had to have a cut off point somewhere.   In the

light of the pathological evidence in particular which we

had had, and you remember we heard from about eight
pathologists, quite a lot, and although they differed in

minor detail as to whether it was ten seconds or five

seconds or fifteen seconds that people lost consciousness,

it was clear that people lost consciousness within a

relatively short period of time according to their view,

and what was much more important was that irretrievable

damage had been done, with somebody who was asphyxiated,

between four and six minutes.     I think six minutes was the

longest period stated by anyone and I think it was Prof.

Usher who said that.     He said that actually in Alan

Johnson's inquest.     He said that once the chest had been

fixed so that the person could not breathe then

irretrievable brain damage was caused.

     If that is right, and as I say it was the unanimous

view and it is a matter for you whether you accept it, but

if you accept that as being correct then whether or not

somebody subsequently breathed for a period or was

resuscitated, like Stephen O'Neill, he was resuscitated

for a period, in fact for two days he appeared to be

breathing and his heart was beating, and yet the damage

had been done.   It is very interesting - I have to pick on

Stephen because Dr. Holt actually dealt with this - you

may not remember the detail but she said that when she

examined the brain she was satisfied that the damage to

the brain had been done at the time of the injury and at

the time when he had inhaled.    So although it was in his
particular case possible to restart the heart - in fact,

they did not get the breathing going because they had to

ventilate him but they were able to restart the heart - in

fact, it was a lost cause right from the word go.        It is

sad but there is no use beating about the bush.     That is,

in fact, how it was.

     Mr. Wardrobe said the same.     He said of all the

people who actually got to the hospital in cardiac arrest

not one survived.     It is just one of those very sad

things.     So I took the view that if that is correct all

the evidence which you have heard would point to the fact

that the crushing had started - well it certainly was in

full swing - by 6-minutes-past, when the match had

finished.     I am not going to say when it started because

that we might come to when I review the evidence for you,

or some of it.    But assuming that it did not begin until

6-minutes-past, if we exclude everything else, you have

still got nine minutes of time from there up to 15.15 for

the damage to be done.

     I know that a lot of people have been anxious that

because death was not certified in many cases until say

4.30 - let's just pick that figure, it does not really

matter what - that the people were not dead, if you like,

until that had happened.     In fact, if you think about it

that cannot be the case because a person cannot be

certified dead until he is, so by definition he must be
dead before he is certified.     All that certification does is

it puts a medical confirmation on the fact, and the fact that

it was not done at three minutes past three - it could have

been done next morning - would not have meant that the people

were living or alive for all that time.     Secondly, I decided

not to go any further because the overwhelming medical is

that the injuries which caused the death were crushing or

asphyxia or some form of compression.     The only place where

that could have happened was within the terraces.     It is true

in some cases there was inhalation of vomit.     You will

remember that and there were some subdural haemorrhages and

so on and those could have occurred outside.     If somebody had

been taken out it is possible that they might inhale outside

but it was all related to and connected with the injuries

that the people suffered within those terraces.     That is the

second reason why I did not feel it was appropriate at this

stage of the Inquest to go and explore and follow people

right through to death certification or even beyond.        It is

very interesting and it may be very relevant in other places

but not relevant, as I saw it, to establishing who, when,

where and how.

        I have also got to say, and in fact it is not entirely

true that we did not look at what happened after 3.15.       On

the contrary, we actually looked at considerable length doing

that.    We spent two and a half weeks in April and May time

and a large part of that was actually spent, if you remember,

tracing people across the field, up to the mortuary, up to

certification and identification.    So, although we did not
deal with it viva voce in quite the same way as we dealt with

some of the other matters, in fact, we did hear a great deal

more in my view than one would normally hear in any Inquest

which I would do in this situation because, after all, it

happens all the time.     People are involved in road traffic

incidents and suffer severe injuries.     I usually just say,

"Did an ambulance come?     Yes, thank you very much.   What is

the cause of death?     Multiple injuries" and I do not pursue
them all the way to the hospital even if they have lived may

be for days or weeks.     If the pathologist tells me that the

cause of death is multiple injury caused by the RTA then t^e

subsequent events, unless they were completely new and in a

sense were the causative thing;     if the pathologist said, "It

had nothing to do with the RTA but it was the way they did

this, that or the other", then that is a different matter.

All the evidence, as I have said, is that it is quite clear

it was crushing.   I have already dealt with that.

     In order to avoid any possible misunderstandings, of

course, you have to understand particularly with asphyxial

deaths and particularly in the light of what the various

pathologists said, if you could have got to a particular

person or if one had got to a person before the irretrievable

damage had been done then, provided one did resuscitation

correctly, that person might well not only have recovered but

might have been perfectly all right.    That is undeniable.

Indeed, we have seen several people who were unconscious, who

told us so, and who are here and who seem perfectly all right

because the cells in their case fortunately had not been so
severely damaged as to be irretrievably harmed.      That, if you

like, is the beauty of the body, that you can assault it like

that and retrieve it before it is too late and the people
themselves just recover.

       I am not denying that.   As a fact that is obviously a

possibility but we also have to face the fact that that is
precisely what did not happen and so I, as I say, took the

view that the cut off was right.     We had to have some limit

at some point.     The other way I went quite a long way back

but even there we tended to start in Sheffield.      We did not

start in Liverpool.     We could have done but we did not

because we have to have some limit somewhere.

       In passing I will just say this;    of the 95 people who

died 14 or so actually got to hospital.      One got to the

Hallamshire and that was Carl Lewis.      One, Lee Nicol, got on

to a ward and stayed on a ward.     One, Adam Spearritt, appears

to have got on to the ITU ward but for some reason they had

no notes and the evidence we heard was that he did not

survive.    We know that he did not survive.   All the rest got

into the building, if you like, but did not get beyond either

the resuscitation room or the mortuary which they had set up.

       Of these 14 people the majority had no hospital notes.

That was perhaps unfortunate but we did not investigate it

any further.     I merely mention it because obviously if you

have notes it makes it much easier to know what actually

happened if one wants to do it but in most cases there were

not.    In most cases you have to remember, if you say, "They

only had 13 in and so why on earth did they not have notes?",
the answer is because there were a lot of other people coming

in as well and it may be that they found it more difficult to

keep up with the paperwork than would appear on the face of

it but the fact remains that they did not keep up with the

paperwork so far as the deceased are concerned.

      Included in those 14 there are 6 people who were under

16.   That is quite interesting because there were 11

youngsters under 16 who died and so more than half actually

got to hospital.   Whether that is a coincidence or whether

the fact that they were children made people put them into

the ambulances I do not know, but it is interesting that of

the younger end of the spectrum more finished up in hospital.

It did not unfortunately make any difference so far as they

were concerned.




                         /I will leave the deceased.
        Nov/ then I will leave the deceased in detail

at this stage.    Perhaps I ought to read out the names

of the people who did get to hospital so that we have

that.

        It was Carl David Lewis; Lee Nicoly Stephen Harrisony

Gary Jonesy Arthur Horrocksy Adam Spearritty Philip Hauimond

Barry Bennetty Victoria Hicksy Stephen O'Neilly Paul Bradyy

Jon Gilhooleyy Philip Steele and David Leonard Thomas.

        Perhaps I should also say that you can do the

arithmetic yourself but you can see that the vast majority

of people who died died in Pen 3 and that is quite

interesting, well not interesting but it actually fits

in with one point Mr. Greenwood made if you remember.

He said there was absolutely no comparison, in his view,

between the condition in Pen 3 as compared to Pen 4

and that would fit in with the distribution, wouldn't it.?

        Now what I intend to do now is to do my suramiiuj

as opposed to my summary and I am going to start by

just reminding you very very briefly of the sort oT

historical situation and remind you that this match tuor.

place in a stadium which had been in existence for many

years, which had staged I don't know how many football

matches but somebody said from the 70s onwards about

I think it was 16 semi-finals, or some order.     Adiaittedly

a lot of them were in the 770s but in the ^Os there were

at least, including the one that unfortunately led to

this tragedy, four, so it was not a stadium which was
                                                              76




brand new, by any means, or one where football had never

been played before.   13 semi-finals there were actually,

Mr. Mole said it.

      I don't think it has been disputed and it is common-

sense anyway, that the Club had responsibility for the

stadium, it was their stadium.   They were the holders of

the Safety Certificate and they had whatever responsibilities

there were under that and we will come to that in a moment.

      They were staging the match.     The F.A. approached

them. They agreed to do it.   They consulted with the

Police as to whether it would be feasible and it was agreed

that it could go ahead but it was their stadium and their

ground and they provided the tickets if you like and did

the printing and stuff like that.

      They also provided the staff.     They had their

Stewards and other people, quite a lot, several hundred,

and in one sense at least they even provided the Police

because the Police were not employees in any sense of the

Club, the arrangement was that the Club had to be involved

and had to deal ’
                w ith various aspects of the matter.

      It was their responsibility to observe as far as

was necessary the provisions of the Green Guide and remember

it is only a guide, I don't want us to get into any

arguments as to the fact that this document is binding

in any sense of the word, it is a guide.     Obviously you

follow guides but it is a guide nevertheless.

      They dealt with the ticketing.     They dealt with
                                                               77




the allocation of turnstiles subject to the overriding

requirement for segregation which meant that in fact

you could only use a limited amount of turnstiles for

the Leppings Lane end and as we know from, I have

forgotten who, but one witness, that in other matches

they might have used more for that end but for segregation

purposes they had to exclude a number of turnstiles.

      I think it must follow that the Club were

responsible for the lettering, the signing of the turnstiles

and the signing within the concourse area and you will

remember that we have spent an awful lot of time on these

signs but there is no doubt that there was a big sigfo over

the tunnel which said "Standing"; that there was a smaller

sign on a pillar, if you came in through the turnstiles

it was on your right which led down to the south side of

the West Stand.     There is a photograph which shows it but

it clearly was not as large, and there was no sign over

the gap in the wall which would have led to the other

north end if you like, the North West terrace.

      It would appear that the situation had been such

for some time.    This was not a new development.   I

don't know whether anybody actually said that but I

think it follows.

      Certainly Mr. Mole told us that he had never

considered the signing as such presented him with any

particular policing problems and it is also right, and

Dr. Nicholson in fact dealt with this point, that however
                                                             78




you count the number of people within Pens 3 and 4 and

even on the highest numbers there was still something

of the order of two-thirds of the total population of the

terrace as a whole in other parts and not in the central

pens.   How they got there is another question.   Did they

go round the sides?   Did they go   down the tunnel and

spread out?   Were they people who knew their way about?

We don't know, but the fact remains that there was a

substantial number who did in fact find    their way to

other parts of the ground.

        Indeed if you look at the compilation video which

I am sure you will do, I expect you will do, when Gate C

has been opened, unfortunately you cannot actually see

the tunnel because of the positioning of the camera but

you can see the gap in the wall and you may want to have

a look and see what is actually happening around that

gap in the wall.    You will find that people are actually

traversing it, so the fact that there was no sign of it

did not necessarily mean that people could not use it

but on the other hand I think you may feel that the

evidence is pretty clear that the main sign was above

the tunnel and you may also feel that the tunnel was in

a very prominent position in relation both to the turnstiles

and perhaps more than that in relation to Gate C.

        The turnstiles, you went round the ground so I

don't have to describe it, but you will remember the layout

and you will be able to visualise it I am sure and you can
make up your own assessment with regard to the other

entrances and what people might or might not have seen.

Gate C was if you like more in line with the tunnel even

than the turnstile but they were all very close to each

other anyway.

      The Green Guide and Safety Certificate.     I am not

going to go through this Green Guide again or indeed the

Safety Certificate in any detail.     We have done it at

length and to a certain extent I don't know to what extent

it will actually help you in your deliberations.

      I think if I just deal with the Green Guide first.

I think there are three or four points that I want to

draw to your attention.

      First of all to whom is it addressed, and it is

addressed if you remember to the holders and the Local

Authorities.    That is the first thing.   I don't know if

it is actually addressed to the Police but obviously

it is available to them to look at.

      What I think is more significant is that the bulk

of the information in the Green Guide if you read it

it deals with structure.     It is more to do with the

stadium than with the use.    That is not to say that it

does not contain a lot about ingress and egress and the

needs for avoiding overcrowding and matters of that sort.

Of course it does contain a lot of that but it also contains

a great deal of information on how to calculate the

capacities; you know what the formulae are; how to measure
the strength of the barriers; what the escape routes

should be and the sort of times that you need to have.

These are all more to me structural matters rather than

operational aspects.




                       I think the other thing
     I think the other thing that it says, and I think this

is a point you do have to bear in mind, the Green Guide

makes it clear that sections of the ground ought to be

units, like the Kop, the West Stand, the North Stand, the

South Stand.      However, it is also quite clear, 206 is the

paragraph or 210, that contemplates sub-sections within a

section.   In fact not only does it contemplate them, it

actually advocates the installation of radial fences and it

says quite clearly that ideally, Dr. Eastwood made this

point very emphatically, that ideally these sub-sections

should be serviced and served by individual and specific

dedicated facilities.     Dr. Eastwood said that in 1981, when

this matter first came up, he actually proposed a plan.         It

was his initiative to do that because he could see that this

would be a better way of dealing with matters.       In 1981, he

said, well before the time.     It wasn't pursued.    It re­

appeared in 1985 when there were some more discussions of

radial fences and on that occasion you will remember there

is in the exhibits a letter from Superintendent Moseley

where he talks about segregation but where he clearly says

that if one did what he wanted one would have separate,

distinct areas.

     Now whether or not those proposals in 1985 were being

put forward for segregation purposes or separation purposes,

I do not think is a matter on which you need to dwell for

too long because apart from anything else the reason why

that scheme was not proceeded with - it actually got as far
as the Officers' Working Party because they actually

commented on it - it was not proceeded with because a more

pressing safety matter arose, namely, the Bradford fire.

However much we may not like it, at the end of the day if

you think that here is a matter which has to be dealt with

immediately, then you have to deal with that, and

particularly if you have nothing to indicate to you that the

arrangements you have are so intrinsically bad that a change

must be made.

     Therefore in 1985 we have heard no evidence whatsoever

that anybody at that time had the slightest concern that the

situation at the Leppings Lane end of the ground was so

intrinsically bad that it could not be allowed to continue.

Indeed, Mr. Bownes, you remember him from the City Council,

said if they had felt there was something which was really

dangerous they would have had to have served a Prohibition

Notice.   That wasn't done.

     Although we spent a lot of time looking at these

alternative plans and drawings and so on, and although no

doubt had they been in place it would have been better than

what we had, particularly with hindsight, the fact of the

matter is they weren't.   It would also appear to me from

all the evidence which we have heard, Dr. Eastwood,

Mr. Seaman, Mr. Mackrell, Mr. Lock, Mr. Mole, it does not

matter who you think of, nobody has given us any evidence to

suggest that at that time they were so concerned - indeed,

the City Council as well - that action had to be taken to
implement those plans.

     The Safety Certificate, of course, had been issue^ by

the South Yorkshire County Council in 1979 and there was a

capacity for the terrace as a whole, including the North

West terrace, of 10,100, or thereabouts.         You will remember

that Dr. Eastwood explained this to us.      He had been

appointed, as far as I understood his evidence, to

specifically deal with the provisions of the Safety

Certificate and he had carried out an appraisal.         In his

terms he had gone round, he had assessed it, he had done his

sums, based on drawings which were available to him at the

time, and he had calculated certain figures.        In fact he

then abated the figures because there were no gangways on

the terraces.      This was known at the time.     The Green

Guide refers to gangways.      It talks about having exit doors

within 12 metres of a gangway or exit door, but there

weren't any.      Dr. Eastwood proposed, bearing in mind that

this was a guide, he said, "Let's reduce the capacity by 10%

to allow for a bit of give, for the fact there are no

gangways."      He did not decide, nor did the club for that

matter.      The Officers' Working Party, having assessed the

situation, decided that was an acceptable situation.

Interestingly enough, you remember, he told us that all the

figures which he put up for the various parts of the ground,

not one of them was accepted unamended.      In fact, one of

them was increased.     He did not complain about that but I

think he was a bit surprised.     The only figure which was
                                                               84



accepted unamended was the Leppings Lane terracing.

However, of course, in 1979 there were no radial fences.

It was a wide open terrace.

     In 1981 there was a match and we have heard a little

bit about that.   The reason I was interested in that match

was because there was a crushing incident and in fact

Superintendent Greenwood turned out not only to have been

there but to have actually been on the gate.      It was not in

fact in the centre pens, which is where I originally thought

it was, it turned out to be at pens 1 and 2.      In that

particular instance that gate was opened and an evacuation

was effected apparently in satisfactory manner.

     Superintendent Greenwood told us a little bit more

about the match and the fact that people did come over the

fences and the thought that having opened the gate, the way

he saw it there was pressure from the back and that having

opened the gate people continued to come out, whether or not

it was a necessary thing.     However, we are not really

interested in that detail.    The two things that interested

me were first of all that the crushing occurred on an open

terrace, which is a factor you have to bear in mind because

we have spent a great deal of time thinking about the radial

fences.   It is very easy to take the view that but for

radial fences crushing could not have occurred.     It did

occur in 1981 and there weren't any.     That is not to say,

of course, that those radial fences did not play a part.

It is a matter for to decide on the basis of the evidence
which you have heard to what extent you think those radial

fences contributed to the situation.      1 suppose if you

think about it, it would seem that they must have done,

because if you have not got them there, it should have been

possible for people to spread.      So it may not be such a

difficult thought after all but do not overlook 1981.

     The other thing about 1981 is that the evacuation

turned out to be successful through those little gates.

Now that in retrospect was probably very unfortunate because

if they had had major problems in 1981 with the people

coming out of that little gate, then it is quite likely that

somebody would have done something about it and we might not

be sitting here today.

     However, there is no way in which you could now say

that any of those people in 1981, that it was obvious to

them that there was an obvious and serious risk.      So those

you can exclude and forget.

     These are background facts which enable you to put the

information in April into context.

     What was done was in fact to put in the radial fences

and the idea was...      We have heard different accounts as to

what the idea was, but there was probably a combination.

There was the convenience of better segregation.      There was

prevention of lateral movement because it may be that what

was in fact complained of in 1981 was that people were

actually coming down.     What you wanted was to block them.

In fact to do the very thing which we are now complaining
of.    Whatever   the motives, the intention, I think,

certainly   from Dr.Eastwood's evidence and as far as 1 can

recollect   from really everybody else who had any comment on

that, was   that the installation of the radial fences was

intended to improve the situation on the terraces and

initially I think they were divided into three big sections.

Subsequently they were re-divided, as you know, into pens 3

and 4 and the little narrow pen 5.     However, I do not think

that actually makes very much difference to the situation

because the crushing insofar as it occurred, occurred in the

centre pen and if that middle divide had not been there it

would have still been exactly the same except for the narrow

little strip of pen 5, which probably would not have made

that much difference.

      Whatever the rights and wrongs of the matter at the

time, it is quite clear that nobody considered it was

necessary to amend the Safety Certificate.      It is perfectly

clear that this matter was considered by the Officers'

Working Party and they made a number of stipulations in

relation to it, one of which has been another bone of

contention, namely, that the gates at the back of the radial

fences were to be under Police control.

      Whatever that might mean, and we might come back to

that in a moment, nobody either at the Council, the Fire

Service, the Police, the club, or anybody else, at that

time, or, indeed, at any time prior to the 15th of April,

1989, considered it necessary to amend the Safety
                                                             87



Certificate because of the installation of the radial

fences.

      The Fire Service in the shape of Mr. Seaman in fact

came along and they were asked about means of escape.       That

is, after all, their main activity because one might have

thought if you put the radial fences in they would affect

it.   On the contrary, he did not really see any particular

problem.      He did say they needed the gates at the back as a

secondary means of escape in case the tunnel was blocked and

he said that as far as he was concerned, although the word

used in all the correspondence is "control", he had always

understood that the word "control" meant manning.




           1 must say I had some
                                                             88




I must say I had some difficulty in following the logic of

his arguments when he was developing that when he was

being cross-examined - I think by Mr. Payne but I am not

absolutely sure - because it seemed to me that from what

he was saying you have got to have somebody there in case

the gates are locked, so that you can unlock them.      As

soon as he said, "Well what if they are unlocked?", he

said, "You still need somebody there so that people can be
directed".   Well, as I say, I had a little bit of

difficulty in following the logic of his argument.

     I also found it difficult to follow the logic of his

argument that you needed people to direct people at those

gates but you did not need them at the tunnel exit.     He

justified it because he said the tunnel was the normal

route of entry and therefore people would know if they

came in that way they could go out that way, whereas the

radial gates were not the normal route of entry so people

might not know about it.   I did not find, personally, that

argument entirely convincing.

     There are several other things, while I am on Mr.

Seamen, I might as well dispose of it, that I was not

entirely happy with.   I was surprised that he had no

objection to the closure of the big blue gates,

particularly in the light of the, if you like, I am now

cheating a little bit and saying particularly in the light

of hindsight, because his explanation as to why he had no
objection was that there was sufficient time for messages

to be passed backward and forward in case there was a

tragedy.     Well, that means that not only have you got to

have somebody who has actually observed that there is a

need to pass the message - that is the first problem you

have got to overcome - you have then got to pass the

message and somebody has got to receive it and has got to

action it.

     We, of course, are not here to criticise that but I

was a little bit surprised by that response.    The fact of

the matter is, of course, on 15th April, 1989, there is

absolutely no evidence whatever to show that those blue

gates were shut so whatever the rights and wrongs of

shutting the blue gates, the shutting of them did not

cause or contribute to the disaster.    In fact, if anything

the argument has been the other way round, that if they

had been shut the disaster might or would not have

occurred.    That is the irony of a lot of the evidence we

have heard, that it depends which way you look at it.

Nearly everything - it is amazing as I was listening to

the evidence quite often I thought to myself, "Yes, that's

true", then if you turn it round and look at the other

side it seems to say almost exactly the opposite.

     While we are on the gates - I am skipping around a

little bit, forgive me - Dr. Eastwood, of course, was

referring to his blue gates, the ones on the inner side.
He said, "Ah, these opened correctly so everything is

fine.     If there is an emergency you can have them shut,

people will be able to get out of them because they will

open with the flow".     Quite apart from the fact he does

not seem to me to have communicated -- although he says

he put them in for that very purpose I did not hear from

anyone that they had ever understood that was what they

were intended for.     Neither Mr. Mackrell nor Mr. Lock nor

Mr. Mole, who, if you like, are the people who spring to

mind, ever seemed to have understood this as their

objective.     Of course, the argument is if those gates had

been shut in the way in which Dr. Eastwood would have

wanted, instead of having a tragedy in the terrace we

would have had it, no doubt, in the tunnel, and possibly

worse because the gates would have shut against the

incoming crowd.     It just shows you that it is very

difficult to construct gates which you can shut in that

sort of situation with complete safety.

        There has been an endless amount of evidence as to

whether or not the terrace was to be treated as a unit or

whether it was to be treated as sections, and whether the

sections were to be treated as individual parts.        In a

nutshell, the argument for treating them as parts is that

the entrance (we will think about the centre sections only

for the time being - it could apply, of course to the

other ones as well but it is much more acute in the
centre), was that if you had come down the tunnel, you

exit on to the terracing a little bit proud of the back

wall; the radial gates are right at the back; if you do

not know that they are there they will not immediately

spring to your attention; and that the fuller the terrace

gets the more obscured they become.

     So whatever the legal theory might be about it being

an open terrace, in practice the pens became self

contained.   I think there is certainly quite a lot of

justice in that argument.   What I am not so convinced

about is whether the remedy which had been proposed by the

Fire Service, for instance, or indeed the other people who

said that the gates had to be manned, would actually have

remedied that situation because whilst a Police Officer

with his helmet is perhaps a little bit more visible than

the gate, he may not be that visible, that is the first

thing.

     Secondly, all the evidence which we have had from

people along that back wall - we heard several people from

that back wall.   I think it was Mr. Twydale and Mr. Oyitch

- either Mr. Oyitch or Mr. Goodman - it does not matter

but I will check that and tell you tomorrow which one it

was - and Mr. Hughes and to a slightly lesser degree Mr.

Grier, the evidence from those people - and Mr. Skarratt

- that is five of them along the back there but two were

very near the gate, that is Mr. Twydale and I think Mr.
Goodman actually, their evidence was that they were not

distressed, that is the first thing.     The second thing is

as far as I could understand their evidence, from that

position they had not really seen very much of the

distress at the front, so even if you had an Officer

standing there does it follow that it would actually have

made very much difference until     if you like it   was too

late?     Then it might, and indeed Mr. Twydale did say that

he tried to encourage people to go out through that little

gate.     He said he did not succeed, that all they wanted to

do was go up into the stands.     I found that a little

difficult to understand but he did say that when a Police

Officer came along he subsequently did seem to be more

successful in diverting people into Pen 2.     So from that

point of view the manning might have been beneficial.

        Of course, the Police evidence was that they had

never understood it in this light at all.     Mr. Mole's

evidence was quite clear, that he accepted that the gates

had to be under Police control because that was a

condition from the Officers Working Party, but that he

understood it in two senses:     that if you had segregation

- in other words opposing fans - and you needed somebody

there because you had the gate closed and you had to have

somebody who could open it; or if you were sequentially

filling and you had the gates closed, you had to have

somebody there, but once, if the gates were open and in
fact the terrace was treated as a whole then you did not

need Officers standing there, and indeed he and several

other of the Police Officers said that putting an Officer

within the terrace on his own was not a good use of Police

manpower, not only for the sake of the safety of the

Officers but also because you lost --   one Officer in a

big crowd was not likely to be able to do very much.     A

serial or a group was a different matter all together.

     The other thing about these radial gates is this, and

Mr. Creaser made this point and I thought this was an

interesting observation, when he was asked or when it was

pointed out to him that the gates were not very visible he

did not deny that but he said that when the pens filled up

and people started wanting to move out and started moving

out through the gates, the crowd perceived the movement.

Now of course I have not been in a crowd.   I can't

actually tell whether that is true but I thought it was an

interesting comment, and it struck me as a possibility, I

am not saying any more than that, that that might well be

true, that if you can get the movement going - this is

really the heart of the matter, can you get it going -

then you might get some perception and then you will get a

flow to the gates.

     The other point is, of course, although Anfield as I

understand it from the evidence from lots of the

witnesses, do not have radial fences, other grounds do,
and I think it was Mr. Ball who did not quite say, but who

almost said it, that he thought that the gates would be at

the back, that there would be a passageway.   He did not

think of gates but he thought there would be a passageway

at the back.   Now whether that is, in fact, the standard

practice of building these radial fences I do not know

because, as I say, we did not press him too hard on the

matter.

     In practice hardly anybody, I think, used the gates.

Certainly if you look, Mr. Bullas said that he could see

people passing and re-passing, and in fact we know of at

least one chap, Mr. Hinton, who came from Pen 1 and

finished up, I think, in Pen 4.   He says he cannot

remember quite how he did it but he was adamant that he

did not go round the back and he was equally adamant that

he did not climb the fences, so the only way he could have

done it is to go through the gates.   In fact, Mr. Johnston

- this is the gentleman I have already mentioned where

there is some doubt as to where he was - the little bit of

evidence, and as I say it is a little bit suspect so treat

this with caution, there is some evidence that he was seen

in Pen 2 at about 14.45.   He has been identified but it is

not a strong identification, and then re-identified at

15.03 or 04, something like that, in Pen 3, so if those

are correct, i£, he would have come in to the pen from a

distance.
       I have been reminded that I have been talking too

long again.   We will stop for a few minutes - not too long

because I want to try and finish as near as possible at 4

o'clock.   Just long enough for you to have a quick cup of

tea.

                     (Short Adjournment)
       I think there has been enough said about the radial

gates.     I am supposed to be summing up and not giving you a

blow by blow account.     I must keep on reminding myself of

that but what I am trying to do is just remind you of what I

consider to be the more salient facts.      You may have thought

of all these yourself as well.

       Before I carry on, we made a mistake this morning.      We

forgot to put this acetate up of Mrs. McBrien and so I am

going to do it now despite the fact that it is in the middle

of the summing up.    It is C.276A.   This re-positions John

McBrien to the left as opposed to the right.     We can press on

now.

       The Safety Certificate did not specify individual

capacities for these pens and the inevitable corollary to

that must be that as far as the Safety Certificate was

concerned the test was treated as a whole in my view.       You

may not agree.    As I said to you right at the beginning, if I

express my views a little bit robustly it is like the Green

Guide on facts.    You can discount them.   That, of course,

meant that when you had a capacity crowd this crowd would he

dispersed, so to speak, on the terrace as a whole.     If you

had a small crowd, the practice was, as Mr. Mole described,

sequential filling.

       Remember that this was where you allowed people into a

section having locked appropriate gates.     If you then felt

that you had more than you could cope with you opened another

section.    There was a bit of argument about it.   Mr. Mole

said, "I would describe it as opening sections".     Some of the
other witnesses said, "What we used to do is seal off areas".

The net effect was the same but the important point about it

was that somebody had to look to see whether or not you

needed more space.    Whether that sequential filling was

legitimate within the Green Guide I do not know but you do

not have to worry your mind on that score here.       When you had

a larger crowd or a capacity crowd or a crowd where you

thought you were going to need them all the practice appears

to have been that the gates were locked open and the terrace

was used in fact as if it were an open terrace.

       This seems to me,   if you assess the evidence, to have

been   the understanding of Dr. Eastwood, Mr. Lock, Mr.

Mackrell, Mr. Mole, Mr. Marshall in so far as he expressed

views and opinions on this, Mr. Creaser, Mr. Murray and

indeed everybody.    Until 1989 it appeared to have worked

without any particular problem.       The term which was used for

this   was 'finding yourown level'.      Before we immediately

say,   "Mygoodness me, we have heard a lot of criticism of

that term", finding your own level from my understanding of

the evidence of all these people who have been mentioned was

in fact nobody actually condemned it as such.

       Even Dr. Eastwood who perhaps was strongest in his

criticisms, if you like, on this matter agreed that it was

perfectly proper to allow people to find their own levels and

allow them to choose where they wanted to stand provided that

it was not allowed to proceed, in Mr. Mole's words, on a

willy nilly basis but there had to be some monitoring at

least of the distribution so that if things appeared to be
getting out of hand intervention could take place.    Dr.

Eastwood wanted that done by having men on the radial gates

and may be at the tunnel mouth and may be at the tunnel exit.

In fact when he was pressed he had Police or stewards, in

fact Police, in at least three locations specifically to do

this task.    Mr. Lock, as I understood his evidence, took the

same view.    Certainly Mr. Mole and indeed most of the other

Police Officers took the view that they operated a system

which they described as 'find your own level' but that

monitoring had to take place to see what was going on.

     We will come to the question of whether or not any

instructions had been given with regard to monitoring and in

particular whether any instructions had been given to

overcrowding, but forget that.   My overall impression of the

evidence with regard to 'find your own level' is this;      in

principle it was not objected to subject to certain

safeguards and, of course, on the assumption that the ground

would be used in its designed way, namely that people would

enter in a conventional manner through the turnstiles.      Mr.

Mole very fairly, as I have already mentioned, said that

signing or lack of it had never caused him the slightest bit

of concern.

     Even if you used just one pen, say you sealed off all

the others and just used one pen, you would still within that

pen have a 'find your own level' situation if you think about

it because nobody had in fact suggested that somebody should

actually position people and say, "You stand here" or "You

stand there".   It would not be reasonable and people would
not like it.     Indeed, we have heard from several of the

Officers that if you tried to move people out of the centre

pens particularly before they were, shall we say, crowded or

whatever that might mean or before they were full they would

object because that is where they wanted to be.     So there was

always an understanding that people would be allowed to

distribute themselves and there was always an understanding,

as we have heard, that the centre pens would be denser than

the wings.     How much denser is another matter and at what

point they should be denser is another matter and whether at

what point you assess the densities at the wings and at what

point they become significant is another matter but there was

always this background understanding that they were the most

popular, that people would want to go there, you should not

and could not move them, but that you should monitor them.

If appropriate action should be taken whatever that might

mean.

        Mr. Greenwood said in his experience local densities

tended to occur.     Whatever you did you would get little

patches but these would sort themselves out and indeed the

overwhelming majority of the supporters who when pressed

about these sort of conditions, those who were pressed that

is, also said exactly the same.     They said "In a big match we

expect to be crowded, we expect to be crushed, we expect it

to be uncomfortable.    We expect it to sort itself out once

kick-off has taken place".    So, the sense if you like of the

whole of the evidence tended in the same direction so far as
that is concerned, and I think it is important to understand

that.

        One of the big problems of finding your own level was

that certainly Mr. Mole, if you accept his evidence,

understood so far as he was concerned that the tunnel had

never been used to divert people.     He certainly said he would

never have agreed to close the blue gates.     That incidentally

was Mr. Lock's view as well and it was Mr. Marshall's view.

Dr. Nicholson's view was a little bit more ambivalent.       In

one respect he agreed that if the Fire Service said you could

close it then he would not dispute it but he also agreed that

he could see the dangers.     He was not running the show anyway

but all the people on the ground, apart from the Fire

Service, tended to think that closing the gates was not

necessarily the best way of doing it.    Mr. Mole said that so

far as he was concerned not only did he disapprove of closing

the gates but in fact it was not done and what is more, so

far as he knew, fans had not been diverted.

        I think you may take the view that the evidence which

you heard both from Mr. Lock and also Mr. Creaser does tend

to show, certainly when Mr. Lock was in charge, he was aware

certainly of a diversion.     He said he would not have approved

of the gates but he would have expected people to be      diverted

if it were necessary.    The difficulty with Mr. Lock's

evidence on this point is that he never had a Semi Final and,

therefore, although he did have one big match I think, most

of his matches tended to be smaller and it may be that his

diversions were more connected with sequential filling than
with the terrace as a whole filling.     Nevertheless it was in

his mind.     Mr. Creaser said something very similar, if you

remember, because he said that when he used to be an

Inspector he frequently used to go round.      He used to assess

the situation.     He used to run round to the Control Box or

radio up to them and say, "Can you get any more in?      What

shall we do?" and that is when he was working on the

concourse area.

        My impression, if you add all this together, is that for

reasons which we do not understand or have not had any

evidence on, the senior Commanders, certainly from Mr. Mole's

time onward, appeared not to have been aware that this was in

fact happening.     They all said closing, sealing or diverting

the tunnel was an option which would have been open to them

if they had realised the need for it and if they had thought

that was what they should do but they had all worked on the

premise, in particular with regard to the 1988 match, that

nothing had happened on the concourse.      The fans had in fact

successfully found their own level.

        The evidence is I think relatively conclusive that in

fact in 1988 there was some diversion of fans from the centre

pens.    We heard from lots of witnesses.   There was Mr.

Kenworthy, Mr. Devonside and Mr. Hutt, for instance.        They

all said that the blue gates were shut at around 14.30 and

that they were diverted towards the side.     They did not

recollect any Officers outside, from which one would have to

deduce that the Officers were on the inside.      That would fit
in with ex-Sergeant Higgins who said that he had in fact shut

the gates in 1988.

     I was not entirely happy with ex-Sergeant Higgins1

evidence.   I do not blame him for this, of course, because by

the time he was asked as to what had happened in 1988 it was

well into 1989 and there was no reason why he should in 1988

have realised he might be asked a question as to the closure

or otherwise of blue gates which suddenly became a matter of

vital importance.    The fact that he could not fully remember

is not surprising but I was not entirely convinced that the

closure was of the length - if he was right then the gates

were closed for an hour or there abouts.    That did not strike

me as being right or indeed necessary because if everybody

was in by three then there is no point in having the gates

closed against people coming in.    In fact you want them open

so that they can come out if they want to but he did say he

had closed them.




                                        /There is a certain.
                                                              103




        There is a certain amount of conflict here because

Inspector Crawford also came along.        Do you remember

Inspector Crawford, he came near the end?        He was not

in charge of those gates but he said that one of his

Serial men actually closed the gates but he insisted

that it was only one leaf, everybody else said it was

two l&aves of those who said that the leaves were shut

and it was difficult to work out the precise timing.

        We also had people who claimed that they went

through.     We had two chaps.     Was it Mr. Griffiths and

Mr. Owens?     I can't remember.     [They came together.

One of them said the gates were shut and they had to

go round the side and the other one said:         "I went

down the tunnel" so there was a little bit of conflict

of evidence but I think taking it as a whole my

impression of the evidence is that there was certainly

diversion away from the centre pens for a period of

time.

        An interesting point which in fact Mrs. McBrien

made, and this if you like is one of the reasons why

I am a bit doubtful about the length of time of

Sergeant Higgins.     If the gates were shut as early

as 2.30 and if some of the other witnesses who had been

in Pen 3 in 1988 were right that it was very overcrowded,

very uncomfortable and that people climbed out halfway

through in order to get up into the Stands, it is

difficult to see how that occurred if nobody was able
                                                           104




to get in, because Mrs. McBrien postulated that they

would have had to come in from the sides, in other words

that they were coming through the radial gates and if you

had had Officers on those radial gates in 1988 then that

would not have happened.

      It is a possibility.   After all as I have already

indicated there were two people whora we know who actually

did that who carae in towards the centre and in fact that

was one of the reasons that Mr. Mole said those radial

fences were put up to prevent natural movement towards

the centre.

      It is not impossible but my feeling is, it is a

matter for you, they might not have been shut for

quite as long as we might think, but be that as it may

the point is it does not really matter, we are not

concerned about the 1988 match, the point is that

the premise on which the "find your own level" was

proceeding appears to have been mistaken as far as t'.ie

senior Officers were concerned.

      We spent quite a bit of time finding out whether

these matters had been reported and it was quite clear

from what everybody said who could have reported tne;u

that they had not and again I make no criticism of them,

they did not see the need for it, it was just an everyday

event as far as they were concerned.   Somebody said

there were too many people in there; shut the gates for

a while; open them, it was just something that did not
                                                           105




need reporting and in particular if this was regular

practice at league matches and sequential filling

situations, they may not have appreciated the difference

between the semi-final and a normal league match, but the

fact was that the people who were running the show were

doing it on a premise which in fact turned out was

incorrect.   You will have to decide to what extent if

any that is significant in the overall picture.

      Now I want to turn to the second point which flows

from this, namely that if there were no specific numbers

allocated to these pens how did you know when they were

full or that they had reached the capacity stated in

the Safety Certificate which was 10,100 divided by so

many square metres and multiplied by the appropriate

5.4 or whatever it is?

      I thought it was very interesting that on the whole

most of the witnesses whom we heard and indeed most of

us when we looked at the photographs said:   "Oh well

that Pen 2 does not look too bad.   That one is even

emptier Pen 6 or Pen 1".

      I thought it was very interesting that when

Dr. Nicholson did his count he did if you remember take

a small segment of Pen 2, just did a sliver, and the

count which he got was 5 per square metre which was in

fact as near as you like to the capacity, the stated

capacity absolutely evenly distributed across the

terraces.
                                                               106




       I am ignoring all the problems about the fact

that the calculations may have been slightly wrong because

the plans were inaccurate.    I don't think it matters to

us .
       The point that I think is significant is that the

people who look at those it would appear to me that neither

the people who were looking in nor the people who were

within the pen perceived that density as being the

correct density calculated in accordance with the Safety

Certificate and that everybody from fans through to Club;

Officers' Working Party and Police had a visual image

of a totally different packing density certainly for

the centre than the strict calculation and in fact of

course it would be exceedingly difficult to look at any

area and say:     "Well we have got 5.4 people per square

metre here or 3.2" whatever the number might be.

       Mr. Lock    I think put it neatly.   He said: "I know

the difference     between a full and half empty bottle"

and what he was saying     is "I look and   if it looks tome

as if that is      full it is full and if   it isn't it isnot .

       That was in fact the system which operated and it was

the only system which could operate on the evidence because

there were no means of counting the people in.      Once you

discarded Dr. Eastwood's schemes, for whatever reason,

it was impossible to accurately control the numbers in

each pen.

       Dr. Eastwood made great play of those two words
                                                               107




"accurate control".    I think you may remember that.      I

always thought lawyers were pedantic when it came to

words.    I think I have changed my mind and I think the

engineers and the surveyors are infinitely worse, may

be because they are mathematicians they are used to even

more precision than legal people, but it was quite clear

that Dr. Eastwood tended to put great stress on words.

Whether or not that was done with hindsight is a matter

for you to judge.

         I don't want at this stage to come on to the

actual assessment of what people thought about the pens.

I will come on to that a bit later because I just wanted

to finish off with the Safety Certificate.

         The Safety Certificate clearly stipulated there

should be Stewards and that they should be doing various

activities and it is also patently clear that for whatever

reason there was no provision in the Safety Certificate

that there should be any Stewards on the terraces.      We

heard from several Stewards,    including Mr. Thorpe who

was the Chief Steward on the West Stand, that he did not

see it as his role to steward the terraces by having

raaior women, for that matter, on the terraces, and he

said, this was not directed at Liverpool it was directed

at any away team, he said he would not put his people

on the terraces.     Whether that is correct or not I don't

know.     I ara not experienced in standing on terraces but
                                                             108




that was his view and in fact he said when he went to a

football match somewhere he was on some terrace and there

weren't any Stewards on those either.   It sounded a little

bit as if he was not pleased by that when he said it.

That was my impression.   The fact was that there weren't.

      Whether that is a good thing or whether that is

something that ought to have been allowed to continue

is not I think an issue which we can deal with but I

think it is plain that nobody took any objection to it;

that it was clearly within the contemplation of the

enforcing Authority because they did not object.    On

the contrary they wrote it into the Safety Certificate

themselves.   They listed all the minimum numbers and

excluded the terrace.

      Of course it did say "minimum numbers" and I

suppose if you wanted to argue about that you could say:

"Oh yes it was 'minimum' but we didn't say that you

mustn't or that you shouldn't".   That is true.    You

can't get away from that.

      There were other duties and obligations under this

Safety Certificate,   in particular the testing of the

barriers.

       Dr. Eastwood undertook this task and in fact the

 barrier in question which broke had been tested the

 previous year.
       There was, as you will remember an enormous amount

 of time spent on discussing, well not an enormous amount,
                                                            109




we did spend some time with Dr. Nicholson in the main

discussing the method of testing the barrier and whether

or   not you should re-zero the gauge and matters of that

sort.

        I think if I sum up what I perceive to be the

evidence on this matter it is this:    whether or not

that was the best method or not, Dr. Nicholson's opinion

in the end     was that despite the rust being there, and

there was some rust, that barrier would have withstood

a test load.




                         I think there was a lot of
     I think there was a lot of argument as to whether it

would have withstood the test load without rust and with

rust and whether the bars were simply supported or

otherwise.   You do not need to concern yourselves with any

of that because that is all a lot of technical stuff which I

do not think we need to be too worried about.

My understanding of his evidence was although you could

criticise the method, and you could argue that it was not

the best interpretation, though he said it was a possible

one, and you could say it might have been an interpretation

which he would not have adopted and one could say that

perhaps one ought to adopt the most stringent interpretation

whenever there were possible interpretations, nevertheless

it was an interpretation open to Dr. Eastwood on the wording

of the Green Guide.

     He also said two other things which I think are

important.   The new Green Guide actually provides for re­

zeroing on the first test so it goes with Dr. Eastwood's

view that you get a bedding in, but it does not allow re­

zeroing on second and subsequent pulls.   The other point he

made was that insofar as where barriers had gone to zero,

where there had been a deflection and come back fully, the

next pull was never worse.   Do you understand?   Now if

that is right it is an important point because barrier 124.A

did come back to zero on its last pull, whatever the merits

or demerits of the methodology.

     Dr. Eastwood had another obligation, which was to
inspect the ground and to issue what were known as

Inspection Certificates.      My impression was that

Dr. Eastwood probably understood the Certificate better than

most and he was right when he said he was not doing an

appraisal, he was carrying out an inspection.      Whether

everybody else understood that I am not so sure, and in

particular I am not so sure whether the enforcing authority

clearly understood it.

     On the other hand, the enforcing authority itself did

inspections.   You remember all this discussion about

Officers' Working Parties and then Advisory Groups.        They

went round either once or twice a year and did their own

inspections and made comments.      In fact on at least one

occasion - 1986 - unfortunately for Mr. Bownes it was not

only that that was the one meeting where the Minutes are

missing, but also in fact the first inspection he attended

and the issue of removing barrier 144 came up.         It was not

suggested by the club, it was not even suggested by

Dr. Eastwood, it was suggested by a member of the Officers'

Working Party - in fact, the Police.      I will come back to

that in a moment.   However, the decision to remove that

barrier was taken by the Officers' Working Party,

communicated to the club and the club in effect did it,

having been asked to do it.      Dr. Eastwood said that his

man, Mr. Strange, was there.     They had discussed it and one

of the things that had worried them was that long drop from

the tunnel down to the end barrier.      He had been along.
He had looked at it and although he could see pluses and

minuses for it, on balance he thought it was acceptable and

therefore he did not raise any objection to it.

     I think it would be very hard to see how either he or

the club in that instance could possibly...      They certainly

could not be reckless and, indeed, I am not saying for a

moment that any of the others were in this regard.     In fact

the impression I got if you listened to the evidence about

the Officers' Working Party, Dr. Eastwood, the Police

involvement, I got the following impression from the

evidence, that a lot of the initiative for change came from

the Police.     They wanted the radial fences.    They wanted

various other matters done which they perceived to be

improvements.     In fact Dr. Eastwood quite clearly said that

he had no concerns about the ground because everything that

had been done, as far as he could see, were improvements.

More barriers were being put in.     They were stronger.      The

radial fences had been erected.     Various other things had

been done which as far as he was concerned improved the

safety.   I want you to guard against the possibility of

saying that because somebody makes a suggestion then he must

carry the can if other people approve it and it turns out it

may not have been the best idea.     If you were to take that

view it would mean that nobody in his right mind would ever

make a suggestion for an improvement.     Whenever you make

suggestions, obviously you would like to think that people

would consider it, but in all these cases the Officers'
Working Party, of which the Police, of course, were a

member, but not the specialist members when it came either

to means of escape or to structure or to the strength of

barriers or to their positioning.         I think we have got to

be very careful that we do not, and there was a very big

temptation I think in the light of some of the questioning,

of saying if you are policing a match you have taken over

the ground.      I do not think that would be a fair and proper

construction to put on the duties of the Police.

        In fact, my impression, if you look at the evidence of

Mr. Bownes, Mr. Butler, Mr. Seaman, Mr. Lock, Mr. Mackrell,

take those as a group, my impression was that Dr. Eastwood

considered that the Officers' Working Party was the arbiter

on safety and that if they approved a particular course then

that was acceptable, subject to his using his head which I

think he did.      Otherwise he would not have gone to inspect

the 144 barrier suggestion.       He would have just have said,

"Well, they want it.      I am not bothered."      He did not do

that.      He did go and look.

        There was that on the one hand.

        The club were the effectors.      They did the work that

was required of them.      They fulfilled their obligations

by...      Take barrier 144.     It was put to them and they had

to report it back as a change.         They did all that.   They

spent the money in order to do the work.

        My impression of the evidence was that the club were

almost bystanders within their own ground and in some ways
they had to be because they were in no position to argue, if

you like, with the Officers' Working Party.     If they said

they wanted this done, they could discuss it but at the end

of the day although they were the holders of the Certificate

and in law responsible, they were in a very difficult

position because they had to comply with what was required

and asked of them.

        That, I think, is sufficient with regard to this

aspect.      It reminds you, I think, sufficiently of the

matters but in a nutshell.      Although I think, as you will

hear in the light of the evidence, the failure of the

barrier within that pen played a role and possibly a major

role in the number of deaths within pen 3, as opposed to pen

4, because that is the major difference between those two

pens.      I know there is a minor one with regard to the

barrier at the top.     The major difference is the fracture

of the barrier and if you look at the location of where the

deceased were - we just saw it on that plan - it is quite

clear that it was around that barrier.      It is also true to

say that it was towards the little gate.

        I think it is impossible, in the light of

Dr. Nicholson's evidence for you to come to a conclusion

there was any recklessness in the way the testing and the

inspections were carried out by Dr. Eastwood.        They may not

have been perfect.     There may have been errors.      In fact

we know the gates did not open the right way.        The 12 metre

rule may not have been strictly adhered to, although
                                                             115



Mr. Seaman was quite clear about that.       He said he did not

think it applied because there weren't any gangways.      You

cannot have the 12 metre rule if there weren't any gangways.

Put it another way, everybody was within 12 metres of a

gangway because a gangway was everywhere.      He did not say

that but that is what it means.       He also said, of course,

that as far as they were concerned those little gates had

never formed part of their computation.      All their

computation had been based on the tunnel and the two radial

gates and the little gates were bonuses.      It did not matter

that they were there.      If they had not been there it would

not have made any difference to them.

     As I was saying, I do not think on the evidence which

you have heard it would be possible for you to conclude, and

this I base mainly on Dr. Nicholson's assessment, that the

testing of the barrier which was done in such a way that it

could be described as reckless, or that the way it was

tested, there would have been an obvious and serious risk of

injury to somebody simply on the basis of the method of

testing of that barrier.

     It is four o'clock and I will stop.      Now tomorrow, one

o'clock, but remember we are going to go on until five

o'clock.




           (The Inquests were adjourned until 1.00 pm

                        the following day)
