                                                                                           M I R . 15


                                                                                                                    4 - 0
  OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and tim e raised    R OS’ O           •             Number



  T itle   'rJjz^nS ^J2jf^r         C-ZL-       A/ £>G           G fiQJi                                XSOU.QO
       •lude source and any document number i f relevant)


T Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Ves/N o   -------
                                                                                                                        Receiver




                                                                                                                        Indexer
  Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

  No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                    Statement Reader
  Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                        Indexer
   Indexed as indicated

   No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                               SIO
   Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                         Indexer
   Further action No(s)


   When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
      HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                          (WEST DISTRICT)



              IN QU E S T S INTO THE D E A T H S OF THE

        V I C T I M S O F THE H I L L S B O R O U G H FOOTBALL

                        S T A D I U M D ISA STE R

                   O N THE 15TH APRIL,              1989



                  INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF



                        GARY PHILIP JONES




                                 Before

DR.    S.L.    POPPER,      LL.B,     B.MED.Sci,          BM,    B S , M RCG P

                   (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                                     At

                  The M e dic o-L ega l Centre,
                        Watery Street,
                           Sheffield.

                                     On

                        23rd April,          1990




                  T R A N S C R I P T OF P R O C E E D I N G S




         From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
              Of fic i a l Shorthand Writers,
          55, Q u e e n Street, S hef f i e l d SI 2DX
U N K I N G STATEMENT BY THE CORONER


OR. JOHN CHALMERS CLARK Called

   By The Coroner
   Cross-examined by Mr. Dawson


GERALPINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called

   By The Coroner
   Cross-examined by Mr. Dawson


•R. JOHN CHALMERS CLARK Recalled

   Further by The Coroner


MICHAEL LAYTON Called

   By The Coroner
   Cross-examined by Mr. Dawson
                        23rd April, 1900

                                INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF GARY PHILIP JONES

                                   THE CORONER:            Good morning,      Mr. Fraser.

                                MR FRASER:   Good morning, sir.  Sir, the first
                           case on your list today relates to Gary Jones.  Mr.
                    B      Dawson, a solicitor from Liverpool, has represented the
                           family since this disaster and will represent them
                           before you this morning, sir.

                                   THE CORONER:            Thank you.

                                MR. DAWSON:   If I may have permission                     to
                           represent the family, sir?
                    C
                                   THE C O R O N E R :     Yes,      it is Mr. Dawson,    is it?

                                   MR.   DAWSON:          Mr. Dawson,      sir.

                                THE CORONER:               Yes, very pleased to welcome you,
                           Mr. Dawson.
                    D
                                    Good morning, ladies and gentlemen of the Jury.      I
                           nope that you had a reasonable weekend.          I have heard
                           that one of you has had a sad loss over the weekend -
                           is it you?      (The Coroner addressed a member of the
                           J u r y . ) I am v e r y , very sorry that that should have
                           happened to you, quite apart from the fact that you are
                           so heavily engaged at the moment makes it very, very
                    E      difficult.      I appreciate your presence.      Please
                           remember me to your wife and thank her and all the
                           other members of the family for being understanding and
                           allowing you, so to speak, to come.          It is very much
                           appreciated.       I know - my Officers have already told me
                           some of the problems - we will see what we can do to
                           make things as easy and as convenient as we can, but
                           obviously I am very, very sorry that this should have
                    F      happened.      It is always sad whenever it happens, but
                           wrong time really from your point of view, isn't it?

                                Can I just say, so that people know what we are
                           talking about, this poor Juror has just had a
                           bereavement in his family and, of course, he has >ot to
                           be here today, so when the funeral has been arranged we
                           will sort out what we do so that we can allow him to go
                    G      to the funeral.  Anyway, thank you.

                                   Mr. Dawson,           you weren't here,        and are your clients
                           here?

                                MR. DAWSON:               Yes, my clients - mother and father
                           - are here.
                H

                                                             -   1   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             TH ' CORONER:  Can you ju.st point them out to me,
                        just because I Like to see where they are sitting?
                        (Mr. Dawson indicated where Mr. and Mrs. Jones were
                        sitting.) Thank you.   Do please sit down.   I£ I just
                        outline for you - were your clients here on tne first
                        day? .

                             MR. DAWSON:    They were present on the first day.
                    B
                             TME CORONER:   So they probably know the practical
                        details better than you do ....

                             MR. DAWSON:    More than I do, yes.

                             Til’
                                , CORONER:    .... but I will just outline it for
                        you and also for their sakss.    The way we have been
                    C   proceeding is that I have read the opening documentary
                        evidence when I released the body.     Sometimes there are
                        errors in that.     I have read them as itstands.    We
                        have then corrected as we go along any errors which I
                        have spotted.   Then we have taken the alconol levels
                        just for the record - we already know about those - and
                        the medical evidence.    I then listen to the presenting
                    D   Officers, who present their summaries - occasionally we
                        modify them because, of course, we are trying to
                        improve things as we go along - and then we deal with
                        the visual evidence and at that point we cease.      It is
                        fairly straightforward but obviously I wanted you to
                        know the sort of    format that we have.

                             MR. DAWSON:     Thank you very   nuch.
                    E
                              THE CORONER: . This then is the resumed inquest
                        which was opened on 19th April, 1989, and on that
                        occasion Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting Coroner's Officer,
                        said;

                             "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
                             been identified to PC 3185 Fox of the South
                    F        Yorkshire Police as that of Gary Philip Jones by
                             Philip James Jones, nis father.   He was 18 years
                             of age, having been born on 18th December, 1970,
                             at Merseyside.   He was a single man and he lived
                             at                               Merseyside.  He
                             was a student by occupation.   He died at Northern
                             General Hospital following an incident at
                             Hillsborough Football Ground on Saturday 15th
                    G        April, 1989.   PC 3185, Fox, caused the body to be
                             removed to the Medico-Legal Centre and t sere ae
                             identified it to Detective Constable Simon Weigold
                             who subsequently identified the same body to
                             Professor Usher and Dr. Clark.   It is the family
                             wish that tne body should be buried."I I

                        And then I adjourned the inquest.  Is Dr. Clark here?
                H       Yes, I just couldn't ....   We circulated a statement -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                              -   2   -
                          well, I suppose it was a pro forma - to the families,
                          to cneck the retails, and it was signed by Philip James
                          Jones, to confirm that we had all the details right as
                          I read them out.  The only thing is "Merseyside", is
                          that, in fact, an area or a location?

                               MR. DAWSON:    It is the old county of Merseyside.

                    B          THE CORONER:   Do we know the place of birth a
                          little bit more precisely?  Could you just take
                          instructions perhaps?

                               MR. DAWSON:   His place of birth was Fazakerley
                          Hospital in Liverpool.

                               THE CORONER:    In Liverpool?
                    C
                               MR. DAWSON:   Yes, and in fact, in the ad>!ress
                          wnere it is described as             'I perhaps you
                          could insert

                               THE CORONER:   Yes, thank you.  I will then read
                          out the address again.  The address should be
                                                      Merseyside, and the place
                    D
                          of birth should be Liverpool. Thank you very much
                          indeed.

                               The alcohol levels were estimated by Dr. Forrest,
                          who gave evidence on the first day, and in this
                          particular instance the result was negative.  Now we
                          will turn to Dr. Clark.  Dr. Clark, before you take the
                    E     oath, we have modified it slightly in order to enable
                          you to take the oath just once in respect of all the
                          cases, so my Officer will now swear you in.

                                DR. JOHN CHALMERS CLARK was called and took the
                                following oath :

                                "I swear by Almighty God that the evidence that I
                    F           shall give shall be tne truth, the wiiole truth and
                                nothing by the truth in respect of each of otner
                                bodies on which I performed a post mortem
                                examination as a result of an incident which
                                occurred at the Hillsborough Football Stadium on
                                the 15th April, 1989".

                                              By THE CORONER:
                    G
                        Q. Now, you are Dr. John Clark,     that is right,   isn't it? -
                           A. Yes, it is.

                        Q. Dr. Clark, if you would be good enough to give us your
                           complete name, your qualifications, and your position
                           and place of work? - A. Yes, it is John Chalmers Clark.
                           My qualifications are Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of
                H          Surgery, Member of the Royal College of Pathologists.


                                                -   3   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                           I am at present a Senior Lecturer in Forensic Medicine
                           at the University of Glasgow.

                        Q. Yes, and you were involved with these post mortems
                           because you have ,;ot connections with Sheffield and it
                           just happened that we were down in this area at the
                           time? - A. Yas, I was working --- I used to work here
                           and I happened to be down giving a lecture that weekend
                    B      and I offered ray services, and that is why I am
                           involved.

                        Q. And we were very pleased to accept them - thank you,
                           Dr. Clark.  Now in this particular case - I just want
                           to deal with the identification and your satisfaction
                           that we are dealing with the right body - can you just
                               is it right that there was what I would call a
                    C      general identification to you and other pathologists
                           by, I think, Simon Weigold, an Officer of the Police,
                           is that right? - A. Yas, that is right.

                        Q. And then in addition did you satisfy yourself in any
                           other way as to the identity of the body that you were
                           dealing with? - A. Well, his name was attached to the
                           body.and I used that as identification.
                    D
                        Q. Yes, and you are quite satisfied that we are talking
                           about Gary Philip Jones, number 86? - A. Yes.

                        Q. Dr. Clark, could you please give me your cause and take
                           me tnrough the relevant parts of the post mortem
                           findings which support it? - A. Yes.  Cause of death
                    E      was crush asphyxia and as a contributing factor I added
                           inhalation of stomach contents.

                        Q. That is under (2)? - A. That is under (2), so (la)
                           crush asphyxia, and under (2), inhalation of stomach
                           contents.

                        Q. Yes.  Could you then tell me on what you based your
                    F      conclusions? - A. Yes.   First of all I was looking for
                           asphyxial signs and his face was congested and
                           cyanosed, and that was sort of florid and blue, and
                           there were fine petechiae on the eyelids - that is
                           little haemorrhages on the eyelids - and on the whites
                           of the eyes.   There was also some bloodstained fluid
                           running ifrom his mouth onto the right cheek, so these
                           were all signs which indicated, were indicative of
                    G      asphyxia.

                                There were a number of surface injuries on the
                           body, a number of grazes on the face and some bruises
                           on the trunk and on the arms; no internal damage at
                           all.

                        Q. So these were all superficial injuries? - A. All
                H          superficial, indicating there had been some pressure


                                                -   4
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             perhaps on the ground or against some other object, and
                             some of tue bruises on tiie arms possibly caused by
                             gripping.  Other injuries, there were a number of other
                             injuries, but these were medical injuries.   There were
                             clear signs that he had received some medical
                             treatment, in that there was a plastic tube just above
                             his right collar bone; there was a drip inserted into
                             his right arm; there were some medical needle punctures
                    B        over the left side of his chest;   and there were EGG
                             pads also on his chest, so all signs of medical
                             intervention, but they hadn't caused any reaction and
                             it appeared that he was either dead or dying when these
                             were instituted.

                        Q. Yes, that is a very important      point, isn't it? What
                           you are saying is that if you      put a needle into   a
                    C      person's arm, for example, if      he is alive at that   point
                           you would expect to find ....      - A. Some bruising.

                        Q.   Some bruising. - A. That is right.

                        Q.   But you found nothing? - A. That is right.

                        Q. Thank you, and that, of course, is an indicator that
                    D      the intervention actually occurred post mortem? - A.
                           Y e s , either ....

                        Q. Or peri mortem? - A. Yes, during the time of death or
                           certainly after it.

                        Q. Can you just very briefly, with the minimum of upset,
                    E      just deal with why you put (2) in? - A. Yes, there was
                           obvious inhaled vomit in his air passages and going
                           down into the lungs, and this had caused some
                           haemorrhage, some bleeding, into the right lung, and
                           that is indicative of inhalation of vomit.

                        Q. Yes, and would I be right in thinking that it is not
                           uncommon to have inhalation?  It is a terminal event in
                    F      any case, and certainly in traumatic asphyxia? - A.
                           That is right.  There is pressure on the chest, there
                           is also pressure on the abdomen and on the stomach so
                           it is not uncommon that some vomit would come up and go
                           down into the lungs.

                        Q. Yes.  I said traumatic, but in fact the term you used
                           is "crush", but it is substantially the same? - A. It
                    G      is the same, yes.

                                  THE CORONER:   Would you like to ask any
                             questions?

                                        Cross-examined by MR. D W S O N :

                        Q. Dr. Clark, could you just clarify what is the likely
                H          cause of the reference in your report, you say, "... a


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                  -   5   -
                             large abrasion on the right side of the face and the
                             temple"? - A. Well, it could have been a number of
                             factors. It is grazing, coming into contact with some
                             rough surface.  Now that could be the ground, it could
                             be a post somewhere, it could even be somebody else,
                             some rough surface, just grazing against the surface.

                        Q . That is just a superficial grazing? - A. Yes, it is no
                    B        internal damage at all.  It is as if you had hit your
                             head against some rough surface.

                        Q. Thank you,

                                  THE CORONER:  Have any of you got any questions?
                             (No response.) Is that clear ladies and gentlemen?

                        Q . Dr. Clark, thank you very much indeed.   I am not
                             letting you go because you are in quite a few cases
                             today, I believe. - A. Yes.

                                  THE CORONER:    Now, can we turn to the presenting
                             Officer, please?

                    D                   GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called:

                                                 By THE CORONER:

                        Q. Now you have already been sworn.

                                  THE CORONER:   Mr. Dawson, I take it you are
                             content with the way we have done the swearing? You
                    E        don't want to re-hear it, do you?

                                  MR. DAWSON:    No, I don't.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   Please tell us yourname so that (a)
                             Mr Dawson knows it, and (b) the shorthand writer knows
                             it. - A. Yes, I am Geraldine Elizabeth Evans of the
                             West Midlands Police.

                        Q. If you would be good enough to take me through your
                           statement.  Before you start:

                                  THE CORONER:   Mr. Dawson, we have received, I
                             received the copy statements that you sent me, and you
                             will find that we are incorporating the information
                             which you have given us into the account, but that is
                             not to stop you asking anything else relevant.

                                  MR. DAWSON:    Yes.

                                  THiC WITNESS:  At about 0915 hours on Saturday,
                             15th April 1989, Mr. Philip James Junes saw his son,
                             Gary, leave the family home with the intention of
                             travelling to Sheffield to attend the Cup Semi Final
                    H        be played at the Hillsborough Stadium.


                                                   -   6   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             Gary travelled in a mini bus together with his
                        cousin, Paul Brennan, and several other people.  They
                        arrived in Sheffield at approximately 1205 hours and
                        parked the mini bus in a side street about 15 minutes
                        walk from the stadium.

                             Paul Brennan states they took a slow walk to the
                        ground but on the way he got separated from Gary and
                    B   other members of the group.  Mr. Brennan entered the
                        stadium and took up his seat position in the North
                        Stand.  There is no information available stating how
                        or with whom, if anyone, that Gary entered the stadium.

                             However, since the preparation of this summary,
                        sir, some additional information has been provided by
                        the solicitor representing Gary's family, to the effect
                    C   that a Mr. Brian Thornhill, a friend of the family,
                        states at about 2.05 p.m. he was 200 yards from the
                        stadium wnen he saw Gary walking towards the ground.
                        There were also several other groups of people walking
                        to the ground but he did not know whether or not Gary
                        was a part of any specific group.  He stopped to speak
                        to him and Gary told him that he was making his way to
                    D   the ground, and Mr. Thornhill knew that Gary was in the
                        standing section.

                             Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
                        terraces Anthony Arthur Hunter, a Sub Officer in the
                        South Yorkshire Fire Service, attended on the pitch in
                        front of the West Stand terraces.  He assisted in the
                        removal of casualties from the enclosures and treating
                    E   tuem on the pitch.  He recalls assisting unknown Police
                        Officers to carry a youth from the gate in enclosure 3
                        and placing him on the pitch where, after giving first
                        aid, he left him with another Fire Officer.  Mr. Hunter
                        believes this youth to be Gary Jones.

                              David William Sweetman, a Fireman with the South
                        Yorkshire Fire Service, also attended on the pitch in
                    F   front of the West Stand terraces following the severe
                        crushing.   He recalls seeing a youth lying on his back
                        at a point near the six yard area, four yards from the
                        goal line.   He believes this youth to be Gary Jones.
                        Fireman Sweetman states that together with Sub Officer
                        Hunter he tried to resuscitate Gary who appeared to be
                        dead.   He tried for approximately five minutes when he
                        was joined by a man who he states was a doctor.
                    G   Resuscitation was continued for approximately ten to
                        fifteen minutes.   Fireman Swestman was then relieved by
                        an unknown man who stated he was trained in first aid
                        and he left the doctor and first aider in charge of
                        Gary.

                             Dr. Andrew Byrne was a spectator at the match and
                        following the severe crushing in the West Stand
                H       terracing he left his seat in the South Stand to assist


                                             -   7   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                          the injured on the pitch.  tie made his way onto the
                          oitch and went to a youth who was receiving cardio
                          pulmonary resuscitation from other other helpers.    He
                          was handed a portable resuocitator and commenced   i\/ing
                          the youth treatment.  He states the youth appeared dead
                          but continued treatment for at least five minutes when
                          a fan came to him stating the youth was his cousin.
                          Dr. Byrne assisted in placing the youth in an ambulance
                    B     and left to assist other casualties.

                               Again, following the severe crushing on tae West
                          Stand terracing Paul Brennan went onto the pitch and
                          saw his cousin receiving attention on the pitch.  He
                          was being given oxygen and chest massage by helpers.
                          Mr. Brennan helped to place his cousin in an ambulance
                          but despite stating that he was his cousin he was not
                    C     allowed in the ambulance.

                               Dr. Peter March, a spectator at the match,
                          assisted treating casualties on the pitch during the
                          incident.  He travelled with a casualty he had been
                          treating at the stadium in an ambulance to the Northern
                          General°Hospital.  Dr. March offered his services at
                    D     the Casualty Department of the hospital and was
                          directed to assist with a youth who was being
                          resuscitated but eventually died.  He believes this
                          youth to be Gary Jones.

                        Q. Can I just stop you for one moment? - A. Yes.

                        Q. The casualty with whom Dr. Marsh travelled, whoever
                    E      that might have been, was definitely not Gary, that is
                           right, isn't it? - A. Yes, sir, it is believed to be
                           another casualty of that day.  Dr. Marsh wrote on the
                           youth's hospital file the time treatment commenced,
                           1555 hours, treatment given, and time lie certified
                           Gary's death, 1620 hours.

                                Hospital records have been examined by Police
                    F      Sergeant Appleton and sae confirms the records of Gary
                           Philip Jones show Dr. Marsh recording the
                           aforementioned cietails.

                                  Later the same day Police Constable Fox attended
                           at the Northern General Hospital and assumed
                           responsibility for the body of Gary Philip Jones.    She
                            Later escorted the body of Gary to the temporary
                    G      mortuary which had been set up in the gymnasium at
                           if111,s bo rough S tad ium.

                                At 02l!j hours on Sunday, 16th April 1989, Philip
                           James Jones identified the body of his son, Gary Philip
                           Jones, to Police Constable Fox at the temporary
                           mortuary in the gymnasium.   Police Constable Fox later
                           escorted the body of Gar/ to the Medico Legal Centre
                H

                                                -   8   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                          wiiere she identified him to Detective Constable
                          WeigoId.

                                On Monday 17th April, 1989, following
                           identification by Detective Constable Weigold, Dr. John
                           Clark carried out an autopsy and submitted a report
                           giving cause of death.
                    B           Sir, also an addendum to the last paragraph of the
                           summary, in relating to the purchase of a ticket,
                           further information has been furnished by Gary's father
                           to the effect that he knew that he was in possession of
                           a ticket.  I tiiink, sir, that you are in possession of
                           a copy of that small statement    *om Mr. Jones?

                        Q. Yes. - A. He had produced a voucher at the ground of
                    C      tiie Liverpool Football Club and had purchased a ticket.
                           Apparently he did this several days before the date of
                           the match and the ticket was displayed in the lounge
                           until Saturday morning of the game, and that concludes
                           the summary, sir.

                        Q. In effect it says he saw him pick up the ticket - the
                    D      last sentence? - A. Sorry, yes, he saw him pick up the
                           ticket on the Saturday morning.

                        Q. Just so we can understand why we have this statement,
                           it is because, in fact, on the clothing of Gary no
                           ticket was found, that is right, isn't it, in fact? -
                           A. That is correct, sir.

                    E           THE CORONER:   That doesn't mean very    much in all
                           tne circumstances but I am obliged to you,    Mr. Jones,
                           for this statement because it does clarify    the position
                           and obviously makes you feel happier that    that is
                           recorded, I quite understand that.

                        Q. Can I just turn back for a moment - if you look at
                           paragraph 4 first of all, this is Anthony Arthur
                    F      Hunter's evidence. - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. I think I am right in saying that, in fact, he says
                           that he arrived on the scene at 1522 - I think that is
                           at page 10, is that right? - A. That is correct, sir,
                           yes.  He arrived at the Penis tone Road entrance to the
                           ground at 1522 hours.
                    G   0. And I think he got to the pitch, so to speak, where he
                           was dealing with people, at about 1526? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. That is on page 17, and am I right in thinking that if
                           one reads his statements it is clear that lie dealt with
                           at least four different people? - A. Yes, sir, there
                           are several casualties that he did deal with.
                H

                                                -   9   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        Q. Yes, and if you look on page 17 he has looked at, I
                           think a video, wuich is reference 15:26:55:16, which
                           means that it was at 1526, is that right? - A. Yas,
                           sir.

                        Q. And he says that at that point he was engaged, he
                           thinks, with Gary Jones, is that right? - A. Yes.

                    B   Q. So the closest we can come to pinning him as to what
                           time he dealt with Gary is   really based upon this
                           video, isn't it? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. Because there is no other time? - A. There is no other
                           time, sir.

                        0. And am I right in understanding that, in fact, reading
                    C      his statements it isn't practicable to work out t*rom
                           the statements in which order he dealt with the various
                           people? - A. No, sir, not at all.

                        Q. Y e s , because he refers to them in different orders in
                           difference places, that is      right, isn't it?- A. Yes,
                           sir.
                    D   Q. At least that is how I understand it.

                                 T h e CORONER: That, by the way, Mr. Jones, is not
                           really surprising, when you think that Mr. Hunter
                           v/asn't at the time walking around with a note pad and a
                           stopwatch in his hand, he was busy trying to do the
                           oast he can and then he has got to sit down and try and
                    E      remember, and it is very, very hard, but we happen to
                           have the video, by chance, which does give us a timing.
                           Mr. Dawson, any questions you would like to ask of this
                           young lady? We will be dealing with the visual
                           evidence in a moment or two, so apart from this one
                           point which I have raised, perhaps inappropriately,
                           don't worry, we are coming to it.

                    F           MR. DAWSON:    Yes,    thank you sir.

                                       Cross-examined by MR. DAWSON:

                        Q. You have made reference to the statement from Mr.
                           Thornhill that was provided, indicating that he saw
                           Gary at about 2.05 p.m. walking towards the ground.
                           Also in the summary of facts you have referred to
                    G      Gary's cousin, Paul Brennan, making his way to the
                           stadium.  Is there any indication in the statement of
                           Paul Brennan as to when he went into the ground? - A.
                           Yes, sir.  If you refer to page 3 initially, Paul
                           Brennan states that they arrived in Sheffield at 1205
                           hours, then if you go to the top paragraph of page 4,
                           ne states, "I was in my seat at 5-minutes-past-2".
                H

                                                 -    10   -
J, L, Harpham Ltd
                        Q. Yes.  He obviously went into a separate part of the
                           ground than Gary? - A. That is correct, yes.

                        Q. But at some stage they were walking cowards the ground
                           together? - A. That's right and then they became
                           sepa rated.


                    B   Q . And then they became separated, thank you.    Is Officer
                             Hunter able to pjive any indication as to how long ae
                             was treating Gary? - A. No, sir.   As previously
                             mentioned, ne did deal with four other deceased
                             persons.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   It think it is three others - four
                             all together I think. - A. Sorry, three others, but
                             Officer Sweetman who he was with does state that he
                             worked on Gary for approximately 15 minutes, but there
                             is no relevant time from Officer Hunter.

                        Q.        HR. D A W S O N : Do I also gather this is perhaps a
                             question it would be more appropriate to put to your
                             colleague dealing with the visual evidence, but is it
                             possible to give any indication as to when Gary would
                    D        have been removed from the pens onto the ground? - A.
                             Not that I can give, sir, no.

                        Q.   I wonder whether you can help on this,Officer?  The
                             parents were given some indication or some suggestion
                             by the hospital that at some stage waen Gary was taken
                             to the hospital he was revived for a period, prior to
                             his death.   Have you been able to obtain any
                    E        clarification of this? - A. If you will just bear with
                             die a second, sir ....

                        Q. It is Dr. Marsh's evidence you are thinking about,       I
                           think.  It is page 40.

                                    THE CORONER:   Perhaps the easiest thing would be,
                             Mr.   Dawson, if I read to you the relevant bitout  of
                             Dr.   Marsh's evidence because ....

                                  MR. DAWSON:   It is a supplemental evidence that I
                             have raised as a result of information that was
                             provided.

                                  THJi CORONER:   Yes, I knew that this point was in
                             your mind:

                        Q. Answer the question as far as you are able and then I
                           will read to Mr. Dawson a Little bit out of lie
                           statements, so that he can see what Dr. Marsh actually
                           says. - A. Yes, sir.  Do you mind just repeating your
                           question again?

                        Q.        MR. DAWSON:   Yes. some information was given to
                H            the parents of Gary that when Gary was taken to the


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                   -   11   -
                             hospital lie was at one stage revived prior to death
                             being certified.   Do you have any confirmation that
                             itiis occurred?  It would be really irom Dr. Marsh. - A.
                             Is this referring, sir, to the casualty at the top of
                             the page, page 40?

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   Yes. - A. The casualty consultant
                             directed him to assist with a man that was being
                    B        resuscitated.  The man had an airway fitted and having
                             heart massage was, in fact, lead.

                        Q.             THE CORONER:    So    the answer is no, isn't it.

                        Q.        MR. DAV/SON:  Yes.   I think the casualty
                             consultant is probably a Mr. Wardrope. - A. There is no
                             reference made in the statement to that.
                    C
                        Q.        MR. DAWSON:   That is where the information was
                             taken from, which was given to the parents, and that is
                             the reason why I raise it. - A. Dr. Marsh makes no
                             reference to Mr. War-'rope.

                                  THE COROWER:   Let me read to you what he says
                             because it will help you.  Just stay one minute, in
                    D        case there is something else.  He says - this is Dr.
                             Peter James Marsh speaking, and I have already
                             explained that wnen I read I am just going to read
                             extracts out of the statements for all the various
                             reasons which I am not going to go into.

                                       MR. DAWSON:    Yes, I appreciate that.
                    E
                                  TiIi:: CORONER: But I am picking the bit which is
                             relevant to Gary, and ue says:

                                       "I introduced myself to the staff in the casualty
                                       department and offered my services ...."

                             - he was at the Northern General -
                    F
                                "I spoke to the casualty consultant.  The casualty
                                consultant directed me to assist with a man who
                                was being resuscitated.  The man, who had had an
                                airway fitted, and having heart massage, died.   An
                                ambulance man was maintaining airflow whilst a
                        medical student administered heart massage.  I simply
                        cuecked that everything was being done correctly.   This
                    G   man had ginger hair, he was short, clean shaven and
                        average build.  His top clothing had been removed. He had
                        jeans on.  He would be in his mid to late twenties.   At
                        this stage the casualty department had quietened down
                        considerably.  With reference to the second man who died
                                  ft
                        • • • •



                              - the first one is the one             he had brought in, nothing
                    H         to do u’ith this -


                                                        -   12   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
     "... he had a wrist tag with a number on.   He also
     had an accompanying file.  I wrote in ttiis file
     what drugs and treatment had been given and that
     we had stopped heart massage.  I wrote down the
     time of this occurrence and signed that the man
     was dead".

So in fact he says nothing in his statement.

     MR. DAWSON:     No,   tuere is no indication from him.

      THE CORONER:   Dr. Clark, if the family would like
to have a tvord with you afterwards to clarify some of
these things, would you be willing to spend a few
mi mites with them?

     DR. CLARK:     Yes indeed.

     THE CORONER:     Provided Mr. Dawson ....

     MR. DAWSON:     I am sure that would be very
helpful.

     THE CORONER:   And I have actually got the
hospital notes here, so if you take taem you might be
able to help the family with this particular problem.

     MR. DAWSON:    Thank you, I am grateful:

Was the hospital aware of    the identity of Gary Jones
when Gary was admitted to    the hospital? - A. That is
something I don't think I    can answer, sir.   If you bear
with me I will just cneck    in the statements.

     MR. DAWSON:   It may be, sir, that the answer to
that is contained in something that you have already
read out, that there was a tag with a number on.

     THE CORONER:     I think the answer is that there
were not.

     MR. DAWSON:   Yes.  I anticipate that that is the
answer, and especially from what you have read out.

     THE WITNESS:     Identifiable by reference number
only, sir.

     MR. DAWSON:   Yes, I make that comment, I ask that
question because obviously his cousin Paul was present
at the ground but was not allowed to go into the
ambulance and accompany him to hospital.

     THE CORONER:     I don't think this lady can answer
that question.
                                  MR. DAwSON:   And there are two further questions
                             which the family would simply like the information on
                             if it is possible.   Again it is not within your
                             knowledge, but I wonder whether you could make
                             enquiries to ascertain this, as to whether there is any
                             information as to w.ien the blood sample was taken by
                             Dr. Forrest from the deceased?
                    B             THE COROJiER:   Dr. Clark will answer that in a
                             moment.  He took the blood sample and he will be able
                             to tell you.   I will call him back.

                                  MR. DAS/SOW:  I am sorry, perhaps I should nave
                             raised that with him.

                                     THE CORONER:   It is all right, don't worry.
                    C
                        0.        MR. DAWSON:    And finally do you have information
                             as to when Gary's body was transported from the
                             Northern General Hospital to the Hillsborough Stadium,
                             where the identification took place? - A. No, sir.
                             Research shows that tne bodies transported trom the
                             hospital to the temporary mortuary were taken between
                    D        2000 aours and 2100 hours.   Sergeant Cox was at the
                             hospital with the bodies at 1945 hours and he
                             instructed Officers to escort bodies to the temporary
                             mortuary.   There are no specific times on the system or
                             in i.;y system.s

                        0.. It seems between 2000 and 2100? - A. And 2100 hours,
                            y as.
                    E
                        Q. Thank you,      I am obliged.

                                     THE CORONER:   Any other questions of this young
                             lady?     (No response.)  Shall we get Dr. Clark to come
                             back?

                                           JOHN CHALMERS CLARK Recalled:
                    F
                                              Further by THE CORONER:

                        Q. If you could just deal with this alcohol point.  Dr.
                           Clark, a further question, I will repeat it:  you did
                           cue post mortem on this young man? - A. Yas.

                        Q. And what day did you do it? - A. The 17th,      the Monday.
                    G
                        Q. On the Monday, and did you take the blood sample ...? -
                           A. Yes, I did.

                        Q ..... which was sent to Dr. Forrest? - A. Yes, I took it
                            at the time of the post mortem.   It was han<;ed to the
                            Police who transported it to Dr. Forrest.
                H

                                                     -   14
J. L. Harpham Ltd
That is right, so it would have been taken - they were
all lone Monday morning weren't I:hay, or was it in tlie
afternoon? - A. I have a note with me.   I don't have
the time here, just on the 17th, which was tlie Monday.
I am sure we could find out exactly when it was, but


I am not asking to give it precisely but my
recollection is that all the post mortems were
completed by lunchtime. - A. In fact, not until the
afternoon, I think.

It was in the afternoon,   I see.

     MR. DAWSON:   So long as we have the date I am not
concerned to ask for further clarification.

     THE CORONER:   The 17th, it was on the Monday.
Thank you.  Nothing else, I take it?

     MR. DAWSON:   No, thank you.

     DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                   By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
Inspector, West Midlands Police.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Dawson, the position is exactly
the same, Officers have already been sworn.

     THE WITNESS:   Sir, an examination of video film
and photographic evidence has been made and Gary has
been identified being removed from the terraces and, in
fact, as you have already heard, receiving treatment on
the pitch.  This specifically is shown on a photograph
which has been given the reference number PR3/29A, and
that photograph is actually timed at 1530.  That
particular photograph, sir, was taken by a Mr. Philip
Rich, who in fact is a South Yorkshire Police Scenes of
Crime Officer.

     Anthony Arthur Hunter has viewed visual evidence
and identifies himself on a video tape which in fact is
a BBC video and he is shown on a time reference at
1526:55:16, and at this stage he is assisting to remove
a youth from the terracing of the West Stand and as he
states, I believe, sir, via gate 3.  In fact I believe
there is a mistake there which I will come to in a
second.  He has viewed a recent family photograph of
Gary which in fact bore the reference RPOD/86, and
clothing photographs, and in fact he identified Gary as
being that person.  He also believes, sir, that he is
shown on a further photograph together with David
William Sweetman, treating Gary on the pitch.  this
photograph has been given the reference NGNl/55.
Although he states that he assisted to carry Gary from
the gate in Pen 3, the video sequence shown at
1526:55:16, that is on che BBC tape, Map 1, is in fact
taken at Pen 2, enclosure number 2, so in fact the
inference there is, sir, that Gary in fact was carried
through Gate 2 and not Gate 3.

     David William Sweetman has viewed visual evidence
and on a photograph which has been given the reference
number NGNl/55, he believes that he is shown together
with Anthony Hunter treating Gary on the pitch.   Mr.
Sweetman has also viev/ed photographs and confirms that
Gary is the person he dealt with on the pitch, as
described, and he has signed a plan of the pitch area
where he actually came into contact with Gary.   That
plan, sir, has been given the reference number DS/1.

      Dr. Peter Marsh has viewed photographs and
identifies Gary as the youth he treated at the Northern
General Hospital.   It will be seen f r o m D r . Marsh's
.statement that he referred to Gary Philip Jones by
deceased reference 84.   This in fact, sir, is a mistake
and is clarified by WPC Snape who took the statement.

     THE COKONER:   In effect, she just says that it
should have been 86, doesn't sae? - A. That is right,
sir, yes.

     The family of Gary have, in fact, viewed visual
evidence, sir, and they can confirm that Gary is shown
on that photograph NGNl/55.

     Sir, if I can refer you just for a moment to the
photograph PR3/29A, which was mentioned in paragraph
14, I should perhaps stress that that is a long
distance photograph, but based on the evidence
available, mainly in respect of the people who I
believe are actually treating Gary at the time, I do
believe that whilst it is long distance that it does,
in fact, show Gary's location.

That is the one where he is being seen taken from the
terraces? - A. He is actually on the pitch at that
stage, sir.

He is already on the pitch? - A. That is right, sir,
yas.

So it doesn't locate him within the enclosure? - A. No,
it doesn't, sir.

Does 1525 locate him within the enclosure or also
outside? - A. No, sir, what that indicates, sir, is
that it would appear, I think I have mentioned to you
before the cross flow of deceased from different pens,
                           and my interpretation of the evidence available is that
                           Gary was probably carried (from
                                                       •orn Pen 3 into enclosure
                           number 2 and then out through   Gat< 2 .

                        Q. Yes, well we know from other cases that that definitely
                           happened. - A. We do know that, sir, yes.   Sir, can I
                           refer you to a plan which has been ,<iven tne reference
                           nuiiiber MWJL/104.
                    B
                        Q. And we are going to call that C 4 7 .    Can I just stop
                           you?

                                THii CORONER:  Mr. and Mrs. Jones, and for that
                           matter Mr. Dawson, don't worry about all these
                           reference numbers at the moment.   They are there so
                           that we can find out way round the paperwork.   Just
                           listen to the text, so to speak, and the references we
                           need but don't let it disturb you.

                        Q. Yes. - A. Sir, that is a plan of the pitch area and in
                           fact refers to the location on video, Map 1, at Gate 2,
                           and the approximate location on the pitch of the
                           photograph PR3/29A.  Sir, I don't know whether you
                    D      would wish to refer to David Sweetman's plan at all?

                        Q. I don't think so.  It is virtually identical,         isn't it?
                           - A. It is, sir, yes.

                        Q. Can you show us on the large plan?

                                THE CORONER:    Mr. Dawson, what we do is we don't
                    E      use trie photographs we use the plans and we demonstrate
                           it on a large scale one so that everybody can see.

                                (The witness referred to the       large scale   plan.)

                                THE WITNESS:   Sir, if I can refer you to the
                           large scale plan, this is enclosure number 3, and this
                           is actually gate number 2. That there is tne fence
                           dividing enclosure 3 to enclosure 2, and with reference
                           to the video identification which is on a BBC tape Map
                           1, tne position we believe that Gary is snown in is
                           actually here, actually just in the process of coming
                           through the    te.

                                                                    tere?
                        Q. Can you show it to us on that one over ____      - A.
                           Sorry, my apologies, yes.    It is, again, on the pLan of
                           the pitch, this is enclosure number 3, that is gate 2,
                           that is tae         w fen e between enclosure 2 and
                                     ie dividing
                           enclosure 3, and it~is at this point here on that plan
                           MWJL/104, that        is shown.  In respect of PR3/29A, I
                           believe that that is approximately this location here,
                           again on the pitch.

                        Q. Yes, so the first sighting of him is at the gate, in
                H          effect? - A. That is right, sir, yes.


                                                  -   17   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
And that is as near as we can ;et as to wnen he left
the terraces? - A. That is right, sir.

     THE GOROHER:   Any questions, Mr. Dawson?      Is it
on the plan - shall we leave him over there?

        HR. DAwSON:   No, I don't think so:

              Cross-examined by HR. DV.7S0N:

So cue first visual evidence, the first sighting of
Gary, is when he is in the process of being taken
through Gate 2 onto the pitch? - A. That is correct,
sir, yes.
He hasn't been sighted before? - A. No.

Is there any indication as to when the photograph
NGNl/55 was taken? - A. No, sir, it is a newspaper
photograph and it doesn't bear the time reference.

Thank you.

     THE CORONER:       Ladies and gentlemen, any questions
of this witness?      (No response.) Thank you very uich.

     That then concludes the evidence which we are
going to take at this stage.  I am going to deal with
the adjournment of the Inquests right at the end so I
will say nothing at this stage.

     I do try and say something to each of the families
and indeed, Mr. and Mrs. Jones, I want to say two
things.  First of all, I very much appreciate the
effort which you have taken to let us have this further
information to clarify one or two of the points in the
summaries, and you, Mr. Dawson, as well, for forwarding
them to us, and also for asking questions which clearly
show how anxious the family are to have as much
information with regard to the detail as we have been
able to produce, and of course I realise that that
isn't what causes the pain, the pain is the fact that
you have lost your lad and I am very, very sorry
indeed, and I am sure the Jury and everybody else are,
that this tragedy has struck you, as well as many other
people, but in this particular instance you in
particular.  Thank you very much indeed for coming.

     Dr. Clark, I don't think you are in the next case,
are you?

        DR. CLARK:    No.

     THE CORONER:   So if you wish to speak to him, you
don't have to, but if you wish to speak to Dr. Clark
then I am sure he will try and deal with any detail
                        which you haven't quite followed, as far as he is able,
                           and if you want - let Dr. Clark have a copy of these
                           notes, there is only one page, in fact - I am sure it
                           might just relieve your mind a little bit.  Can we have
                           the notes back because we need to return to those in
                           due course.  Yes, Hr. Dawson?

                                MR. DAWSON:   On behalf of the family can I
                    B      express my gratitude to you for the condolences that
                           you have expressed to them.

                                THE CORONER:   Thank you very much, that is very
                           kind of you.  What we do is we rise now for a moinent or
                           two while we sort ourselves out for the next Inquest,
                           so that is what we are going to do.  Thank you.

                             (The Inquest into the death of GARY PHILIP J   i'.S
                                   '-/as adjourned to a date to be fixed)




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

                                                -   19   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
