    Transcript created by Merrill Legal Solutions


Owning                      South Yorkshire Coroner
Organisation:

Title Memo:                 Pre-review of inquest - Cassette No. 1

Description:

This transcript was produced in April 2011 by Merrill Legal Solutions from the digitised version
of the audio cassette copy of this recording, after enhancement by BR Consult to reduce noise
and improve audibility of the incoming radio transmissions.




 MERRILL
 LEGAL SOLUTIONS
   Digital transcript of Wordwave International, a Merrill Communications Company
                     101 Finsbury Pavement London EC2A 1ER
                  Tel No: 020 7422 6131 Fax No: 020 7422 6134
       Web: www.merrillcorp.com/mls        Email: ukclient@merrillcorp.com
00:00:18


CORONER:              Ladies and gentlemen, I’m very grateful to you for coming
                      this afternoon. This is what I would call a semi, informal
                      meeting. I’m sorry that we’re meeting in a court but it’s a
                      convenient room and there’s plenty of space.


                      It was, and in fact is, intended as a meeting between myself
                      and, if you like, the legal representatives in the main but I
                      know that there are several members who have lost loved
                      ones in this particular disaster present in court. You will
                      hear what I propose to do in a moment. If, towards the end,
                      those, shall we say, lay people feel that there is something
                      pressing that they really need to know would they please
                      instruct their solicitor, who I think for practical purposes is Mr
                      Frazer. Is that right? Then he can put any points which
                      need to be made to me and I’ll obviously consider the points
                      that are made.


                      Now, perhaps I’ll get on very quickly. Could the solicitors
                      who are present stand up and just introduce themselves to
                      me so that I know who is who? I know you, Mr Frazer, but
                      stand up anyway and lead off because then people will know
                      what’s happening.


MR FRAZER:            Sir, my name is Frazer. I am one of the members of the
                      steering committee which was formed by the firms of
                      solicitors in Liverpool who were instructed by families shortly
                      after the disaster. My committee represents approximately
                      150 practices. Within that group, about 50 practices have



www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                      2
                      received instructions from bereaved families. Those
                      50 practices, I understand, represent 92 of the deceased;
                      there being three deceased or bereaved families who have
                      not either contacted us as a group or contacted solicitors
                      themselves.


                      We have had general conduct and it would be our intention,
                      subject to your approval, sir, to be present to assist the
                      bereaved and the court throughout any hearing you may
                      reconvene.


CORONER:              Thank you, Mr Frazer.


MR GREGORY:           My name’s Gregory, sir, and I represent Sheffield City
                      Council.


CORONER:              Sheffield City Council?


MR GREGORY:           Correct, sir.


CORONER:              Any others?


MR DOYLE:             My name’s Peter Doyle, Davies Arnold Cooper solicitors for
                      the club, Sheffield Wednesday.


CORONER:              For the club?


MR DOYLE:             For the club.


CORONER:              Yeah, Peter Doyle, did you say?
00:03:00


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                   3
MR DOYLE:             Doyle, Doyle.
00:03:07
CORONER:              Yes.


MR CALLAGHAN:         Sir, my name is Andrew Callaghan of (several inaudible
                      words). I represent the Trent Regional Health Authority and
                      the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service.


CORONER:              Thank you. Yes?


MISS THORPE:          I’m Catherine Thorpe from Reynolds Porter Chamberlain.
                      We represent Eastwood and Partners.


CORONER:              Yes. Any other solicitors present? Can I just check that
                      there are no families here who are not represent by any firm
                      of solicitors? Thank you.


                      Is this a lady who is a legal representative?


MISS NORCLIFFE:       Yes, apologies.


CORONER:              Yes, well sit down and make yourself comfortable and then
                      tell me who you are. No, sit down and make yourself
                      comfortable and then when you’re ready you can tell me.
                      We’re just doing the introductions so could you tell me who
                      you are and who you represent?


MISS NORCLIFFE:       Sorry, Belinda Norcliffe from Hammond Suddards and we
                      represent the South Yorkshire Police.


CORONER:              Yes, I missed your name, sorry.


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                 4
MISS NORCLIFFE:       Norcliffe.


CORONER:              Did you catch it?


MR JONES:             Norcliffe, yes, I’ve got it.


CORONER:              Yes. No, you haven’t missed anything yet so it’s all right.
                      We’re only doing preliminaries.


                      I wanted to just introduce Mr Mervyn Jones. A lot of you will
                      know him anyway. He’s the Assistant Chief Constable in the
                      West Midlands Police and he is acting as my Coroner’s
                      Officer for the purposes of this meeting and also, indeed, for
                      the purposes of the inquests generally. I’ve asked him
                      specifically to sit near me because he will ensure that I don’t
                      overlook anything that’s important for the purposes of this
                      meeting.


                      Now, the object, or the purpose, of this meeting is to try and
                      tell you some of the thinking which I’ve been engaged in, the
                      proposals which I have with regard to resuming the inquest
                      and to obtain from the legal representatives confirmation
                      that what I am proposing would appear to be an acceptable
                      way forward.
00 : 06:08
                      There will be various subsidiary points arising later on but
                      the main object of the meeting is that. I ought to make it
                      clear so that there is no misunderstanding on this that I’ve
                      had a preliminary discussion with Mr Frazer and, indeed, Mr
                      Kennedy from Hammond Suddard last week on a less


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                     5
                      formal basis than this with a view to in fact exploring the very
                      subject which we’re discussing today. I felt it would be
                      sensible if I talked to the two solicitors with whom, on the
                      whole, I’ve had most correspondence. If it appeared to them
                      that there was no mileage in the proposal then it might have
                      been aborted at that stage. The fact that we are meeting
                      must indicate to you that on the whole we felt it was worth
                      proceeding to the meeting today.
00:07:15
                      The second thing I want to say, and in a sense it’s out of
                      order but it is important that I say it and that it is understood,
                      the fact we’re meeting today and that I’m thinking of
                      resuming the inquest rather sooner than I had originally
                      intended does not mean - does not mean - that the Director
                      of Public Prosecutions has either informed me of any
                      decisions or taken any decisions. I want to state absolutely
                      categorically that the Director of Public Prosecutions has not
                      informed me of any decision which he might be
                      contemplating regarding this matter.


                      Secondly, my Coroner’s Officer - if I may refer to you like
                      that, Mr Jones - who is also heading up the team which is
                      preparing the paperwork for the Director of Public
                      Prosecutions informs me that the Director at the moment is
                      not able to take a decision because all the paperwork has
                      not yet been delivered to him. So, not only do I know
                      nothing but DPP probably doesn’t know either because he’s
                      not yet in a position to consider the evidence.


                      The third thing I want to say is, as you will know from the
                      letter I sent to you, that it is my intention, subject to this


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                       6
                      meeting, to try and resume shortly after Easter. The timing
                      for that has got nothing whatever to do with any action or
                      inaction or decision, or otherwise, by the DPP. It is a
                      convenient time as far as I’m concerned. A time which, of
                      course, is painful because of it’s proximity to the anniversary
                      but we have considered that aspect and we felt, on balance,
                      that if we were going to resume it might be better to resume
                      then than, say, a month later. So, the timing, again, has
                      nothing whatever to do with the DPP.


                      The fourth point that I want to make is that the present time
                      schedule, as I understand it, for submission of papers to the
                      DPP is such that if we do resume these inquests shortly
                      after Easter, the papers will not yet have been submitted to
                      the DPP in full. In other words, the position will be exactly
                      as it is today. It may be that whilst we are proceeding with
                      the inquest the papers will go to the DPP and, indeed, the
                      submission may well be completed but it would have nothing
                      whatever to do with me.


                      I stress this because we had considered something of this
                      sort, in fact, some time ago and we rejected it because we
                      were concerned that people might feel that there is
                      something going on which I’m not letting on about. That is
                      not the case and I do want you to understand and I do want
                      you to believe it as well. I can’t make you believe it but that
                      is, in fact, the truth.


                      Now, the reason why I, if you like, have revised my opinion
                      as to the possibility of resuming these inquests, and I will
                      discuss the scope in a moment, was because we received a


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                      7
                      letter from Miss Steele, who is a member of the Hillsborough
                      Steering Committee, in which she had enclosed a letter
                      which she actually wrote to the DPP.
00:11:24
                      By chance we also had a letter from Hammond Suddard
                      who did not actually make the same point but it was also
                      raising points relating to timing, disclosure and one thing and
                      another. When I read particular Miss Steele’s letter I
                      realised that what she was saying was very similar to what I
                      had originally thought about. I felt that if this was coming
                      from the Hillsborough Steering Committee, and subject to
                      sorting things out with regard to how we could do it, then it
                      would be appropriate maybe for me to reconsider my earlier
                      decision which had been I will do nothing until after the DPP
                      has come out with an answer, whatever that answer might
                      be.
00:12:24
                      So, that’s the reason why I rethought it. I felt that it had
                      certain advantages. It obviously had advantages because
                      the Hillsborough Steering Committee wanted it; I could see
                      certain advantages for other parties; and I could see very
                      real advantages to the bereaved families because it would
                      enable a good bit of information to be made public some of
                      which I know because I’ve had conversations or
                      correspondence, people are very anxious to have and I can
                      understand that if I were in your unfortunate situation I’m
                      sure I’d be saying exactly the same. It would enable us to, if
                      you like, deal with quite a bit actually as you will see in a
                      moment.


                      All this is still by way of introduction, and I’m sorry the


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                      8
                      introduction is a bit lengthy but that’s how it is. I want to just
                      indicate three possible scenarios for the inquests. Please
                      listen to these bearing in mind what I have said as to my
                      knowledge as to what the DPP is going to do, which is the
                      same as yours. In other words, I don’t know. There are
                      three possibilities that cross my mind.


                      The first one is that having considered all the paperwork and
                      the evidence he decides to bring a prosecution against
                      some body or bodies, corporate or unincorporated - 1don’t
                      know. He decides to bring a prosecution for a major offence
                      which falls within Section 16 and which, not to mince words,
                      the only one that is likely to apply would be a charge of
                      manslaughter because all the others are irrelevant.


                      Now, if he were to bring - if he were to bring - such a charge
                      then the procedure under Section 16 of the Coroner’s Act is,
                      as my legal friends will, of course, know, that I would adjourn
                      the inquest sine diem. At the end of the Crown Court
                      proceedings it would be my option whether I resume the
                      inquests or not. It’s only fair to say that I have been Coroner
                      now for about four and a half years and I’ve never yet
                      resumed an inquest which was adjourned under Section 16.
                      So, if I were to apply normal practice then it is quite possible
                      that at the end of the day I would not resume. There are
                      reasons for this which I won't go into at the moment.


                      That is scenario number one. The prosecution, adjournment
                      under Section 16, decision at the end of the court hearing,
                      what happens to the inquest. Scenario two is the DPP says
                      no prosecution but that one or more or some other person


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                      9
                      decides that they wish to bring a private prosecution against
                      somebody corporate or otherwise. Now, if that were to
                      occur and if a charge were laid then, as I understand it,
                      Section 16 of the Coroner’s Act would apply again with
                      exactly the same consequences.
00:16:15
                      The third scenario is that the DPP says no prosecution and
                      nobody else wants to proceed. In those cases we would, in
                      the normal run of events, resume the inquest and complete
                      it within the ambit that I consider appropriate to the
                      circumstances. Now, I, and common with everybody else of
                      course, are in difficulty because I don’t know which of these
                      scenarios will apply.
00:16:55
                      If we were to resume the inquest, as I say, before the DPP
                      makes up his mind and if a Section 16 situation were then to
                      arise at some subsequent point in time, I would immediately
                      after that, or as soon as possible thereafter, resume the
                      inquest but purely and simply for the purposes of adjourning
                      under the provisions of Section 16 in order to comply with
                      the Act. That would be a formality; wouldn’t take very long.


                      In a sense getting information now would have that
                      advantage that we would be able to deal with it fairly quickly,
                      it would have the advantage the reason why you adjourn
                      under Section 16 - or one of the reasons - is that families
                      can get their death certificates, which of course as you know
                      they can’t normally until the inquest is completed. I mention
                      that now so that you may understand the likely progress, if
                      you like, of the proceedings.




www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                    10
                      Now, I’ve already indicated the reasons why we’re meeting
                      and following Miss Steele’s letter and my reconsideration I
                      got in touch with the DPP, or one of his representatives, to
                      see whether he would agree that I should resume the
                      inquest on a limited basis. Now, what in effect I proposed to
                      him was that we would resume the inquest for the purposes
                      of taking the medical evidence and we would deal with the
                      alcohol levels of the deceased at the time; we would
                      endeavour to put before my court evidence of where the
                      deceased were within the stadium and, if possible, evidence
                      of where they were seen, either alive or dead, at various
                      points within the stadium and probably some evidence as to
                      how they got there or what time they left home and what
                      time they arrived.


                      If I put this, if you like, in Coroner’s jargon we would seek to
                      establish who the deceased was, which we’ve already done
                      in a sense; when they died; and where they died as far as
                      we are able. What we would not do, we wouldn’t deal with
                      how and we certainly wouldn’t deal with why or who is to
                      blame, which strictly speaking is outside the Coroner’s
                      jurisdiction anyway and we might not deal with that come
                      what may. Certainly we wouldn’t want to deal with
                      controversial matters.


                      The reason for this is, (a), because the DPP would not - this
                      is not necessarily in order of priority, this is just an order -
                      agree to me resuming the inquest if we were to deal with
                      controversial matters or matters which might be construed
                      as criticism or attack on any body or individual, corporate or
                      otherwise - it’s neither here nor there. He would not agree if


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                     11
                      we dealt with matters which would imperil, if I could use that
                      word, his investigations or the scope for action which he
                      might wish to take.
00:21:07
                      If you think about it this is right because it is in the interests
                      of justice that nothing that I do should muddy the waters, for
                      the sake of a phrase, and perhaps hinder other proceedings
                      which might take place in a different court. This is
                      something which is not unique to Hillsborough, this applies
                      in all cases where charges of this nature are being
                      considered by the DPP. There is nothing unusual; the only
                      unusual thing about this is that I’m prepared, in fact, to take
                      some evidence in order to enable the legitimate needs of the
                      bereaved families and other legitimate requirements to be
                      met.
00:22:09
                      Perhaps I should also say that not only is it in the interests of
                      justice but if you think about it, it is very much in the interests
                      of the parties to the proceedings that nothing that is done
                      here, or indeed in any other place, should perhaps prejudice
                      criminal proceedings, which is what we’re talking about. So,
                      if you like, you can look at it from the relatives’ point of view.
                      The relatives, in my judgment, wouldn’t want me to do
                      something which might prejudice those proceedings,
                      whether that’s right or wrong is not for me to say but I’m
                      conscious of that as a fact.


                      So, we now come, in a sense, to the heart of the matter and
                      that is if I resume these inquests the inquests will be of a
                      limited nature; they will be designed to be non-adversarial;
                      to present the factual evidence - that’s what we want to get


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                      12
                      out - of what happened in the sense of where were they but
                      not how did it happen or who is to blame, but, “Was this
                      person seen in Pen 3 or was he seen in Pen 4? Was he
                      seen alive in that pen? Was he seen dead in the pen?
                      Where was he on the playing field? Did anybody attempt
                      resuscitation?” That sort of thing which I think is of interest
                      to the bereaved and which, provided we do the presentation
                      correctly, can be done within the parameter which I’ve
                      already outlined.


                      Now, the way I want this evidence presented, shall we say -
                      I say we because although strictly speaking it’s my court and
                      my inquest, it would be very foolish of me not to
                      acknowledge the enormous amount of work which has been
                      done by my Coroner’s Officer and his team but also, of
                      course, by the discussions which we have had to try and
                      sort out how best to meet the various legitimate
                      requirements of all the parties involved; that’s me, the DPP,
                      the bereaved, the civil proceedings and everybody who is in
                      any way involved. So, I tend to use the word ‘we’, not in a
                      royal sense but in the sense of acknowledging that I have
                      had very helpful discussions and advise from Mr Jones.


                      Now, the way we intend to present the evidence is as
                      follows. We will deal with the post mortems. It had been my
                      original intention to call the pathologist to every single
                      inquest but I’m thinking about that aspect and I think there
                      will be some inquests where we will need to have a
                      pathologist there because there may be specific questions
                      which need to be dealt with. There will be others where it
                      may be possible to deal with the post mortem findings by


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                   13
                      way of documentary evidence. This is something which I
                      will look at the - 1have already looked at them but I will look
                      at them again, of course - post mortems, and (b), we will be
                      discussing it, no doubt, with the Hillsborough Steering
                      Committee or the appropriate solicitors if they’re not within
                      the umbrella.
00:26:13
                      The alcohol levels of the various deceased will be
                      presented; they were all done apart from one person who
                      didn’t have an alcohol level done. We will tell you at the
                      inquest what they were in respect of each single individual.
                      We will have Dr Forrest come along, not to every inquest
                      because he would be here for weeks, but we will have him
                      here probably on day one to formally prove his evidence. If
                      there’s any individual case where the alcohol might be
                      controversial, shall we say, then we will probably have him
                      here to reprove it so that the individual family can hear.
00:27:04
                      Perhaps as an aside, I haven’t said it but you may have
                      gathered, my intention, in fact, is to take each individual
                      deceased and, if you like, run a mini inquest for that person;
                      complete the evidence as far as we’re going and then next
                      deceased and so on through 95 cases. I’ll come back to
                      that in a moment.


                      The rest of the evidence the West Midlands Police are in the
                      process of preparing for me folders in respect of each of the
                      deceased. These folders are not yet complete. I haven’t
                      seen them yet. I’ve seen a specimen of the sort of
                      document which we’re going to have. You might say, “Why
                      on earth are they not complete? What on earth is going


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                    14
                      on?” The reason - and perhaps you’ll correct me on this if I
                      get this wrong - is actually quite simple.


                      Like everything else you have to have things in priorities.
                      When the disaster occurred the first priority, if you like, from
                      a legal point of view was to deal with the deceased, people
                      as individuals, and for me to take the necessary steps so
                      that the families could have their funeral and could have
                      their loved ones back as quickly as possible. That was
                      priority, if you like, number one.


                      Then, as you know, Lord Justice Taylor was appointed to
                      carry out his inquiry and you will also know that he wanted to
                      start very, very quickly in fact. That meant that the major
                      effort of the investigating team had to go into servicing - if I
                      can use that word - the public inquiry and I said that I quite
                      understood that and as far as I was concerned I would want
                      all the information in due course, but I wasn’t going to insist
                      upon having it first. I don’t think it would have done me
                      much good if I had insisted, but I didn’t.


                      After the publication of the interim report, as you know, the
                      matter was referred to the Director of Public Prosecutions
                      and because --
00:29:40




www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                    15
