HER MAJESTY *S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
              (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.
                   On

           7th February, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                        INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                        Page

JOHN MORGAN Sworn

     By the Coroner                                       1
     Cross-Examined by Mr.      Payne                    21
     Cross-Examined by Mr.      King                     27
     Cross-Examined by Mr.      Catchpole                41
     Further Cross-Examined      by     Mr. King         46
     Further Cross-Examined      by     Mr. Catchpole    48
     Cross-Examined by Mrs.      McBrien                 49
     Cross-Examined by Mr.      Russell                  64
     Cross-Examined by Mr.      Isaacs                   74
     Further Cross-Examined      by Mr. Payne            75


SUBMISSION BY MR. PAYNE                                   79

REPLY BY MR. KING                                         80

THE CORONER                                               82


JOHN MORGAN Recalled

     Further   Cross-Examined    by Mr. Payne             84
     Further   Cross-Examined    by Mr. King              85
     Further   Cross-Examined    by Mrs. McBrien          88
     Further   Cross-Examined    by Mr. Russell           90
     Further   By the Coroner                             90


MALCOLM JOHN BRANDWOOD Sworn

     By the Coroner                                       92
     Cross-Examined by Mr. King                           98
     Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien                       99
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell                        99
     Further Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien              100


DISCUSSION                                              101
                                               J . MORGAN


         FORTY-SEVENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

           THURSDAY, 7th FEBRUARY 1991

     MR. PAYNE: May I say before you call the first
witness that we have completed the analysis that was
discussed yesterday afternoon.  I have circulated the
results so that they can now be checked and we will
report to you on progress.

     THE CORONER: Thank you.   I know Mr. Isaacs is not
here and I   think he has rung in, but I hope hewill
forgive me   if we start, and I am pleased to see you,
Mr. King.

     MR. KING:  If you did delay    at all for my
benefit, I am very grateful.

     THE CORONER: We try and wait for a little while.

                JOHN MORGAN Sworn

                 By THE CORONER:

It is Sergeant John Morgan, I think, that is right, is
it not? - A. Yes, that is right.

Is it 758? - A. Yes.

Your evidence basically falls into two halves, I think
it would be fair to say? - A. Yes sir.

Without the ground and within? - A. Yes sir.

We will start on the outside first of all? - A. Right,
sir.

I think I am right in saying that you were in charge
of a serial whose task was to look after turnstiles 9
to 16? - A. That is right, yes, Serial 18.

Were you also responsible for the big gates A and C or
not? - A. I was responsible for entrances A and C, as
opposed to the concertina gates.

Which ones are they as opposed to the concertina
gates? - A. 1 to 11, in fact, were known collectively
as entrance C.

I see what you mean.  I have understood you now. - A.
I am sorry, 1 to 10 are known as entrance A and 11 to
16 were entrance C.
                                              J . MORGAN


Then the other half of the dividing wall was the B
section? - A. That is right.

I have understood.   The total was 1 to 16? - A. Yes.

You were located on the outside of the ground, as
opposed to being on the inside, that is correct, is it
not? - A. I was, sir.

The  reason for the division of A andC was that one of
those sections was supposed to go to the North Stand
and the other section was going to go to the West
Stand? - A. Yes, that is right.

And the intention was that the terracing would be
dealt with by turnstiles A to B, that is right, is it
not? - A. Yes.

What time did you take up your position? - A. We were
kept on standby in the enclosure behind the turnstiles
until about half-past 11, and then we went outside and
all   the turnstiles were open by about 12 noon.

You  have done this duty before, have you not? - A.
Yes, I have.

In fact, I think I am right in saying that you are a
very experienced Police Officer as far as policing
football matches is concerned? - A. That is true.

Including semi-finals? - A. Yes.

Did you do the 1988 semi-final as well? - A. I did,
but I wasn't actually deployed at that end of the
ground, I was on the track serial, Serial 1.

So you were at a totally different location? - A. Yes.

When you first took up your task outside describe to
me what the situation was like, say, between 12 and 2?
- A. There was a steady build-up really with only a
moderate amount of people hanging about on the
forecourt around the shops, around the bridge and in
front of the perimeter gates.  People were standing
around waiting for friends, eating food and just
generally buying programmes and just generally hanging
around, and they were being constantly dispersed by
mounted and foot Officers.

In what way were they being dispersed? - A. They were
being moved from the forecourt area. They were being
encouraged to enter the ground early.
                                             J . MORGAN


Were they being told anything about leaving if they
did not have tickets, or anything like that, as far as
you know? - A. I could not tell you, sir.

Did you do that yourself? You cannot talk about what
others did, but did you do it personally? - A. I
encouraged people to enter the ground, yes, but I was
in a position which was further back from the actual
forecourt.  I was on the concourse itself in front of
my men, that is between the perimeter gates and the
turnstiles.

So you were in that area? - A. Yes, I was in that
enclosure.

Where were your men then? Were they further forward
outwards? - A. No, they were behind me. They were
actually standing by the sides of the turnstiles.

Did you have occasion to warn anybody as to their
behaviour? - A. Yes I did. Several people approached
the ground quite early.  In fact, we had a double-
decker PSV and a couple of coaches arrived quite early
in the afternoon and off-loaded at the Leppings Lane
end, which was contrary really to the planned
reception arrangements because the coaches and the
transport for the Liverpool fans was to be met on
Penistone Road and Halifax Road, but further vehicles
continued to arrive throughout the early afternoon,
including vans and all sorts of different modes of
transport.  Several people approached me and they were
obviously intoxicated at that stage and they were
asking where the nearest pub was and I warned quite a
few that if they returned to the ground and sought
entry they would be refused entry if they were
considered to be drunk.

Those people moved away I take it? - A. Yes, they did.

I think you were also approached by various people who
had some trouble with tickets and things? - A. Yes.

Just tell me a little bit about that? - A. There was a
lot of confusion regarding the ticket denominations
and entry to the correct part of the ground. The
tickets were colour coded. The North Stand tickets
were brown, the West Stand tickets were red and the
Leppings Lane terrace tickets were purple. We had
people asking for the correct entry point. There were
some squares of colour on the turnstile walls which
matched the colour coding of the tickets, but people
did not seem to be able to see them very clearly and I
was constantly questioned as to the correct entry
point by a vast number of supporters throughout the
                                                        J . MORGAN


         afternoon. We were also approached by Liverpool
         supporters who were in possession of tickets for the
B        Kop. Kop tickets were orange in colour and I was able
         to point out that a provision had been made on the Kop
         to house Liverpool supporters in a separate area, a
         raised triangular area.

    Q.    As far as you know, let us dealwith theseKop people
         for a moment, the ones you saw. Did yousend    them
         away or did you direct them towards the turnstiles,
         your turnstiles, I mean, Leppings Lane? - A. The ones
         who were in possession of the Kop tickets, I directed
         them to the Penistone Road north end.

    Q.    You did? - A. Yes.

    Q.   As far as you know did they go? - A. As far as I know
         they did, yes.

    Q.   What about ticketless fans. Tell me a bit about those
D        insofar as you know anything about it. - A. The
         numbers of fans without tickets initially did not
         strike me as being particularly high, dramatic.   I was
         approached by some people, I mean not a great many
         people, who asked where the ticket office was, and I
         just assumed that obviously if they were enquiring
         where the ticket office was they had not purchased
         tickets and were seeking some.




F




                               /Q.   But you did not ....




H
                                                 J.   MORGAN


You didn't perceive that at this stage as a particular
problem? - A. No, sir.

I think you did actually see one of your Officers arrest
a ticket tout? - A. I did.

     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, I don't know if
you remember but this is the Officer who is going to tell
us about that arrest:

I want you to tell me a little bit about that because we
were interested in this aspect? - A. This ticket tout in
question was arrested by an Officer from another serial,
in fact.   An Officer named PC Roberts.     His collar
number is 2902 Roberts.   He was arrested in Leppings
Lane, approximately 50 yards away from the concourse area
at that end of the ground, towards the direction of
Penistone Road North.    That would be on the far side of
Vere Road in front of the shops.    He was arrested for
obstructing the free passage of the highway.     In fact
when he was spotted by the Officer he was surrounded by
about thirty people and the passage along the footpath
was obviously blocked.   The Officer brought him back to
the ground and took him to the concertina gate A.      This
man was in possession of a large amount of cash, £701.64.
He was also in possession of eleven purple tickets for
the Leppings Lane terraces and seven of the orange
tickets for the Kop.

He was selling these tickets for £35 each.    He was taken
to the Police room.

Yes, I don't think we need to go into that.   I think
what we were interested in was the volume.   It doesn't
matter what happened to that man subsequently. - A. He
did in fact indicate that the tickets had been obtained
from the Anfield ticket office.

Did he? - A. Yes.

Just to get this right, the mere possession of tickets
and, indeed, selling them at whatever price you like, in
itself is not an offence, is it? - A. No, it s not.    In
fact we verified that the tickets were genuine.   We
asked for an official of the club - Basil Jones - to
attend that end of the ground.   He took a sample of the
tickets to return to the office to verify they were
genuine and they did turn out to be genuine tickets.

What you are saying is they weren't forgeries? - A.
That's correct.   In fact, throughout the afternoon, if I
might just add, I did see a very crude forgery which
someone had purchased.   This was a photostat copy of a
                                                J.    MORGAN


genuine ticket which had been coloured with orange
crayon.   That was during the early afternoon.

Was that the only example that you... - A. That is the
only other example that I saw, yes.

As far as you know, your colleagues, did they find a lot
of forgeries of this nature or, indeed, of any other
nature? - A. I am afraid I couldn't tell you.

Just so we get this absolutely right.   The reason why a
ticket tout is arrested is because of the obstruction he
causes? - A. That is right.

It isn't the selling? - A. The selling of the tickets
isn't an offence in itself.

It is the location and the fact it is obstructing free
passage? - A. That's right, sir.

The people who were standing around him, did you observe
what happened to those by any chance? - A. I think they
just dispersed amongst the other people of the crowd who
were gathering in the roadway.

Now time went on and in fact I think at ten past two you
had to leave because somebody alleged he had a wallet
taken? - A. Yes.

What did you do actually, just briefly? - A. I was
approached by a man who was an off-duty Police Officer
who alleged he had had a wallet stolen from his back
pocket containing four football tickets and £40 in cash.
I took him to the Police Room.   I informed my Sector
Inspector what I was going to do and I took him to the
Police Room so he could report the theft to the CID
personnel.

That was Inspector Sykes? - A. Yes.

So you had to go off and deal with that? - A. I did
unfortunately, yes.

I think whilst you were there you heard some radio
messages, is that right? - A. I became aware prior to
that that there was some difficulty with transmissions
and reception of the radio.    The messages from ground
control were broken - staccato - and the messages on
talk-through were quite clear.    When I went down to the
gymnasium I saw a radio engineer who was being sent to
the Police box.   After the matter had been dealt with
with the man who reported the crime to me I returned back
underneath the North Stand, back to my position.    I
heard a radio message being passed.    I only heard it
                                                                 7
A
                                                        J.   MORGAN


        once and I recognised the voice as that of Inspector
        Sykes who was asking for more men to be sent to Leppings
        Lane urgently.   There was other radio traffic being
        passed at the time.
B Q.    You were already by that time going back anyway? - A.
        Yes, I was.

     Q. Do you know about what time you got back? - A. Well, my
        initial impression was that it was about 2.30, but I
        realise that that time was probably inaccurate.   It was
        possibly ten minutes later than that or even longer.    It
        was about 2.40 or perhaps a little bit later.

        You say that your original impression was 2.30.   What
        has made you change your mind that it might be a bit
        later? - A. I have seen the video of that end of the
        ground.

     Q. Of the crowds do you mean? - A. Yes.

     Q. You are saying that what met your eye is more consistent
J)      with a later time? - A. Yes.

       What did meet your eye? - A. As I reached the back of the
       enclosure behind the West Stand I saw something that I
       had never seen, ever, in all the years I have worked
       Sheffield Wednesday football ground.   I saw people
       climbing over the turnstile walls and jumping down into
       the enclosure at the back.   It was an absolute
       pandemonium of noise and a confused situation.    I went
       to the rear of the turnstiles A to G and looked through
       one of the openings and saw a vast crowd outside.    There
       were cries of pain from people who were being pushed
       against the bars of the revolving turnstiles and I
       actually climbed on to one of them to try and persuade
       the crowd to stop pushing, which was a futile gesture
       really.   I had never seen that before, ever.




             Q. So this, as far as,




H
                                                J.   MORGAN


So this as far as you were concerned was a one off? -
A. A unique situation, yes.

I know you were not at the end in 1988 because you have
already told me, but have you been at that end at other
major matches? - A. Yes, I have.  I was at that end of
the ground in 1987.

Was that a semi-final? - A. Leeds played Coventry at
Hillsborough.

Did you see Inspector Bennett? - A. I did.

Where was he? - A. When I initially arrived he was in
the enclosure at the rear of the West Stand and he was
trying to calm people down. As people were able to
gain entry they were distressed and in fact I was
approached by more than one person who actually grabbed
hold of my uniform anorak and shouted into my face, "Do
something, open the gates, there are people getting
crushed outside".

I think you said you climbed up and tried to shout - I
didn't quite understand where you were when you did
this. Were you on the inside? - A. I was on the
inside.

Did you climb onto the roof, are   you saying? - A. No, I
went into one of the turnstiles,   I am not aware which
one it was, one of the openings,   and actually climbed
onto the revolving turnstile, so   that I was able to
look above people s heads at the   crowd outside.

But that, you said, was futile? - A. That is right.

Was it because the people in the immediate vicinity
were not in a position to respond or because there was
too much noise, or because they didn't respond, or
what was the reason why it was futile? - A. Because the
people at the front who were being crushed against the
turnstiles themselves were helpless, because of the
pressure from behind.

Could you observe what was going on behind? - A. I
didn't notice what was happening behind at that stage,
no. I tried to quantify the number of people that were
actually in that area and I put it at something like
4,000, but that is only a very rough estimate.
Obviously I could not see the other area in front of
entrances A and C, because of the steel screen.

You then came back out and that is when the people
grabbed you and said, "Do something, open gates , and
words like that? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                 J.   MORGAN


Did you then see a gate open? - A. I did, yes.

Which one did you see open? - A. The concertina gate C
opened.  I think it was opened by a steward, although I
can't be sure, and there was a rush of people.  I would
think about 200 people rushed through. My impression
was that it wasn t opened wide and it was only opened
for a short length of time.  I tried to stop these
people, or slow them down, by putting myself in their
path and trying to push in the opposite direction, and
I shouted for them to calm down, but I was just knocked
to one side.

When you say knocked, do you mean onto the floor or
pushed aside? - A. No, pushed aside.

Did you see that gate shut again at that point? You
said 200 people came through. - A. No, I actually went
out after the initial influx had subsided.

So you don't know what happened to the gate behind you?
- A. No, sir.

Does it follow that you did not see it open again? - A.
I did not see it open again, although I was aware later
that it had opened again.

But you never saw it? - A. No. There were a couple of
horsemen outside, mounted Officers outside.

Near the gate? - A. Yes.

What was the mood and what was your perception of the
people who came through at that time, or the people who
you saw outside when you exited through that gate? - A.
They were in a state of haste really, and they were
quite aggressive. That was my impression.

Anything else? - A. I saw the crowd surging.  I mean
they were there to enjoy the football match and they
were in high spirits, they were chanting and singing.
It just seemed to be quite a happy sort of crowd,
although there was a pervading smell of intoxicants in
the air.

The 200 people who came in or however many it might
have been - I am not holding you to 200 - are you
saying that they ran in headlong or did they walk in
slowly, did they walk fast or was it just that there
was a substantial number of people who were walking
which is why you were moved to one side? Can you see
the difference, as to what I am trying to find out? -
A. Yes, sir. My impression initially was that they
rushed in rather than walked calmly in, and that is the
                                              J.   MORGAN


reason I placed myself in their path, to try and slow
them down and calm them down.

Having got outside what did you do then? - A. I went to
the side of the bar, beside entrance C, beside
turnstiles A-G.

You were now in the opposite area to where you had
started from? - A. Yes, sir. There was no chance of
reaching Officers who were on my serial because of the
vast crowd that was present, so I busied myself trying
to remove people from the crush at the side of the
funnel bar, and I did that by pushing the crowd away
physically and ducking people under the bar, as if
ducking them in water, and I pulled them out from
underneath, dozens of people.

You were trying to get them into the area between the
funnel bar and the River Don and the road? - A. Yes.

Because I take it from what you are saying that was
clear? - A. Fairly clear.

Did people co-operate with you in that respect? - A.
The majority of people did co-operate. There were
youngsters and women in the crowd, and youths of all
sorts of ages, and you could hear people screaming and
shouting that they were being crushed as their ribs
were pressed up against the bar, but there were
individuals who resisted. They pulled away and refused
to leave that situation because they were obviously
frightened of losing their place in the queue. Having
reached so close to the turnstiles they were reluctant
to give up their place.

It is only fair to say that if the gate had not been
opened, if gate C had not been opened, they would in
fact have lost their place because they would have had
to go round to the back and start again, wouldn't they?
- A. That is right.

That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Because that was the only way in? - A. Yes.

As far as they were aware? - A. Yes.

What happened then? - A. In fact, as people were pulled
out and ushered towards gate C I thought that entrance
through that gate was being monitored and only a few
were being allowed in at a time.

Was the gate still open? My impression wasthat you
did not know what was happening at gate C? - A. I don't
                                              J.   MORGAN


know whether it was still open or not but some people
actually came back and protested that they were not
being allowed through, so I then went to the gate and
it was opened and second time.

You did see it open a second time then? - A. I can't
actually remember seeing it but ....

I am being unfair to you. What I am asking is that
when you went back - you had come through, you didn't
look whether it had been shut, you then started pulling
people through, is that what you have told me? - A.
Yes.

Somebody came back and protested that they could not go
through. You then went to gate C and you saw it was
open, is that it? - A. I didn't actually see it open
but I gave instructions, or I asked the Officers who
were there, I told them that these people had been
pulled from the queue and would they please allow them
entry to the ground through gate C. I didn't actually
see it open a second time.




          /Q. So what you were doing ....
                                                   J. MORGAN


So what you were doing is that you were taking them
to Gate C and giving an instruction that it should be
opened to allow them in? - A. Yes, or a suggestion.

You were expecting the lads to respond to that? - A.
Yes, to respond.

Did you see Inspectors Purdy/Sykes anywhere in that
area? - A. I saw Inspector Purdy there by the side of
the funnel bar and I saw Inspector White and another
Inspector called Delaney. They were there, yes.

What were they doing? - A. The same thing as me.

Pulling people underneath? - A. Yes. There were
other PCs present whose identities were unknown to
me.

May I ask you this; you were, of course, fairly far
back but did you by any chance see a Police Land
Rover? - A. No, I did not, sir.

Did you hear any tannoy messages on the outside?     I
am not talking about the inside? - A. I cannot
remember hearing anything.

You did not hear any loudspeaker announcements
either? - A. No, sir.  I cannot even remember hearing
the radio that was round my neck. Gate B opened as
well whilst I was there.

That is what I am going to ask you next.   Did you see
Gate B opened? - A. Yes, I did.

Where were you when that gate opened? - A. I was at
the funnel bar.

Still doing this moving of people? - A. Yes.

While you were doing that did you notice that the
crowds were coming past you from the outside? - A. I
did not notice. Behind me, you mean, between the
river and...

Towards in effect Gate C I am asking? - A. I was not
aware of that, no.

Gate B, of course, was directly opposite you? - A.
Yes, it w a s .

You did see that open? - A. Yes, I did.

Presumably people went in? - A. Yes, they did.
                                                   J. MORGAN

Did that make a difference to the crush? - A. A
dramatic difference.

Before the gate opened, Gate B, the area within the
funnel bar and the turnstiles and Gate B, had that
been relieved so far as you could see? - A. Not to
any great extent, no. No, it had no.

I take it that when that gate opened there was a
dramatic difference? - A. There was, yes.

Did it clear completely or were there still people
going forward towards the turnstiles? - A. It
certainly solved the problem that existed.

You then I think after a few moments did hear a radio
message, is that right? - A. Yes, after the crowd had
dispersed I was able to rejoin the Officers of my
serial.

So you went back? - A. I went back to where I was
supposed to be, yes, and they were shook up and
distressed but there was a great sense of relief
because we had managed to get the people inside
around about kick-off time. Then I heard a message.
The voice of the Officer who was speaking on the
radio was Sergeant Goddard.  I have known him many
years and recognised his voice. The tone of his
voice was quite urgent and strident and he repeated
several times, "All available assistance on to the
perimeter track. People are invading the pitch". So
I collected my serial together and we entered the
ground through one of the turnstiles at Entrance C.

Before you carry on I just want to go back for one
moment to the outside? - A. Yes, sir.

You were not, of course, responsible for that area
and I quite understand that but you were there and
you could see the people. Did it appear to you there
were sufficient at that point when you were there;
that there was any danger to health or life? - A. In
the crush situation there was undoubtedly the danger
of serious injury or even death.  I am quite
satisfied about that.

That is on the outside? - A. Yes.

You are quite satisfied on that score? - A.
Perfectly.

So I am taking you back inside now.   You heard the
message? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                  J. MORGAN

You went in with your serial through Gate C, did you
say? - A. Through one of the turnstiles at Entrance
C.

You went round and presumably you entered the stadium
near the Police Control Box? - A. I did, yes.

Because that is where you had been asked to go? - A.
Ye s .

Firstly, when you first entered, can you remember
what was happening on the pitch? Not what was
happening on Leppings Lane but what was happening on
the pitch? - A. You mean did I see any players?

That is what I am after? - A. I cannot remember
seeing any players, no.

Does it mean you cannot remember seeing any players
or does it mean that you did not see any? - A. I
cannot remember seeing any players at that end of the
ground, at the Leppings Lane goals. There may well
have been some players on the pitch but I was not
aware of them.

Did you at any point see any players on the pitch or
did that account of the proceedings not feature in
your recollection? - A. It did not impress itself on
my recollection.

So what did you do? - A. I went on to the perimeter
track and I was aware that there were several people,
supporters, gathered on the perimeter track and on
the pitch. There were people lying on the grass who
were being tended by Police Officers and by civilians
and I went up to the perimeter fence behind the goal,
just to the left of the goal when you face the West
Stand.  I saw people crushed up against the pen
fence. All I can remember are some faces, necks and
arms that were blue and the pen was bulging under the
pressure of the crush. These people were obviously
either deceased or unconscious because I think they
were being maintained in an upright position by the
pressure of the people behind.  It was quite horrific
really.

It was and you are quite right. Were there already
other Officers in that area? - A. Yes.

So you were not the first Officer to get there? - A.
No, I was not.  I have looked at the video tapes and
I have looked at the photographs which were taken and
I would estimate that I went on to the pitch at
either seven or eight minutes past three.
                                                  J. MORGAN


Are you basing that on the number of people you saw
on the pitch? - A. I am basing that on photographs
where I have seen myself which are timed.

On the pitch? - A. Yes.

We might look for those or at least find one of   those
later on.  I did not know we had identified you   and
perhaps we can have a search and see whether we   can
find you on one of the photographs because that   would
help us I think? - A. Right.

When you were in that area having surveyed the scene
and realised it was horrific as you put it, what did
you do next? - A. I decided, because there were
Police Officers actually climbing on to the hoardings
and Police Officers climbing on to the top of the
fence and further Police Officers working at the
small gates that I would achieve nothing if I stayed
there. So I decided to go round the back of the West
Stand and enter the terrace via the tunnel.

You did, in fact, meet a senior Officer at one point?
- A. Yes, I did.

Was that when you were entering or when you were
leaving? - A. That was when I was entering through
the uncovered seating section of the South Stand.   I
actually went round the back of the Police Box and
went down on to the South Stand via the first gangway
and I saw Superintendent Murray coming up the steps
in the opposite direction. He was followed by Chief
Inspector McRobbie who was dressed in civilian
clothes.

Was there an exchange? - A. Mr. Murray just said, "Do
what you can" and he looked to be in a state of shock
I would think. His face was ashen and he looked very
upset.

Before we leave the pitch, because you never came
back on to the pitch, did you, only very, very much
later? - A. Very much later, yes.

In addition to the Officers you have described on the
hoardings and the gates there were, in fact, other
Officers whom you saw, is that right? - A. Yes.
Other Officers were standing on the field actually
looking at the scene and they appeared to be stunned.
I cannot describe them as anything else really.

You decided your best place was at the back? - A.
Yes.
                                                J. MORGAN


I think by this time you had lost your serial, which
I am not blaming you for in any sense of the word,
but I think that is right, is it not? - A. I had lost
some of them.  It turned out that a few of my
original group of ten did follow me round the back.

Did you go back the same way you had come? - A. Yes,
I ran back behind the Police Control and into the
enclosure behind the West Stand.

And headed for the tunnel? - A . Yes.

You got to the tunnel. First of all, in the
concourse area were there any injured people at that
end that you can remember? - A. No, none at all.

So you ran down the tunnel, would that be right? - A.
That is right.

Was it clear when you ran down? - A. Yes, it was.

You tell me in your own words what you found or what
you saw? - A. The tunnel was clear as I entered it.
No one was leaving and there were no people in
distress.  It was completely clear and at the far end
of the tunnel I saw the wall of people who were
standing at the back of the terrace and behind them
were three Police Officers, two females and a male.
They were looking over the heads of the people in
front. So far as I am aware, they were unaware of
what was happening. That is the impression I gained.
I just went to them and said, "Get these people out.
There are dead bodies in there", because that was my
impression when I went on to the pitch.

That is because you had seen them from the front? -
A. From the front, yes.

Carry on? - A. They responded immediately and I
decided to enter Pen 3, which is to the right of the
radial fence at the end of the tunnel, and I did so
by pulling people back, grabbing them and just
pushing them backwards and by that method I was able
to work my way down the terrace.  It was literally
quite a fight to get on to the terrace itself.
People resisted.  I was rather rough with one or two
people and probably that is why they did resist.   I
was subjected to some physical abuse.

The people in the tunnel obviously were not moving
nor were the Police Officers who you have described
and your impression was that certainly the Police
Officers, and presumably the people near them could
                                               J. MORGAN


not see what was happening? - A. That is my
impression, yes.

What I am trying to find out is that when you got on
to the terrace itself and elbowed your way through
and pulled people back, did you gain any impression
as to whether people were aware of what was going on?
- A. As I got further down the terrace I became aware
of what was happening at the front because the crowd
then was starting to thin out a little bit.  I did
not gain the impression there was a crush.  I was
able to move about.  I was not crushed against the
radial fence or unable to move.  I was able to grab
people and push them and say, "Get out". As I got
down towards the front it was obvious that people
were in distress and in deep shock in a lot of cases.




                     /Q. You are not talking about
                                              J . MORGAN


You are not talking about the people who were severely
injured? - A. No.

Just the people who were standing up? - A. The
supporters, yes.

In fact, this sounds similar with regard to what you
mentioned with regard to some of the Officers whom you
had seen on the pitch, would that be right or not? -
A. That would be accurate, sir.

Did you ferry people backward or forward? Which way
did you aim to get the people whom you were trying to
get out out? - A. The people who were not injured?

Yes, let us deal with those first. - A. The fans?

Yes. - A. Backwards towards the tunnel.

I think you have said that some were not too keen? -
A. Yes, that is right.

But you did manage to get them out? - A. Yes. I was
supported behind by other Officers who were doing the
same thing, so it was like a chain, if you like. We
passed them back and other Officers pushed them up the
tunnel.

Did you see any activity in the front, I mean on the
pitch side, when you were within the pen? I am now
asking you what you saw when you were looking out. -
A. Yes, I saw Superintendent Greenwood standing on the
hoardings, and other people, but vividly I remember
Superintendent Greenwood standing on the hoardings
doing a pushing motion with his hands.

Have you identified yourself on any photographs within
the pen? - A. Yes sir.

You have done that as well? - A. Yes.

So you can find yourself on the outside? - A. On the
field.

On the field? - A. Yes, and in the pen.

Do you by chance know what time it was when you saw
Superintendent Greenwood making these motions? - A. I
was unaware of the timescale, I am afraid.

     THE CORONER: May I just interrupt for one moment.
Mr. Isaacs, I know it has been a very difficult day,
but I hope you will forgive me for having started
without you.
                                                               19

                                                       J.   MORGAN


              MR. ISAACS: Not at all, sir     I sent a message
         that I was going to be delayed.
B             THE CORONER: I knew you were delayed, but I
         thought you would understand if we started.

              MR. ISAACS:   I certainly do, sir.

              THE CORONER: You have, of course, mentioned
         quite a lot of Police Officers being engaged in rescue
         activity? - A. Yes sir.

         But I think it is also fair to say that you saw a lot
         of spectators doing exactly the same, did you not? -
         A. Yes, they were quite heroic and sensible.  I was
         very impressed.  Bearing in mind that probably the
         vast majority of these people had never before seen
         any death or serious injury, they responded very well.

         Were you still within the pen when the first ambulance
D        arrived, can you remember that? - A. Yes, I was*

    Q.   You were within the pen? - A. Yes.

    Q.   By then had you managed to retrieve any bodies from
         the people who appeared to you at that point to be
         either seriously injured or dead? - A. Yes. The vast
         majority of the people who died were in a tangled pile
         at the front against the wall.

         Right up against the front? - A. Yes. I saw people
         still alive trapped up to their hips in the deceased
         and tried to release them repeatedly with the help of
         fans and with the help of other Officers who were by
         now climbing into the pen to help, but it was very
         difficult. Trying to grab hold of belts and clothing
         to try and get some sort of purchase was difficult.   I
         had got black leather gloves on and they just seemed
         to slip off their limbs. They were like sweaty and it
         was difficult to release them from the tangled mass,
         but eventually we were able to manage to release some
         of them and we carried some back through the tunnel,
         and we also carried injured people back there, and the
         pen itself was broken down by supporters and Police
         Officers.

         You mean the fencing? - A. Yes, the perimeter fencing
         near the radial fence on the terrace itself, and we
         were able to hand bodies through that opening.

    Q.   Did you see Chief Superintendent Nesbit? - A. I did
         later when I actually went onto the pitch.

    Q.   But not earlier? - A. No.


H
                                             J.   MORGAN


I have got two more questions on this, I think. As
far as you were concerned, did the tunnel at any stage
get blocked so that it could no longer be used for
exiting? - A. I am not aware that it was.

That was not a problem as far as you were concerned? -
A. No.

Did you see Inspector Sykes within there? - A. I can't
remember, sir. It was a weird sensation because I
seemed to be concentrating.on a very small area, like
tunnel vision really, and I wasn't aware of things
that were happening quite close to where I was.

If I could turn to 1988 for a moment, in 1988 I think
you said you were the serial Sergeant in charge of the
people within the ground, is that right? - A. I was,
yes.

Where were you located in 1988? - A. I was located in
the player's tunnel.

Why were you there? - A. It was my responsibility to
monitor crowd behaviour and I had certain functions to
perform as regards stoppages of play. The Officers
who were around the perimeter track were required to
stand and face the crowd whenever there was a serious
stoppage in play, and this was achieved by a signal
from the Sergeant in charge of the serial, who would
walk forward out of the tunnel onto the perimeter
track which would be the signal for all the Officers
to get up from their seats and face the crowd.  I was
also responsible for the behaviour of the players and
the protection really of the officials and the various
management of the two teams.

That, I take it, is a good central position where you
are halfway between the two major standing areas? - A.
Yes.

You can see the North Stand, of course, directly in
front of you? - A. Yes, that is right.

Were you aware in 1988 of any particular crowd
problems in the Leppings Lane area? - A. No, none at
all.  I went round the ground quite frequently.  I had
frequent excursions round to see if there were any
particular problems from the men who were on the
ground, and nothing was brought to my attention.

Would it be fair to say that you stayed within the
ground, in the sense of within the area bounded by the
stands? You did not go into the concourse area or
anything? - A. I did not, no.
                                              J.   MORGAN


You did not send any messages about closing gates, or
anything of that sort, leading onto the terracing at
Leppings Lane? - A. No sir.

I did not think you had, but I just thought I would
ask you. Did you see people being pulled up into the
stands in 1988, can you remember that? - A. I can't
remember that, sir.

You cannot? - A. No sir.

Your recollection of 1988 is that there was nothing
particularly that concerned you? - A. No.

About the Leppings Lane end.  I am not interested in
other parts of the ground. There may have been
incidents, I do not know, but all I am interested in
is Leppings Lane. - A. There was nothing of any
significance, no.

I want to ask you something completely different
because I notice that you are a Sergeant.  Before I do
that, the Officers who were located round the ground,
particularly the Leppings Lane end, are they usually
the same Officers, not the Sergeant but your serial?
Is that usually the same Officers who would be on gate
duty in the Leppings Lane perimeter track? - A. On the
perimeter track, yes they would be Area Officers,
Community Constables drawn from both Sub-Divisions,
local Officers, yes, and they perform that duty many
times.

The last thing I want to ask you is this.   I see you
are a Sergeant? - A. Yes sir.

Are you issued with a stick to walk round with? - A.
With a stick? We are issued with a staff, a
truncheon, which is kept in the pocket within the
uniform trousers, but no other stick, no.

So you do not carry a swagger stick? - A. We do not,
no.

And the truncheon would not normally be carried other
than in this holder, unless it was being used, is that
correct? - A. That is correct, yes.

           Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Sergeant Morgan, can you please tell the Court what is
your length of service in the Police Force, please? -
A. 23\ years.
                                                                22

                                                        J.   MORGAN


         Have you been in the South Yorkshire Force for that
         time? - A. I joined Rotherham Borough Police in 1967.
         There was an amalgamation of Sheffield City Police and
B        Rotherham Borough Police, which became the Sheffield
         and Rotherham Constabulary that year, and then the
         Force amalgamated with part of West Yorkshire, or the
         old West Riding Force, to become the present South
         Yorkshire Police.

         What the Jury are interested in is is this your patch,
         this part of the country? You have not come from
         Devon, or anything like thait? - A. No. I have been a
         Sergeant in F Division now for 11 years and 3 months.

         You have mentioned the 1987 Coventry/Leeds semi-final
         when you were on duty. Where were you on duty on that
         occasion? - A. I was on duty at the Leppings Lane
         concourse, coach reception.

    Q.   Was that match a sell out? - A. Yes, it was.
D
    Q.   And a capacity crowd? - A. As far as I am aware it
         was.

         You have mentioned other times when you have been to
         the ground and just fill in information about that.
         How often have you been on duty as a Police Officer at
         the Hillsborough ground? - A. At a rough estimate I
         would say well in excess of 150 games.

         Have they included performance of duty at this part of
         the ground, the Leppings Lane end? - A. The vast
         majority of the duties I have performed there have
         been on coach reception at the Leppings lane entrance.

         So on our model where the words "Leppings Lane" are
         written on the road, is that right? - A. Yes.  I would
         be on the grey area just to the side of those words.

    Q.   The vast majority of more than 100 matches? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Certainly in the period leading up to this   particular
         match has this football club attracted big   gates on
         occasions, apart from the semi-final? - A.   Certainly,
         yes.  It is a Second Division Club now and   the average
         gate is something like 23,000, even though   the Club
         are in the Second Division.




                                   /Q.   Which Division were...




H
                                                                   23
                                                            %


                                                       J.       MORGAN


    Q. Which Division were they in in 1989? - A. In 1989 they
       were in the First Division.

    Q. Which means that other clubs who visited them would
       obviously all be First Division clubs, including
B      Liverpool? - A. Yes.

    Q. On the occasion of popular clubs like Liverpool, what
       sort of crowds had attended? - A. Liverpool have quite a
       large following.   It is well known and they have always
       been very well behaved.

     . Quite.    I am concerned at the moment about numbers in
       the ordinary run of league matches? - A. I wouldn't say
       that the numbers on an ordinary league game would achieve
       capacity.

     . What sort of proportion of capacity have you experienced
       at other league matches during the two or three years
       before 1989? - A. I have been to matches where there was
       a very large crowd.   I am unable to put numbers on, or
       be specific about particular matches, but certainly I
D      have been there when the away support has been quite
       large.

    Q. I want to ask you against that experience about the
       build-up at the turnstiles before the kick-off, before
       the disaster took place. - A. Yes.

    Q. In your experience, stationed as you were outside the
       perimeter gates on those other occasions, including the
       1987 match and any other match you want to think about,
       have you ever seen people being crushed up against the
       turnstiles? - A. Never, no.

    Q. Have you ever seen a crowd of the sort you have been
       describing today? - A. Never in my experience.

    Q. Is it fair to describe what happened outside the
       turnstiles - I know it may sound silly but I want to make
       sure you agree with the word - is it fair to describe it
       as an emergency? - A. Definitely, yes.    It was unique.
       Something which I have never, ever, seen.

    Q. Can you help the jury to understand how this happened at
       this particular match? - A. Obviously I left that area at
       ten past two.   The build-up prior to that had been only
       moderate and when I returned at twenty to three it was
       just unbelievable.    I was shocked.   I had never seen
       anything of the like.    There was obviously a very late
       influx of supporters arriving late at the ground.

    Q. What the jury may be interested in is this: on the other
       occasions when you have seen large crowds attending,




H
                                                J.   MORGAN


including at the 1987 semi-final, people have not been
put in the position of being crushed against the
turnstiles? - A. No.

Can you help about your experience of the behaviour of
crowds generally?   Is it the case that in general most
people in most crowds are well behaved and wish to
co-operate with stewards or Police? - A. Generally that
is the case.

Does it only take a very small minority to affect badly
the behaviour of the whole crowd?   I mean to have an
effect upon the behaviour of the law-abiding majority? -
A. In general terms a small minority who behave badly can
affect the situation where there is a large crowd, I
accept that, yes.

Just because you have got a large crowd - I mean, at
these other matches where you have policed, there have
been on occasions large crowds outside the turnstiles? -
A. Yes.

Not of the size of this crowd? - A. No.

Large nonetheless? - A. Yes.

On those occasions people have not been crushed up
against the turnstiles? - A. No.

I want to ask a question to try and put this in the
context of Police experience.   Police Officers, as we
all know, have to attend and deal with all sorts of
emergencies and unpleasant events, road traffic accidents
and unpleasant, distressing events.   You must have had
to do that, presumably, in the course of your career? -
A. Yes, many times.

How did this emergency of this crowd outside the
turnstiles, how does that compare with other emergency
situations in your Police experience?   Putting it in the
context of your experience in your career? - A. It was,
as I have said already, a unique experience.   I can't
compare it to other football matches which I have
attended.   I have attended every ground in the county,
on large matches, small matches, and it was unlike
anything I had ever seen before.   To compare it to road
traffic accidents...   I was at Toxteth during the riots.
I was involved in the miners' strike and the steel strike
- there was a similar situation at several of the
collieries during 1984, during the strike - hostile
crowds.   Really, I don't think you can compare a
football crowd to a crowd of pickets.
                                                  J.   MORGAN


It is certainly not what you expect? - A. It is not what
I expected that day.

The Police don't prepare for a football crowd in the same
way as they would prepare for that other kind of
situation you are talking about there? - A. Not at all.

Just one other topic.   On the question of opening the
gates, in all your experience has the opening of the
gates to allow people to rush into the ground to avoid a
crush outside, has that ever formed part of Police
planning for a football match? - A. Never in my
experience, no.

Has it ever come into consideration? - A. I have never
ever known it.   I have never ever known that situation
to be required.

Or even thought of? - A. Or even thought about.

That is right, is it? - A. Yes.

            Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Sergeant, my learned friend Mr. Payne has dealt with many
of the most important issues and Iam not going to go
over those again.   I just want to take you backover one
or two of the other factors just to seek some help from
you about it.   First of all, the jury has been
interested throughout this case about ticket touts.    I
wonder if you can help us as to whether any information
was gleaned from this person as to how many of the
tickets were represented by the £701 that he had in his
possession?   In other words, he had eighteen tickets
left at £35 apiece.   Do you know from him or from any
other source how much of that £701 was represented by
tickets he had already sold? - A. I am afraid I have no
information to enlighten you on that, sir.

It was a match known to be an all-ticket match? - A. Yes.

It was a match where visiting fans had been warned in
advance that alcohol would not be permitted into the
ground? - A. That's right.

It was a match where those supporters attending in
official coaches and minibuses knew that they would
probably be searched for alcohol somewhere on the way to
the ground? - A. Yes.

Notwithstanding all of that, and indeed the publicity
there had been that drunken fans would not be given entry
into the ground, was it necessary for you and members of
your Serial to confiscate alcohol outside the ground? -
                                                                  26

                                                          J.   MORGAN


       A. Yes, it was.   We were provided with plastic bins,
       dustbins, and issued with plastic dustbin sacks and
       labels for property which we confiscated and throughout
       the early afternoon until ten past two when I was called
i>     away, Officers of my Serial and Officers working outside
       the perimeter gates were constantly taking cans,
       partially consumed cans, full cans, plastic two litre
       bottles of intoxicating liquor, from people and placing
       them in the bins.

      . I want to go forward now, Sergeant, to the first opening
        of Gate C when you estimated that about 200 people came
        in at that time - a relatively short period of time - and
        you have described that they seemed to go in with an
        urgency such that you were concerned about it, both as to
        the state of haste and the state of their aggression? -
        A. Yes.

      . You have described that because of that concern you
        placed yourself in the way to try and calm the situation
        down? - A. I did, yes.

]) Q. But you were pushed aside? - A. I was.

     Q. As a result of your not being able to do anything
        yourself, was there any consequence so far as those
        people were concerned that they all get in and then just
        walk in an orderly fashion?   Did they cause accident or
        injury to each other or to themselves? - A. I actually
        became aware of people going down, being either pushed
        down or losing their footing and going down, within that
        group of people.   I was quite surprised when the mass
        had passed that there were no injured people actually
        lying on the ground.

            MR. MANNING:      Yes, thank you, Sergeant.

             THE CORONER:   Mr. King, we will pause for coffee.
        Is that satisfactory to you?

             MR. KING:     Very satisfactory, sir.

             THE CORONER:   Sergeant, you are still on oath but I
        will get you to have a look with my Officers to see if we
        can find the photographs where you can identify yourself.
        I take it nobody will object to that.   It might be
        useful because it may give us a time.

                           (Short adjournment)




H
                                                 J.   MORGAN


     THE CORONER:  Mr. King, before you begin, we have
got a new face. Perhaps you had better just introduce
yourself.

     MR. KILVINGTON:   Sir, Mr. Kilvington, for SYMAS,
the Ambulance Service.

     THE CORONER:      That is because we have got Mr.
Eason later on.

     MR. KILVINGTON:      Yes, sir.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Sergeant, you told us that the policy was that if
anybody arrived at the ground in an intoxicated state
they would not be allowed in the ground, and that was
what you were trying to tell people? - A. That was what
I was trying to achieve, yes.

How many supporters did you on the day actually prevent
entry into the ground when they were trying to get into
the ground, because they were intoxicated? - A. I can't
remember any.

How many arrests did you personally see or witness for
drunk and disorderly on that day? - A. Certainly I drew
the attention of some Officers who were with Sergeant
Proctor to a particular individual, who they in fact
arrested.

One individual? - A. Yes, one.

And we are talking about a game which was attracting
some 54,000 people? - A. Yes.

Can I move onto something else? You were being asked
about your experience of the Leppings Lane end. Just
let me investigate that a little.  In 1988 at the semi­
final you were not in fact outside the Leppings Lane
end at all, were you? - A. No, I wasn't.

In 1987 you had been? - A. Yes.

I want to deal with your experience of what you call
large crowds arriving.  The 1989 semi-final was a
54,000, in round figures, capacity game. Did you know
that? - A. Yes.

Were you aware that the numbers of tickets which had
been allocated to Liverpool were approximately 24,000,
the exact number being 24,256? - A. I was not aware of
that, no, sir.
                                               J . 'MORGAN


Does it surprise you that it was as many as 24,000, or
were you expecting that sort of number? - A. I was
expecting that sort of number, yes.

Were you aware that all 24,000 Liverpool supporters
were issued with tickets which would expect them to
enter the ground   through oneofthe Leppings Lane end
turnstiles? - A.   I was awareof that.

Were you aware how many turnstiles were at the Leppings
Lane end? - A. I   am aware ofhow many thereare, yes.

How many is that? - A. 23?

23. How many matches had you been to prior to 1989
when 24,000 people were being expected to go through a
total of 23 turnstiles only?   In other words, all
24,000 being expected to go through the Leppings Lane
terraces - how many previous games had you been to for
that situation? - A. I can't really be specific.   I
can't be specific as to how many semi-finals I .have
actually worked and I am not really aware, because of
the passage of time, of the arrangements for entry of
supporters at those other games, so I can't really be
confident about answering that question.

You see, it is important, Sergeant, because you have
been asked your view on what was precedented and
unprecedented, what was to be expected and what was
unexpected, based on your experience of previous games.
Now, previous league games which you have manned have
never had 24,000 people being expected to arrive all at
the Leppings Lane turnstiles, have they? - A. No.

The 1988 semi-final you can't help us on because you
weren't outside in Leppings Lane, that is right? - A.
That is true, yes.

As far as 1987 goes, is it right that that   was on a
Sunday? - A. That is right.

Is that right, that that had a 12 noon kick-off? - A.
Yes.

And that that kick-off was postponed for quarter of an
hour because of late arrivals? - A. Yes.

Apart from those three semi-finals can you identify to
us, as far as your experience goes, to any match when
something like 24,000 people were arriving for the game
using only the Leppings Lane end turnstiles? - A. I
can't, no.
                                                             29

                                                     J.   MORGAN


    Q. The fact is that you have no experience, apart from one
       of those three games, according to your experience at
       those three games, when that could possibly have been
       the case, that is right, isn't it? - A. That would be
       accurate, yes.
B
    Q. So when you - and I don't blame you for this, Sergeant,
       because you were not in charge of planning for this
       semi-final - when you were giving us the benefit of
       what was expected or unexpected, you were not basing it
       on vast experience of 24,000 people arriving at these
       23 turnstiles, were you? - A. I was basing my answers
       upon the experience which I have gained over a number
       of years at a number of football matches.

    Q. But they were not experiences of the same situation
       .... - A . This situation was unique.

    Q. The situation here, Officer, which had been planned in
       advance, was that 24,000 people were due to arrive at
       the Leppings Lane end for 23 turnstiles. That is
       right, isn t it? - A. As far as I am aware it is. I
       don't know what the arrangements were for admitting
D      spectators at the other games that you have brought to
       my notice.

    Q. Yes, but you have not been able to identify to us,
       apart from the'88 game when you were not outside, apart
       from the '87 semi-final when you have agreed with me it
       had the features of being delayed for quarter of an
       hour and was on a Sunday, you have not been able to
       identify to us any game where you have experience which
       you base your assertion this was unique or unexpected,
       when 24,000 people were due to arrive to use 23
       turnstiles at Leppings Lane end, that is right, isn't
       it? - A. I can't, no.

    Q. Let us go a bit further.  In fact, not all 24,000 were
       going to be evenly dispersed among the 23 turnstiles,
       were they? In other words, it was not going to be
       1,000 for each turnstile? - A. I don't know what the
       denominations of the various tickets were or the
       numbers of the various entrances were, I am afraid.

    Q. You know this much, don't you, because you told us of
       the awful confusion over the tickets. - A. Yes.

    Q. That according to whether you had a seat in the North
       Stand or a seat in the West Stand, or a terrace
       standing ticket, according to which one you had you had
       to go through a different set of turnstiles, that is
       right, isn't it? - A. That is right, yes.
                                               J . 'MORGAN


Turnstiles A-G were the Leppings Lane turnstiles,
weren't they, for those who had standing tickets? - A.
For the terraces, for the standing, yes.

So you can help us -- and that was within your
knowledge on the day? - A. Yes.

That everybody who had a ticket for the standing area
had to go through seven turnstiles only, A-G? - A. Yes.

You can probably confirm, can you, that the sort of
numbers who would be expected to have to use those
seven turnstiles would be some 10,100 people, about
10,000? - A. Yes.

Just trying to think through with you what can be
expected or unexpected, and what is precedented and
unprecedented, just taking that simple fact of 10,000-
odd people and seven turnstiles, you would agree with
me that they could not all get through in the last half
hour, could they? - A. 10,000 people going through
seven turnstiles in half an hour?

It could not be done, could it? - A. Impossible.

We, in fact, know that people have rough guidelines as
to how many a turnstile can cope with in an hour. - A.
Yes.

Various figures are given but two which are given, one
is 1,000 per turnstile in an hour, and one is 750 in an
hour. - A. Yes, I am aware of that - 750 for payment
and 1,000 for ticket holders.

Well, I am not going to go into the argument about what
it was, I am just trying to go into experience, what
could be expected, thinking it through in advance with
you, because you were asked questions about what was
precedented and unprecedented. Let me take the
generous figure, if I can put it that way, of 1,000
going through in an hour, all right? - A. Yes.

That means in half an hour you could at most get
roughly 3,500 people through? - A. Yes.

I will take my calculator to show that I am not trying
to trick you in any way.  I am simply going to put in
10,100 people, which is the numbers which had to go
through those seven turnstiles, A-G. - A. Yes.

I am going to take from that 3,500.   That leaves 6,600.
- A. Yes.
                                               J.    MORGAN


6,600 is approximately two-thirds of the total capacity
of 10,000, so that even if everything was going well
and you were getting 1,000 people through a turnstile
in an hour, it follows doesn't it that two-thirds of
the capacity for the Leppings Lane terrace had to
arrive at the Leppings Lane end, A-G, two-thirds had to
have arrived and got through the turnstiles before
half-past-2 if we were going to get through the
remainder by kick-off time, that is right, isn't it? -
A. Yes.

If one took the smaller figure of 750 - I won't go
through the whole exercise but I will be put right if I
am getting it wrong - but the sajne exercise tells us
that to get everybody in by 3 o'clock at only 750 going
through each turnstile, three-quarters have had to have
arrived by 2.30 in order for everybody to be able to
get in by kick-off and the game to start. Do you
understand? - A. That seems logical, yes.

It follows from that also, doesn't it, that if by 2.30,
and it would not be you because you were not in charge
of this, but if by 2.30 it is clear that two-thirds of
the fans which we have been talking about have not
arrived into the ground, or three-quarters have not
arrived, it would be obvious at 2.30 that a lot more
had to arrive, and more than the turnstiles could cope
with in the last half hour? That is right, isn't it? -
A. To me, obvious to me?

Not to you because you did not know the figures, but it
would be obvious to anybody who had access to how many
were already in the ground as to how many more had to
come, that is right, isn't it?

     THE CORONER:    I think he can't answer that.

     THE WITNESS:    I do understand by I don't think I
am in a position to be able to say ....

     MR. KING:   I won't take it any further, sir.

The reason I am putting these to you - and to be fair
to you I explained it to you - is because you have been
asked questions based on your experience to test what
was expected and unexpected.  I am just trying to test
with you that, in fact, and this is not being hurtful
to you, your experience and knowledge of facts do not
necessarily help us on that exercise.  Do you
understand? That is what I am trying to put to you. -
A. I had a role to play on that day as a Sergeant, a
very small cog in 3,000 cogs of varying sizes.  I had a
very small part to play.  I was not involved in the
planning or the logistics of the exercise, so really I
                                                J. MORGAN


cannot help you with what should have been obvious
and what should not have been obvious.

No, but you have agreed with me entirely though that
one can think in advance through the sort of matters
I have gone through with you as to the numbers
arriving when they are going to arrive how many more
are likely to come. You can go through an
exercise? - A. I think you can provided your
attention is not diverted by other important and
pressing matters.

Of course. I am not talking about you, Sergeant,
because you were involved in other matters. - A. But
surely the same goes for other Officers of whatever
rank.

I am, in fact, talking of up to 2.30 and we will no
doubt hear evidence of what the pressing matters were
up to 2.30 if that is the explanation. Let me move
on to something else. You, when you looked through
turnstiles A to G, when you had come back at about
twenty to three, saw some 4,000 people, an estimate
doing the best you can, in the area you were looking
at? - A. Yes.

What was the area you were looking at when you
estimated 4,000 people? Could you show us on the
model? - A. Yes. The area in front of the turnstiles
and back towards the road. That is the area in my
view.

Thank you. Do I take it from your answer that you
had not ever seen so many people before in that area?
- A . No, I had not.

You would agree with me that the area between the
turnstiles A to G and the perimeter gates is a self-
contained area, that is to say there are boundaries,
the turnstiles, the dividing wall to the other bank
of turnstiles, the river bed on the left, and the
perimeter gates? - A. Yes.
Just dealing with the experience of crushing and
reasons for crushing, if an area which is a self-
contained area becomes overcrowded, that is too many
people, that is when crushing can arise, is it not? -
A. Yes, congestion.

It does not arise necessarily out of misbehaviour on
the part of the people within the area. It can arise
simply because there are too many people for a
confined space? - A. Too many people trying to force
their way into a confined space.
                                                J. MORGAN



Let me go back. That may be right in some situations
but we have, do we not, at football grounds
capacities   laid down in advance for how many people
can get into a ground and where they should stand? -
A. Yes, I believe so.

We do not allow as many people who feel they can get
in, to get  in, do we? - A. No.

The reason for that is that it is well known on
experience, is it not, that overcrowding in itself,
you can get too many people in a space and just
simple crowd pressure can cause overcrowding and
injury? That is right, is it not, because that is
why we have capacities? - A. I would assume so, yes.

Of course, you can have a problem with misbehaviour
but too many people in a confined area, if it is too
many for the safe capacity, is a matter which can
cause overcrowding and crushing in itself, is it not?
- A. It is, yes.

Undoubtedly, when you looked through turnstiles A to
G and saw the 4,000 people stretched through away
from the turnstiles throughout this confined area of
the turnstile area, on any view, there were too many
people there for the safety of the people within that
area, were there not? - A. There were too many people
in a small space, yes.

You were not responsible, and I do not suggest for
one moment that you were, for the flow or controlling
the flow of the people into that confined space, were
you? That was not anything to do with your
responsibilities, was it, on the day in 1989? - A. It
would have been if I had been there.

But you were not there? - A. But I was not there, no.

So I do not ask you any questions about how it came
about that too many people got into this confined
space because you were not there and I accept that? -
A. That is right.

The opening of the gate, that is to say, and I am
sorry if I have got it wrong, you saw Gate C open,
did you not? - A. Yes.

Your recollection was that only 200 people went
through, is that right? - A. A rough estimate, yes.

Forgive me for this because sometimes I forget and I
should not forget so quickly evidence you have given,
                                                  J. MORGAN


we know that Gate C was opened once for a short
period at about 2.48? - A. Yes.

And shut again and then a second time at 2.52 when it
stayed open? - A. For five minutes.

For five minutes or so? - A. Yes.

When a lot of people went through during that five
minutes? - A. Yes.

You have seen the videos, have.you not? - A. Yes, I
have.

I am trying to put you back not through the videos
but what you remember on the day. On the day, do you
recall an opening of Gate C, a shutting, and then
another opening, and a lot more people going through?
- A. No.

On the day your only recollection is of the first 200
people or so going through? - A. Yes, and I was aware
it had been opened again because people came and
complained that they were not being allowed to enter
the ground by that gate. So I asked for the gates to
be opened again to allow other people inside but I
cannot recall whether I saw it or not.  I cannot
recall.  I cannot remember.

You did not see the manner in which the people went
through Gate C over the five minutes? - A. No, I did
not.

You have seen   the video though? - A. Yes.

You would agree with   me that on the video   over those
five minutes, people   did not over the whole five
minutes rush in in a   sort of riotous way over five
minutes, did they? -   A. No, they did not.

The video shows very clearly them walking in, does it
not? - A. Yes, walking quite calmly and steadily.

Over a period of five minutes? - A. Yes.

It was through that gate, that the great vast bulk of
people went through over that five minutes period,
was it not? - A. Yes.

You had the unfortunate experience of some 200 people
who rushed in   apparently on the first opening of Gate
C and it does   sound a situation which you   did not
enjoy and I accept that. Did you see where those 200
people went? - A. No, I did not.
                                                J. MORGAN



You yourself were only interested in calming them
down, were you not? - A. Yes and stopping them
rushing in.

They clearly were in a state where they were affected
obviously by what was happening outside, were they
not? - A. They must have been.

What was happening outside in your evidence was a
pretty awful experience for anybody who was in it? -
A. Yes.

Of course, once you get through a situation, through
a gate, and you are relieved from that situation your
initial panic could then disappear, could it not? -
A. Yes.

You do not know what happened to those 200 people
immediately after they rushed through because you did
not observe it? - A. I have no idea.

You do not know, for example, whether those 200
people once they got through took a deep breath,
stood around in the concourse, and then went on to
the terrace in some way. You just do not know, do
you? - A. I do not know, no.

Can I go forward, if I may, to when you received the
message for people to go on to the pitch because of a
pitch invasion? - A. Yes, sir.

You estimated that you would have got there round
about seven or eight minutes past three - that is on
to the pitch side? - A. Yes, based on photographs
which I have seen since.

It also makes sense because your recollection is of a
lot of activity as far as rescue goes on the pitch? -
A. Yes.

In terms of people trying to revive people, people on
the ground, on their backs and so forth? - A. Yes.

First aid. We know what had been going on when that
was not happening before that. So it follows you
were probably right in your view that there was
nobody playing on the pitch because the game had
stopped at six minutes past three, you see, and so it
would fit in with what your recollection is, of not
seeing players on the pitch, would it not? - A. I
cannot recall seeing any. There may well have been
some on the pitch.
                                                J. MORGAN


Of course, but I am giving you a little comfort that
your estimate is probably right that you did not see
any because they had gone off? - A. Right.

At eight minutes past three or so, after the game had
been finished and after there had already taken
place events to lead the number of people on the
pitch getting first aid to have first aid, at that
time you met Mr. Murray, did you not, Superintendent
Murray? - A. Yes.

Did you get the impression that; Superintendent Murray
knew himself what had happened? - A. The impression I
got was that Superintendent Murray was upset about
something.

Did he give you any orders apart from, "Do what you
can"? - A. No, he did not.

Did he give any directions, specific directions, as
to what actions ought to be taken to relieve any
given situation? - A. No, but I do not think that was
necessary because I do not need to be told what to do
in a situation like that.

So be it. What was the position of Superintendent
Murray on the day? - A. The position?

Yes, what function did he have on the day, do you
know? - A. He was the Superintendent in the Control
Box.

In the Police Control Box? - A. In the Police
Control.

You say - and it may be right, Sergeant - that you
did not need any directions. You were able to see
what was needed to be done as soon as you got there.
Is that what you are telling us? - A. Yes.

When you got there you saw, did you not, that there
was very little room to work around the fence area
and the gate area of the pen you went to, that is
right, is it not? - A. That is right, yes, because
other Officers were already there.

It was not simply that other Officers were already
there. They were dealing with a very cramped exit
point in that gate, were they not? - A. They were
spread along the whole length of that fence. They
were pulling people over the top of the fence and
through the exit gates on to the perimeter track.
                                                J. MORGAN


I do not know if you did tell us the pen that you
went to at this stage. Did you? - A. I went to the
fence that was surrounding Pen 3 or in front of Pen
3.

So you went and probably saw the gateway at Pen 3? -
A. Yes.

It is right, is it not, that it was so narrow indeed
that people were having difficulty getting out?
There were unfortunately deceased, tangled bodies
round the gateway and it really was a very difficult
situation at the gate, was it not? - A. To be quite
honest, I did not concentrate my attention on that
particular area.  I took so much in during a very
short time. I was looking at people climbing up into
the West Stand, for instance, and climbing over the
radial fences into other pens and the Officers
hauling people out over the top of the fence and I
just gained the impression that Officers were working
at the gate as well.

It was obvious, was it not - they were doing their
best and I am not criticising them at all - that
their efforts at that stage were not, inevitably,
going to be very effective as regards relieving the
pressure on the front because you told us, did you
not, that when you arrived at eight minutes past
three people were crushed against the fence, you
could see it, in a dreadful state? You saw that? -
A. yes, I did.

Clearly whatever was happening and had been happening
in the previous eight minutes after kick-off by the
Officers, doing their best perhaps, had not bee
effective to relieve the pressure on those people who
you could were squashed against the fence. That is
right, is it not? - A. It is difficult to quantify
how effective their efforts had been. Certainly they
were already rescuing people from that situation and
whether the crush was so much worse before they
started to extract people from the pen or not is
something I cannot comment about.

What you can tell us is that at eight minutes past...
- A. There was still a crush.

Not only was there still a crush but there were still
people who you could physically see were crushed
against that perimeter fence at the front? - A.
Certainly.

What was obvious to you, and I commend you for this,
and what needed to be done was to go round the back
                                                  J. MORGAN


and relieve pressure from the back. That became
obvious to you very quickly, did it not? - A. I
thought it might be a good idea, yes.

You formed that view very quickly on arrival, did you
not? - A. I did.

The impression I get is that you must have been the
first Officer to go round the back with other
Officers to seek to carry out that exercise of
relieving people from the back. I say that because
you tell us about other Officers already there just
standing looking over the heads of the crowd at the
end of the tunnel? - A. To be fair I think that
certain other Officers also thought they were the
first to go into the tunnel and whether they were or
not now, I cannot help you with. My impression was
that I was one of the first.




                       /Q. What we can deduce.
                                              J.   MORGAN


What we can deduce, can we not, Sergeant, fairly
easily is that the Police Officers who you saw
standing at the end of the tunnel as you went down it,
looking over the heads of the crowd, were not aware of
what was going on at the front? - A. That was my
impression.

Presumably if they had been aware, they would have
somehow done what you had done to go in and try and
relieve the situation, or done something as an
Officer? - A. There might already have been Officers
inside, I don't know.

But you did form the view, did you not, that they did
not seem to know what was going on because you told us
that evidence? - A. Rightly or wrongly, yes.

Rightly or wrongly, and rightly or wrongly what was it
about them which gave you that impression that they
did not know what was going on, rightly or wrongly? -
A. Because they were just standing looking over the
heads of the crowd in front.

Therefore, it would appear a reasonable inference to
say that your actions of taking men onto the terrace
after 8 minutes past 3 was, from the external
evidence, the first effort to that extent, is it not,
otherwise it is hard to explain these Officers
standing at the back? - A. I can't be specific because
there may well have been Officers in Pen 4, for
instance, or in Pens 1 and 2, or even in another part
of Pen 3.

So be it. - A. I wasn't aware of them.

You tell us that you identified yourself on the video
within Pen 3, or was it outside Pen 3, I am sorry? -
A. Within Pen 3.

What time was it on the video at that stage? - A. I
identify myself when I was on the pitch from
photographs.

You do not know the time within the pen? - A. I have
no idea, no.

     THE CORONER: Can I interrupt you, Mr. King.    I
think we found three photographs which identify him,
two outside and one inside, and I will put those up
towards the end.

     MR. KING: So be it. I can leave that at that
stage. I was asked specifically to raise that because
I know it is of interest and concern.
                                               J.   MORGAN


     THE CORONER: It is an interesting point, but I
think we will have the times on the photographs.

     MR. KING:    I am obliged, yes.
I just want to ask you one ortwo matters about the
tickets which you told us at the beginning of your
evidence. From your investigations each and every
ticket which was in the possession of the person who
was arrested who had been selling them was a genuine
ticket? - A. Yes.

So we can deduce from that that anybody who went into
the ground with one of those tickets was within the
capacity numbers expected at the ground? - A. Yes.

It is an obvious point, but they would not have fallen
within the category of someone without a ticket,
obviously if they had one of those tickets? - A. No.

I have been asked to raise this, although it does not
go directly to the issues for this Jury but I will
raise it since you have mentioned it. Do     youknow
whether any investigations were made of the source of
the tickets, as to the names and addresses of the
people - I do not want the answer as to who they were
- who had been sold the tickets? - A. No. I
understand that tickets are provided, or the punter is
able to buy tickets from the ticket office provided he
surrenders a voucher.

But were you aware that certainly with the Liverpool
Football Club, anybody who purchases a ticket through
the Club has to give their name and address which is
recorded so it can be traced exactly who has bought
the ticket originally? Did you know that? - A. I did
not know that, no.

As far as ticketless fans were concerned, you told us
that your initial assessment was that it was not very
dramatic the numbers of people without tickets, that
is what you told us today? - A. That is right.

I have got it front of me, and I want to show it to
you, page 125 of the transcript of your evidence at
the Taylor Inquiry.  I wonder if that could be shown
to you. - A. Does this refer to the number of people
who were on the bridge after?

Not at all.

     THE CORONER: Which page do you want?

     MR. KING:   Page 125F, sir.   It is only two
questions.
                                                   J . MORGAN


     THE CORONER: Does it begin, "Over the day
generally ...."?

     MR. KING:   Yes sir.

     THE CORONER: Just read it to yourself. (Handed to
the witness).

     MR. KING: Go to F on page 125 and you see a
question beginning, "Over the day generally ...."? -
A. Yes.

Could you just read to yourself that question, your
answer and then the next question which was put to you
by Lord Justice Taylor? - A. Yes.

Have you read that now? - A. Yes, I have.

Do you agree that that is the evidence you gave to the
questions there stated at the Taylor Inquiry? - A.
Certainly.

Do you stand by them? - A. I do.

So if I ask you the question, you could perhaps give
the answer as recorded. The first question was, "Over
the day generally did you form any assessment as to
whether there were more or less people there than
usual without tickets?" What was the answer you gave?
- A. "It didn't strike me as being dramatic, no."

Lord Justice Taylor asked you,"The numbers without
tickets did not strike you as being dramatic you say?"
and your answer was? - A. "No, no, my Lord."

     MR. KING:   Thank you   very much.     Those are my
questions.

         Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

Sergeant, you have been asked a lot       of hypothetical
questions by Mr. King, who has just       asked you
questions here. A lot of them were        based on anice
little argument about the turnstile       arrangements. - A.
Yes.

I am sure you understood the purpose of that was to
get that your experience as a Police Officer at that
end of the ground was not very valuable to this
particular Jury. - A. Yes.

I want to explore your experience. What I want to
deal with is your factual experience, what you have
                                             J.   MORGAN


experienced, because that is where the Jury can derive
a lot of benefit. - A. Yes.

I think it is fair to say, and correct me if I am
wrong on this, prior to this disaster if you had been
asked the question, "Are you proud of the system that
has been developed to police football matches at
Hillsborough?" what would your answer have been? - A.
I would have said that the system of policing football
matches at Hillsborough was a very good system, one
that had been developed over countless years and one
which was very efficient.

In developing that system it draws on the experiences
of the Officers that police that ground, and any other
football ground, on a regular basis? - A. Yes, week
after week.

Am I right in saying that you have experience of
Officers from other Forces, including Officers from
the continent, coming to actually see that policing in
operation at Hillsborough? - A. That is right, yes.

So it was a model example of policing as far as you
were concerned? - A. Yes.

The experience that you have as an Officer at that end
of the ground - forget the turnstile arrangements at
the moment on this day - you have been there when all
those turnstiles have been open, is that right? - A.
Yes.

You will have been there when there are large numbers
of people attending at that ground? - A. Yes.

That is both League matches and semi-finals? - A. Yes.

You answered a question from my learned friend Mr.
Payne, when you said in general the crowds you have
experienced there, even at large matches, are co­
operative with the Police? - A. Generally they are,
yes.

There has been a lot of evidence given about the need
for co-operation between crowds and Police Officers
who are trying to marshall them and get them to do
things, and that is fair, is it not? - A. Yes, that is
fair.

But your experience is that at that end of the ground
the people have always been efficiently marshalled and
got into the ground. There has not been the crushing
that we saw on 15th April 1989? - A. That is right.
                                                J.   MORGAN


The way that was achieved was, with the reasonable co­
operation of the crowd, people were formed into
queues, and marshalled and stood in orderly fashion
waiting to get into the ground, is that right? - A. I
have seen people queueing to enter the ground in an
orderly manner without any crushing, without any
pushing, and I have marshalled the queues that have
been formed outside.

And that is both at League matches --- A. That is at
large League matches, at the semi-final in 1987.

So that is when we have got, as we know, a capacity
crowd in 1987, that was what happened? - A. Yes.

So the effect of your evidence to this Jury is as a
matter of fact you have seen large crowds behaving
properly, being orderly and being properly marshalled
by Police Officers at that end of the ground? - A.
Yes.

When you give your evidence that what you saw on that
day outside those turnstiles was unique, is that the
comparison you are drawing? - A. Yes, it is.

There was another series of hypothetical questions put
by my learned friend Mr. King, and that related to the
safe numbers of people you can get into a confined
area. - A. Yes.

You eventually agreed with him, as must be right, that
if you have too many people in a confined area that is
itself a matter which can, or could, cause
overcrowding, crowd pressure? - A. I did agree with
that, yes.

That is a hypothetical proposition? - A. Yes.

Your answer initially, however, was there were too
many people forcing forward. Now is that what you saw
on 15th April when you climbed up on that turnstile
gate? Did you see people at the back forcing forward?
- A. Yes, surges.

So that is a matter of fact for the Jury, not a
hypothetical proposition.   That is what you saw and
witnessed? - A. Yes, it is.

I will not go into the efforts of the Police Officers
to stop that because we have heard as a matter of fact
from them the efforts that they were trying on that
day to stop people behaving in that way.   I would like
to turn briefly to the question of the tickets and the
confusion that was outside the ground.   I wonder
                                                   J . MORGAN


whether you could look in the bundle at C287, I
believe it is. It should be a photocopy of a ticket
like this. - A. Yes sir.

I will just wait for Sergeant Griffiths to put it up
for the benefit of the Jury. This is a ticket for the
West Stand which is the turnstiles outside which you
were positioned with your serial? - A. Yes. Some of
the red shading is badly faded on this one, but yes.

I think I can help you, Sergeant.  That is the actual
ticket that was copied.  I just want to go through the
information that was available on those tickets, and
we can see that on both the stub and on the main body
of the ticket it says fairly clearly, "West Stand"? -
A. Yes, it does.

For present purposes, on the stub of the ticket, which
is where you would expect it, there is the word
"Entrance"? - A. Yes.

And that has the   letter "C" on it? - A.   Yes.

So regardless of colour for the moment,the person who
buys this ticket would know that he is goingto the
West Stand and he is going in through entrance C? - A.
Yes.

We also know that on the day there was a colour coding
system operated? - A. That is right.

You have told us about that. Am I right in thinking
that in 1989 this was the first time in your
experience it had been operated, the colour coding? -
A. That was the first time I had seen it. Whether it
had in previous matches or not, I am not able to say.

I think that is correct, but I am not certain myself
so I will not take that much further. Can you now
look at a photograph C259, please, Sergeant? This is
actually a photograph of the turnstiles outside A to
G? - A. Yes.

I just want your help with something.  The turnstile
doorway is actually quite tall, is it not? - A. Yes,
it is.

You are a tall man and you would not have to bend or
stoop to get in, there would be quite a clearing over
your head? - A. Yes.

We see above that doorway there is the letter "B"? -
A. Correct.
                                              J.   MORGAN


We see by the side, unfortunately out of focus on this
camera, the purple square? - A. It is the purple
square with "Leppings Lane Standing" on it.

Which would have related to the colour of the terrace
ticket? - A. Yes.

We see over in the corner, just above the metal wall,
"Visitors West Stand Seats"? - A. And the letter "C".

Yes, so that is clearly above the top of the turnstile
door? - A. It is.

If you go to C256, this is a general view of the
turnstiles. Again we have some difficulties with the
camera lens used, but we can see that across the range
- we know it is an odd sequence - there are the
letters and wording above all the turnstiles. Letter
"A" is above the far left-hand series of turnstiles.
That has "North Stand Seats" written above it? - A.
Yes.

Then it goes "C" and "B" over the right, we know? - A.
That is right.




                          /Q.   It is right
                                                J.   MORGAN


It is right to say there is an incline down from the road
slightly into that turnstile area?   The turnstile area
is slightly lower than the road itself? - A. Yes, it is.

What is correct is that anyone looking at those
turnstiles would be able to see over the heads of people,
over the top of the turnstile gates, those signs with the
lettering "A - North Stand seats," C - West Stand
seats," B - Leppings Lane terracing"? - A. Yes.

You have told us there was a lot of confusion on the day,
people coming up and asking you about their tickets.   I
believe it is right to say at one stage your lost your
patience with some people and started pointing them at
the coloured signs at the side of the turnstiles? - A.
That is right.

I take it from that that those coloured signs at that
stage were obvious to you?   You could see them otherwise
you wouldn't have pointed to them? - A. They were obvious
to me, yes.

Obviously later on they could have got lost in the crowd,
but at the time we are dealing with you could see them? -
A. Yes.

So is the impression to be left with the jury this, that
those coloured signs relating to the colour of the ticket
could be seen by you?   The signs above the doorway could
be seen by you? - A. Yes, they could.

That gave all the information one would reasonably expect
someone to need to get into the ground, but
notwithstanding that people were still coming up? - A.
Yes, as a matter of course, they asked.

     MR. KING:   Sir, before Mrs. McBrien rises, there
was a matter which I wanted to raise about the matter
which has just been asked which my learned friend has
investigated but which I should have investigated myself
and my learned friend might want to come back on it.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

I meant to investigate with you the confusion which was
apparent to you over the tickets.   My learned friend
Mr. Catchpole has already investigated that with you and
he may want to ask you another question or so arising out
of what I ask.   It was something again which you told
the Taylor Inquiry which I wanted to investigate with
you.   It is simply page 124 of your transcript.   The
                                                   J.   MORGAN


question begins at letter H on page 123 and then goes
from A to B on page 124.

     MR. KING:    Sir, he would have to see page 123 to
make sense of it:

First of all, Sergeant, you have read that which you told
the Taylor Inquiry, according to this transcript.   Do
you accept that is what was asked and what you said in
response at the Taylor Inquiry? - A. I do.

You stand by what you told him? - A. I do, certainly.

I just want to investigate it slightly.   The first
question on page 123, letter G:

     "Q. Were you conscious during the build-up that
     there were people coming to the turnstiles with
     tickets for the Kop end?"

Your answer:

     "A. Yes, I was.  It was very confused.   Constantly
     throughout the afternoon people were approaching me
     with brown coloured tickets for the North Stand,
     purple coloured tickets for the terraces, orange
     coloured tickets I believe which were for the Kop
     and I was constantly sending people to the correct
     entry point."

Then you were asked by Lord Justice Taylor:

     "Before we go on, what was your reading of that?
     That they were just being stupid, too much to drink
     or that the ticket denominations were not as clear
     as they should have been, or what?"

Could you read the answer you gave? - A. I said:

     "I don't think the ticket denominations were as
     clear as they should have been, the colouring on the
     tickets and also the signs on the actual turnstiles.
     They were just squares of colour, as I recall.
     Certainly on my turnstiles they were red squares at
     the sides of the doors, which were totally
     inadequate."

What caused you to reach the conclusion that the red
squares at the side of the doors on your turnstiles were
totally inadequate? - A. Because people didn't seem to
see them.They approached me    and asked me where they
were to go to enter the ground and held their ticket up.
                                                  J.   MORGAN


Your answer to Lord Justice Taylor wasn't that they were
just being stupid, because that was an option which was
given to you as a potential answer.   Your answer was
that you regarded the squares of colour as totally
inadequate? - A. Yes.

You stand by that? - A. I do.

       Further Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

The answer you gave was, "They were just squares of
colour, as I recall." - A. Yes.

We know there were actually two signs, there were the
squares of colour which we have discussed? - A. Yes.

And there was also the sign above the door? - A. Yes.

Which you weren't dealing with in that answer? - A. No.

Would you mind looking at a further answer you gave to
the Taylor Report?   Would you look at page 139 please,
between E and G?     It is a question starting, "Again,I
don't want to be rude to anybody..." - A. Yes, sir.

Do you stand by that answer? - A. Yes, I do.

It says:

     "Again, I don't want to be rude to anybody but how
     on earth does confusion arise if somebody is in a
     reasonable state of sobriety and a recognised
     football supporter? Where is the confusion in
     following the clear instruction, entrance C, as
     distinct from gangway W, seat 66, or row 20?    How
     could we make it clear?   Please help us?"

Your answer, Sergeant, was:

     "I don't honestly know because I think people as a
     matter of course, having read that information on
     their ticket, wish to confirm it."

A. That's true.

Is it your experience of football matches that supporters
very often come up to Police Officers and wish to confirm
what they have presumably read on their ticket if they
have properly looked at it? - A. Yes.
                                                J.   MORGAN


           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Sergeant, you said you returned to Leppings Lane at 2.40.
Did you see any traffic moving along Leppings Lane at
that time? - A. I can't recall any traffic moving on the
road at all.   I certainly didn't see the Land Rover.
My attention was drawn specifically to the state of the
crowd in front of the turnstile walls.

Amid all your experience of policing football matches,
have you ever seen Leppings Lane closed to traffic before
a match starts or is it just at the end of a game that
that happens? - A. Just at the end of the game, I think,
normally.

Whether there was confusion or not about the tickets, did
you draw this problem to the attention of Ground Control?
Did you think it was a problem that needed addressing to
somebody else? - A. I think at that stage it was too late
to draw anyone's attention to the problem and I was quite
content that I should perform the task which I was
required to perform on the afternoon of actually
directing people, ushering people to different entry
points.

What time was it that you noticed this confusion about
the tickets? - A. As a matter of course at other games
very often the Police Officers are approached and asked
for directions.   It always occurs, but it seemed to be
more prevalent on this particular one.

Was it because there was a greater crowd in that area so
more people were asking you?    More people had been
allowed in through the perimeter gate hadn't they? - A. I
think it was a valid attempt by the club to ensure that
spectators went to the correct part of the ground, to the
correct turnstiles, by having these squares of colour.
I think it was a good idea, but the orders of the gates -
A, C, B - didn't really help, although... People as a
matter of course tend to approach Policemen and ask them,
even though they might have read the information on the
ticket and decided which part of the ground they ought to
be at.   They will ask anyway just to confirm it so they
know they are right.

That is a natural thing for people to do, to seek
assistance from Police Officers? - A. Of course it is.

I know my son very often did that. - A. Yes.

Would you say it was the crowd, the numbers there, that
was causing the problem for people to get to the right
turnstile, more than the colour coding?    It was just the
sheer numbers that was not helping them? - A. There was a
                                                   J.   MORGAN


problem insofar as people were approaching the wrong
turnstiles and were being directed to other turnstiles
where they should have sought entry with the correct
ticket.   There was a constant tooing and froing of
people which to a great extent caused problems as well.

Their movement wouldn't be very easy through a large
crowd?   It would have been jnuch easier if there were
smaller numbers there? - A. Of course.

Were all the gates open when you were there, the
perimeter gates? - A. Yes, they were.

So obviously very large crowds were being let into the
area? - A. Until ten past two when I left the area, the
build-up wasn't really - I have described it as being a
moderate build-up.   There wasn't a crush.   There wasn't
a massive influx of people approaching the ground at that
time as far as I can remember.

You said you definitely directed fans with Kop tickets to
the Notts. Forest end.   What route did they take?   Did
you notice the exact route they took to get there? - A.
No, but they wouldn't be able to go down the side of the
river because there was a barrier.   There was a portable
barrier set up near concertina gate C, manned by
Policemen, who were preventing that, so they would have
to go either up Catch Bar Lane and down Catch Bar Lane to
Penistone Road North and approach that end of the ground
by that route.   Or they could have gone round down
Leppings Lane to the island and back along Penistone Road
by that route.

So you actually saw them going back? - A. I wasn't aware
of which direction particular groups went, no.

We have heard evidence here that some people did make
their way from the Nottingham Forest end to Leppings
Lane.   Was that possible do you think?   Other people
did do it, they have said. - A. Are you referring to
Liverpool supporters?

Yes, the ones who had the Kop tickets.   Is it possible
they may have made their way to the correct end, the part
that was designated at the Spion Kop? - A. I was
approached by some Liverpool supporters who had Liverpool
accents who were in possession of orange tickets and I
told them to go to the turnstiles giving access to the
Kop and they were directed there by me.

Yes. I was just wondering what route they took but you
can t be sure of that? - A. I can't be sure of that.
                                                 J.   MORGAN


Did you go to the gym at all, did you say? - A. Yes, I
did.

What time was that? - A. About ten past two.

You didn't go there after kick-off, did you?   Or did
you? - A. Eventually, after the rescue had been completed
from the terrace.   I went back to the gym eventually.

You weren't there soon after three? - A. No.

It says in the Operational Order that normally, had
things gone as planned, is that where you would have been
after kick-off? - A. After kick-off if things had gone
according to plan I would have released numbers of my
Officers for refreshments during the match.

You mentioned the 200 people you saw going in when Gate C
first opened and you said they rushed in? - A. Yes.

You have also said they were aggressive, that is what I
noted? - A. Yes.

I have taken a lot of interest in that particular part
because that was when my son went into the ground at
2.48.   I was most concerned about this.   I was
wondering if I could draw to your attention the
transcript of Superintendent Roger Marshall's evidence at
the Taylor Inquiry, page 107.   Well, we could go back to
page 106, really.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Is it possible, sir, to use this at
this stage?

     THE CORONER:   I don't think it is going to help you
with what you are trying to establish.   Are you trying
to get him to say that the gate was opened by permission?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   No.   I am trying to say that the
people who went in at that time, before the gates was
opened, were showing the Officers nearby that they had
tickets.   That is one thing.   There was also not a
large crowd outside Gate C at that time.   I have made
extensive inquiries about this.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I know how you feel
about this but it doesn't alter...   What you can say to
this Officer is...   You are challenging his description
of "aggressive"?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes
                                                    J.   MORGAN


     THE CORONER:   So you can ask him on what basis he
says they were aggressive, but then you must be prepared
to accept his answer on that as well.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Another point on that, sir.   It
seems as though they just rushed in, but they were
actually allowed in through the gate.   They were
encouraged to go through the gate.

     THE WITNESS:    I don't dispute that at all.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   You don’t? - A. No.

That is what it says in the transcript, the Officers
there... - A. Could I point out that the situation
outside was such that had that gate not been opened I had
formed the intention to open it myself because it was an
urgent situation outside.   It needed to be done.    It
needed to be opened, that concertina gate.

If I may say this, my son moved away from the crushing at
the turnstile area at 2.45 to get away to a safe place...

      THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I am sorry.   You can
ask the Officer questions.    You cannot tell this Officer
what your son did.    First of all, you don't know because
you weren't there and secondly, it is a statement of
fact.    I will ask him this question and then you must
accept his answer which you may or may not like:

Officer, you saw the gate open, is that right? -A. Yes.

You saw what you estimated was about 200 people come in?
- A. Yes.

What impression did you form as to their behaviour or
character as they came through? - A. They were in a state
of great haste.   They were showing some aggression.
They were anxious that they should get in.

When you say they were showing some aggression, tell me
exactly what they were showing?   We might as well grasp
this nettle.   What were they showing? - A. Well, I tried
to reason with them.   I stood in their path and tried to
slow them down and I was calling for calm.   I was trying
to stop them rushing into the ground.   There was an
obvious risk that they could trample people, a number of
their own group could be trampled and I was trying to
prevent that.   I looked upon that as aggressive
behaviour. That was my impression.
                                                             53

                                                     J.   MORGAN


Q. From what you saw of that opening were you able to form
   any conclusion - not from what you have seen on the
   video, not from what you have heard fromMrs. McBrien
   or anybody else - were you at that timeable to form
   any conclusion as to how the gate came to be opened at
   that stage? -   A. I believe that  a steward opened it.

Q. You believe it was    a steward? -      A. Yes.

Q. If I put to you what Mrs. McBrien is putting to you, if
   you were told   that in fact this   opening was    in orderto
   eject a fan -   this is not what Mrs. McBrien put - but
   this opening was in order to eject a fan, have you any
   evidence to enable you to say no, that cannot be right?
   - A. No, I would accept that.

Q. You would accept it. If I also put it to you that
   coincidentally with that Officers were intending, or
   were anticipating that the gate was opening at their
   request, have you any evidence to dispute that? - A.
   None at all.

Q. None at all. All you remember is that the gate opened,
   your impression was it was the steward who did it, and
   a number of people came in? - A. Yes.

Q. Who you tried to slow down? - A. Yes.

Q. You had to move to one side. - A. I was pushed to one
   side, sir.

Q. You were pushed to one side, I beg your pardon, and
   some people fell over? - A. Yes.

Q. You were surprised at the end of the day .... - A. That
   someone was not injured.

Q. That somebody   was not injured. - A. That is right.
   They were not   being violent; there were not striking
   out at people   in frontj they were just rushing in, in
   an aggressive   manner.

        MR. KING:   To complete the picture of those
   points for Mrs. McBrien s benefit, could you ask the
   Officer whether he would or would not dispute that
   Officers were also encouraging people to go through at
   the same time?

       THE CORONER:     Yes.

Q. If it were put to you, as Mr. King has reminded me,
   that Officers outside might well have been encouraging
   people to enter at that point in time, have you any
                                                J.   MORGAN


evidence or any reason to assume that might well not
have been the case? - A. None at all, sir.

You would be prepared to accept that if that was the
evidence? - A. I would, sir, yes.

     THE CORONER:    We have tried to cover it all, Mrs.
McBrien.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Thank you.

     THE CORONER:    I know it is important to you, but


     MRS. McBRIEN:   It is very important actually
because they even went to the toilets ....

     THE CORONER:    No, no ___

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Before going into the pen, they
didn't rush ....

     THE CORONER:    Move to your next question.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Could I just ask one more on that,
please?

     THE CORONER:    Yes, so long as you can put it as a
question.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Is it possible, do you think that
it is possible that they may have been confused,
because some Officers were saying, "Go in", and some
had obviously closed the gate soon after they came in,
after a few seconds. Wouldn't that made people wonder,
should they be going in or should they be staying out?
It would certainly make me feel that way. - A. Possibly
so, yes, possibly so. There was an emergency situation
outside.

Not at gate C. - A. There was an emergency situation
outside turnstiles A-G, which is just at the side of
gate C, and that situation needed some relief, so my
perception was at that early stage that the gate had
been opened to allow relief of that situation.

I think I can accept what you are saying if I look at
it this way, that John probably did hurry away ....

     THE CORONER:    No, Mrs. McBrien.   I am very sorry.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Because he thought it was wrong to
go in ....
                                                                   55

                                                           J.   MORGAN


              THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, no. He has answered
         the question. He cannot tell you what John did or did
         not do.  I know that is what you want him to say and he
         might, out of the kindness of his heart, say, "Well I
         am quite sure that John was one of the ones who came in
B        because the Police Officer took him by the hand and led
         him in".  It would be a totally valueless reply. He
         does not know John. Don't ask the question. You are
         going to get a reply which you don't like.

                 MRS. McBRIEN:    Could I just say that John, in his


                 THE CORONER:    No you can't say it, Mrs. McBrien.

              MRS. McBRIEN:       It is about the ticket actually,
         this one.

              THE CORONER:       All right, ask a question about the
         ticket.

    Q«        MRS. McBRIEN:   When John was found he had in his
n        possession just half a ticket for the match. Now we do
         know that he went in through that gate. - A. Yes.

    Q. I am quite positive in my own mind, knowing John as I
       knew him, that he would have torn the other half
       because he knew it was wrong to go in through that
       gate. - A. Yes, I can accept that.

    Q. That is why it will follow, what you are saying .... -
       A. There were many people entering through that gate
       who were holding their tickets in the air, sort of
       saying to the Police, "I've got a ticket, you should
       allow me in anyway".

    Q. Yes, but they would definitely have expected somebody
       to take that other portion of their ticket? - A. Yes.

    Q. I know John  would not have liked to be in a ground if
       someone had not taken his ticket. - A. Yes, I accept
       that.  I know what you are saying.

               THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, I am sorry, this
         Officer has    gone well beyond -- unless you can move on
         to your next question I am going to ask you to sit
         down.

                 MRS. McBRIEN:   All right, I will leave it at
         that.

    Q. Did you think it was a correct thing for you to pull
       people away from the turnstile area and push them
                                                 J.   MORGAN


through that gate a little later, at 2.52?     Did you
think that was the right thing to do.

        THE CORONER:    He didn't say that.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   You did move people from the
turnstiles though, didn't you? - A. Yes, I did, because
there was a crush situation, and I did remove people
from that situation.

You did put them through gate C, didn't you? - A. I
could not see any other alternative.

     THE CORONER:   He did not push them through gate
C, that is what I am objecting to. He guided, directed
them to gate C.

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, I am not sure how I wrote it
down.

I am sorry about that. - A. That is all right.

But I asked you, did you think it was the correct thing
to do? - A. Yes, I did, certainly.

As you are very experienced at policing football
matches, how do people normally go into a match? Do
they usually go through a big gate like that? - A. No,
they usually go through the turnstiles in a normal way,
in a normal manner.

So if people would have been allowed more time perhaps
the correct method could have been used, would you say?
- A. Yes, I would say that.

You mentioned gate B opening, didn't you? - A. Yes, I
did.

What time was that please? - A. As regards timescale, I
can't be specific but my impression was that gate B
opened after the first opening of gate C when I came
outside.  It opened after that and I believe that it
opened before gate C was opened a second time. That is
my impression.

So that would be a very important event, wouldn't it?
One that would be noted, the opening of gate B, because
it would relieve pressure there, wouldn't it,
definitely? - A. Dramatically, yes.

So it was I suppose, in one way, a sensible thing.
Now, could you look at C277, please? It is a list of
the main events. Can you see the opening of gate B on
there at all? - A. No, I can't. Gate B?
                                                  J.   MORGAN


Q. Yes, gate B. - A. No, I can’t.

Q. We do know that gate C opened and we do know that gate
   A opened for a very short time, but I have not found
   any evidence of gate B opening.

       MR. CATCHPOLE:     Sir, with respect to Mrs.
  McBrien, we have hadevidence from the gatemen on gate
  B•

       THE CORONER:   We have heard from dozens - not
  dozens, but at least half a dozen witnesses that gate B
  opened. We heard from two yesterday, one today, that
  is three. What you have not found, and that is a
  totally different matter, you have not found a time for
  it, and there is a very good reason for that. The
  reason is that there is no video evidence of the timing
  of that opening of   that gate. This is one of the
  problems with gateB, we don't   know what time it
  opened.  If we knew it we would have told you.

        MRS. McBRIEN:    So you have no proof of that?
        THE CORONER:    Oh, no __

       MRS. McBRIEN:   Will you be calling the Chief
  Steward who was on the gates.

       THE CORONER:   No. We have already had the
  appropriate stewards; we are calling no more.

       MR. CATCHPOLE:   I believe we have already had
  him. He collected something like six dozen pairs of
  shoes - six pairs of shoes.

       THE CORONER:   That is right. We have had Mr.
  Stewart, we have had I don't know how many stewards.

  nMnflMRS: M c BRIEN: Sir, I was referring to Mr. Jack
  Stone, who actually gave me that information.

                       N° ’ w® are not calling him and he
  hhf         S    Mrs. McBrien, because you don't know
  the time when something happens does not mean to say it
  did not happen.   I understand there has been a big
  ?S£oOSi°?    Lo?don» that mfly well be so; I have no
         ?     6 lfc haPPene<*; it does not alter its
  truthfulness or the fact that it happened. This

  thai'SlIS'yS H X L°rtkg^Ul!^°anIh?^n^u
 E aT afso*                  e lse “           - - S     o -
                                               J.   MORGAN


     We will have lunch now because my temper is
fraying and I think we need a break.  Sergeant Morgan,
I am afraid you have to come back after lunch. Mrs.
McBrien, you will be allowed to continue, of course,
but you must concentrate on the questions which are
proper and which you can ask this witness, and if you
cannot do it then I am going to stop you.  I want to
give you as much liberty as I can but we must make some
progress.

     MR. KING:    Could you tell us the next witness,
please?

     THE CORONER:   We have got to have Mr. Doyle, come
what may. We have released three of our witnesses but
I think it is going to be the linesman, Mr. Brandwood.

     MR. MANNING:   Sir, a total aside, but I am
conscious looking outside that the snow is coming down
harder.

     THE CORONER:   That is why we have sent some of
the witnesses home. Obviously this is quite an
important witness and I want everybody to have the
correct amount of time, but on the other hand we cannot
allow, as Mr. Isaacs reminded me yesterday, completely
free play. We have got to make some progress. We will
have lunch.

                 (Luncheon Adjournment)
                                                  J. MORGAN

     THE CORONER:    I have looked out: of the window
and somebody has also told me what the weather
forecast is. We are going to carry on today because
we have got people here.   I think it may be sensible
if we take tomorrow offand take Monday off as well
because hopefully the weather will then have
improved.  It will also give us a little bit of a
breather because we have been going for six weeks
now. Do you approve of that? No objection I take it
from those in front of me? On Tuesday we will start
at 10.30.  I will say that now and then we know where
we are. We are trying to disentangle all the
witnesses but they probably would not be able to make
it here tomorrow. That is the major consideration.
We have got people here today and if we possibly can
we want to deal with those.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Sergeant, you got a   message
saying that fans were invading the pitch   and so
naturally when you went to that area you   were
reacting to that sort of situation? - A.   Yes, ma'm.

Did you consider the possibility that it could be
something else at all? - A. Not at all, no.

You said that you went down the tunnel afteryou had
seen serious crushing in the pens. When you went
down the tunnel you did not see anyone leaving who
was in distress. In fact, I have got here that no
one was leaving, no one was in distress because no
one was aware of what was happening, when you went
down that tunnel? - A. That is right.

You got into the pen I believe at 3.15 because you
said the ambulance had just arrived.

     THE CORONER:   No, no, you have misunderstood
him.  I asked whether he was still in the pen when
the ambulance was there. That is not the same thing
as saying he got in at that time.  I could have asked
him, "Were you still in the pen at quarter to four?"
and he might have said yes for all I know but that
does not mean to say that that was the time he got
there. There is a difference between "What time did
you get there?" and "What time were you still
there?".

     THE WITNESS:   I was still working in the pen
when the ambulance arrived behind the goal.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   So have you any idea what time
you did go down the tunnel? - A. Not really, no.
                                                J. MORGAN

No idea at all? - A. I was certainly on the track. I
have said it was about seven or eight minutes past
three from the photographs which I have seen but the
exact time I entered the tunnel I cannot be accurate
about.

You cannot give an approximate time of how long it
would take you to get from that position around? - A.
I would think a couple of minutes. I would probably
have entered the tunnel round about eleven minutes
past perhaps.

At that time you said that you saw no one and no one
was leaving, no one was in distress, and no one was
aware of anything at all? - A. That is right.

The match had stopped at six minutes past, had it
not? - A. Yes.

This was five minutes later? - A. I believe it had,
yes.

Were people not wondering why the match had stopped?
Wouldn't people question that?

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, he has told you
what he has seen and heard. He cannot tell you what
the people were wondering. How on earth can he say
that? He said, and Mr. King very rightly asked him,
what gave him the idea that these Officers, in whom
you were interested, did not know what was going and
he said because they appeared to be looking and
weren't doing anything so far as you could see but he
cannot tell you what was in their mind. For all we
know they knew what was going on but the impression
he got was that they did not know. He cannot tell
you what people were thinking.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   When you were on the pitch you
did see people crushed, didn't you? - A. Certainly,
yes.

Who were blue? - A. Yes.

So you were aware of it from that side? - A. Yes,
they were.

But when you went to the back there was nobody coming
out? - A. No.

Nobody was distressed? - A. I did not see anybody.
                                                 J. MORGAN

You told us you were able to hand bodies through a
gap in the perimeter fence from the tangled mass? -
A. Yes.

Would you agree that the tangled mass was near Gate
3? - A. The group of people I was dealing with were
to the left of Gate 3. If you are standing on the
terracing looking towards the goal at the Leppings
Lane end, that group of people, the location I was
working, were to the left of Gate 3.

So that was Pen 3? - A. Yes.

That is where the most people died, didn't they? - A.
Yes.

But the gap you were referring to was where the fence
had been torn down, was it? - A. Torn down, yes.
That was, I believe, in the section of fence nearest
the radial fence, you know the radial fence between
Pens 3 and 4.

In Pen 3? - A. Between Pens 3 and 4 there is a radial
fence that goes back to the mouth of the tunnel. The
fence was torn down directly adjacent to that radial
fence in Pen 3.

In Pen 3? - A. Yes.

  MRS. McBRIEN:    Sir, is there any photograph evidence
of that?

     THE CORONER:   No. In fact, I was going to stop
you because we know that fencing was torn down at
about 18 or 19 minutes past and I do not think we
need explore it. I do not think it is going to help
us in any meaningful way.  I have allowed him to
answer your questions because he tells you what was
happening but we do not need a photograph of that.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    I do not think you are going to
allow the next one.

  THE CORONER:    Pardon?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I do not think this will be
allowed because I think it is an opinion probably.

     THE CORONER:   Do not ask it then if you know it
is not going to be allowed.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I was wondering if this Officer
being such an experienced Officer at football grounds
that he would be able to give his feelings on it.
                                                   J. MORGAN



     THE CORONER:      Doing what?

     MR. KING:      Give his feelings.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   So that he could give his expert
advice or tell us something about this.  It is to do
with the ticket tout actually.

     THE CORONER: I do not    think it is necessary,
no.   I wanted him to tell us about the ticket touts
but I do not think we need any feelings on the
subject.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   No, I did not mean that exactly.
I meant his opinions about it really.  I know you do
not like people to give opinions...

     THE CORONER:     No, you are quite right.

     MRS. McBRIEN:      But I thought this was quite
useful.

     THE CORONER:    Ask a question and I will then
shut you up if I think itis wrong or I will allow it
if I think it is right.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Would you say it was much more
serious to allow ticketless fans into a ground
through a concertina gate than to sell valid tickets
to fans outside the ground?

     THE CORONER:   Than to do what? I did not hear
the second part of the question, I am sorry.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Than to sell valid tickets to
fans outside the ground. The ticket tout was
arrested for doing that.

     THE CORONER:  No, Mrs. McBrien, it is a non
seauitur. It is not a proper question. Try another
one.

     MRS. McBRIEN:      That is all I wanted to ask,
thank you.

What I will ask because I think it is what Mrs.
McBrien is driving at; what Mrs. McBrien is anxious
to know I think, was the risk of opening the gates
justified in the light of the situation that you
perceived outside the gates? - A. Certainly it was,
yes.
                                                J. MORGAN


Based on your experience as an Officer and no more
and no less? - A. Based on common sense really.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Just one more question relating
to that.  If you were placed in a similar position
again, would you want the same thing to happen?
Would you expect the gates, the exit gates, to be
opened again to allow fans in? - A. If necessary,
yes.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am just slightly concerned
about the premise of the question that it is accepted
on entering Gate C ticketless fans went through. The
evidence of this Officer, such as it is, is that he
saw people going through waving their tickets.

     THE CORONER:   Indeed.  I did not mean to phrase
it like that.  I think I was trying to find out
whether...

    MR. KING:    Sir, I know that.

     THE CORONER:   Ticketless fans might have gone
in. There is absolutely clear evidence, he has told
us, that they were waving their tickets.

     MR. KING:   I agree, sir.




                     /Cross-Examined bv MR. RUSSELL.
                                                           64

                                                   J . MORGAN


               Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

Q. Sergeant Morgan, you have been asked about your
    recollections of the 1987 semi-final between Leeds and
    Coventry? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   When I think you told us you had a serial outside the
     Leppings Lane terrace? - A. Outside the turnstiles.

Q.   I am sorry, outside the turnstiles. - A. Yes sir.

Q.   On coach reception? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   You were asked about the delay of the kick-off onthat
      occasion? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   Can you please help me with this. In 1987 it was the
     Leeds United supporters who were accommodated in the
     West Stand, the Leppings Lane terrace and the North
     Stand? - A. It was, yes.

Q.   So those were the supporters who were using the
     Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A. Yes, they were.

Q.   It was the Coventry fans then who were being admitted
     through the Penistone Road turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q.   Can you confirm for me, please, that the reason why
     the kick-off was delayed was because Coventry fans who
     were destined for the Penistone Road turnstiles were
     delayed on the motorway? - A. I believe that is the
     case.

Q.   You have indicated that you were aware of the
     provision in the Spion Kop for Liverpool supporters
     who had tickets for that end, is that correct? - A.
     That is correct, yes.

Q.   Can you also confirm that there was a segregated area
     provided? - A. Certainly.  There was a raised
     triangular section to one side of the Kop which was
     reserved for that eventuality.

Q.   That was in the north-east corner of that stand? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   As a Serial Sergeant on the perimeter track in the
     1988 semi-final, can you help us with this. Do you
     recall the episode where there was some difficulty in
     the demarcation between Liverpool fans in that
     triangle area and the Nottingham Forest fans in the
     rest of the Spion Kop? - A. I can't remember that.  I
     can't remember any problem in that area.
                                             J . MORGAN


You see, we have heard evidence about that from
Superintendent Marshall, who was the Superintendent in
charge inside the ground that year, but as a Serial
Sergeant you do not remember it? - A. I don't remember
it, no.

But would you expect, as someone who had commanded a
serial inside the ground on the previous year, that if
there had been that trouble, as we have been told
about, it would have been an area of concern for the
people policing the ground? - A. Of course it would,
yes.

To make sure it did not happen again? - A. Yes.

It would have been natural in those circumstances for
attention to be concentrated upon that area? - A.
Certainly, yes.

Sergeant Morgan, you told us you returned at one stage
outside the ground through Gate C at which stage you
realised that you were unable to return to your serial
who were outside entrance A? - A. Entrance C.

Entrance C, I am so sorry. You told us that you
decided to stay in those circumstances and act as a
Policeman outside entrance B, turnstiles A to G, is
that correct? - A. That is right, yes.

Who told you to do that? - A. No one told me to do
that.

Why did you do that? - A. Because there was an urgent
situation in that area which required some attention
and I decided that that is where I would work.

So in those circumstances you were acting upon your
initiative? - A. Yes.

Was that a wholly unusual thing for you to do? - A.
Not at all, no.

And the action that you took was to extract supporters
from behind the metal barrier, underneath the metal
barrier, by pushing people under and getting them out,
is that right? - A. That is right.

Again is that something you were told to do by a
senior Officer? - A. No.

It was something again which you did upon your own
initiative? - A. Yes, because people were in distress.
                                                  J.   MORGAN


You received an alert to go to the ground, Sergeant
Goddard was it, whose voice you recognised on the
radio? - A. That is right, yes.

You told us that as you entered the stadium itself you
came across a senior Police Officer whom you
identified as Superintendent Murray? - A. Yes.

Can you remember whether you passed him at close
quarters, saw him a long way off or what? - A. He was
face to face. He was coming up the gangway that I was
using to enter the playing area.

Is that the gangway at the west end of the South
Stand? - A. South-west, the first gangway, yes, at
that end.

He was entering the stand from the pitch? - A. Yes, he
was.

You were walking down the gangway onto the pitch? - A.
Yes, quite a narrow gangway.

I wonder if we could pinpoint that in terms of time,
not by reference to a picture of you but by reference
to a picture of Superintendent Murray walking towards
that location at MW11/4.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     We have got PR4/4 and   PR4/7,   sir.

     MR. RUSSELL:      Perhaps   I    could provide      it.

     THE CORONER:     We are not in a position to produce
any acetates this     afternoon, I am afraid.

     MR. RUSSELL:  I am sorry, I thought I had asked
for the ones I wanted.   I must have overlooked that
one.  I am sure it is my mistake.   Perhaps I could
invite Sergeant Morgan to look at my photograph.

     THE CORONER: Yes, and we will just pass it round
the Jury quickly after that.

     MR. RUSSELL:  I do not think there is any dispute
that this is Superintendent Murray walking in that
direction. - A. That isSuperintendent Murray, yes,
and the time on the photograph is 15.07.

     MR. RUSSELL:     Sir, I think the MWL series is one
minute fast.

     THE CORONER: So that should be 6.
                                                J.   MORGAN


     MR. RUSSELL: Perhaps that could be checked
because there are not, in fact, any MWL photographs in
the album I have been using with corrected times.

     THE CORONER: I think they all are. Just quickly
look at it, members of the Jury.

     MR. RUSSELL: Before it is passed to the Jury,
can I just elicit the answer to the next question and
then it can go round the Jury with this piece of
evidence in their minds.

     THE CORONER: Yes.

     MR. RUSSELL: You see Superintendent Murray is
there walking in a particular direction, and he would
be walking, would he not, towards the gangway down
which you were coming? - A. Yes, that is right.

     MRS. PERKINS:   The photograph is C449.

     THE CORONER: We will do acetates on Tuesday.
(Photograph handed round Jury)

     MR. RUSSELL:  Sergeant Morgan, you have told us
what you were told by Superintendent Murray to do,
namely to do what you could? - A. Yes.

Did you expect at that point and in that situation to
be given detailed orders by Superintendent Murray? -
A. No, I did not.




                          /Q.   You have told
                                                                     68

                                                             J.   MORGAN


    Q. You have told us about the scene outside the entrance
       gates being unprecedented in your experience.   Was the
       view and the scene that greeted you when you passed
       Superintendent Murray and walked on to the pitch, did
B      that have any precedent in your experience? - A. No
       precedent whatsoever.   I had never seen anything of the
       like in my life.

    Q. You took the opportunity, I think, of assessing the
       situation for a short while? - A. For a very short time.

    Q. We can see photographs of you on the pitch doing that, or
       following that - PR2/32 is a photograph which I think you
       have identified yourself?

              MR. GRIFFITHS:     PR1/32

              MR. RUSSELL:     PR2/32.

              THE CORONER:     Is that

              MR. RUSSELL:     Yes, it         I have got that one in
D            album PR2.

    Q.        THE CORONER:     Is that

    Q.        MR. RUSSELL:   You are
         dividing fence between pens 2 and 3, is that right,
         Sergeant? - A. Yes.

         I think you have also found yourself on two other
         photographs? - A. That's correct.

              MRS. PERKINS:     That is C.450.

              THE CORONER:     Do we know the time on that one?

              MR. GRIFFITHS:     15.09, sir.

              THE CORONER:     That is in fact 15.08, isn't it?

              MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, there are two other photographs
         which I believe show Sergeant Morgan at an identical time
         but I don't want to clutter the exhibit bundle.

              THE CORONER:     You have done well to find the 15.06
         one and the 15.09.

              MR. RUSSELL:     The 15.08:

         Having assessed the situation you went to the rear of the
         stand? - A. I did, yes.




H
                                                   J.   MORGAN


With a number of your Serial, not your entire Serial as I
understand but a number of them? - A. Yes, a number of
them.

You entered pen 3? - A. I did, yes.

Would it be right to say, Sergeant, that if other
Officers had already gone into pens 3 or 4 from the rear,
you would not necessarily expect to see them when you
arrived at the backs of pens 3 and 4? - A. Not
necessarily, no.

That would especially be the case if they were already
down in the pens and working to relieve whatever
situation they had found? - A. Certainly.

Even more especially the case if the pen in which they
were working was not pen 3 but pen 4? - A. That is right.

I wonder if you can help me with this. At the time you
arrived at pens 3 and 4 did you see WPC 3107 Helen
Pearson? - A. I don't know the two female Police Officers
who were at the back of the crowd personally.   I
wouldn't be able to identify them.

Or PC 3023 Beverley Martin? - A. Likewise with that
Officer.

Or PC 1675 Rich? - A. I know Rich and certainly he was
not one of the three that I saw.

Or Police Sergeant 1757 Burns? - A. I also know Sergeant
Burns and he wasn't there.

You didn't see him? - A. I didn't see him at the back of
the crowd.

Or PC 2364 Ford? - A. I don't know that Officer.

Or PC 1543 Aitkin? - A. I don't know PC Aitkin either.

Or PC 2191 Llewellyn? - A. I don't know that Officer.

Or Inspector Bullas? - A. I know Inspector Bullas.

Did you see him? - A. I didn't see...

In the vicinity of the tunnel or the back of the pens
when you arrived? - A. Not when I arrived, no.

I would like you to look at another photograph now,
PR4/4.   I hope that hasn't been cropped in such a way
to... - A. I can see myself.
                                                   J.   MORGAN


There is a collection of Officers at the entrances to
both pens 3 and A in that photograph? - A. Yes, there
are.

Have you been able to identify yourself? - A. Yes.

Perhaps you can help me with this.   I can make our two
Police Officers who are in pen 3, right at the entrance,
and five who are in pen A near the entrance.   Can you
identify yourself as one of the two Officers at the
entrance to pen 3? - A. I was further down the terracing
with my back facing the camera.

Looking back towards the entrance? - A. Yes.

In that photograph, Officer, can you see the Policewoman
who is working deep in pen A?    It may be that it has
been cropped.    That is my concern.  If I can perhaps
hand in my copy.    I have ringed the individual concerned
and Sergeant Griffiths can show you.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     I am afraid it's chopped off, sir.

     THE CORONER:   In that case we will have to pass the
photograph round and re-do it, but unfortunately we can't
do it today.

     THE WITNESS:     Yes, I can see...

     MR. RUSSELL:    Can you confirm that that is a woman
Police Office, whom you can recognise by her hat, working
just the other side of the fence dividing fence 3 and A,
deep in pen A? - A. In pen A, yes, definitely.

     THE CORONER:  Can you show it to the jury and then
let the lawyers have a look at it as well.

     MRS. PERKINS:     That is C.A51.

     MR. KING:      Does this photograph have a time?

     THE CORONER:  Yes, it is on there.      Sergeant
Griffiths, can you read the time on it?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:      15.13, sir.

     THE CORONER:      Which would be 15.12, I presume.
                                                                  71

                                                          J.   MORGAN


Q.        MR. RUSSELL:   Sergeant, you don't know, of
     course, what had happened before you got there, but
     would you agree with me that the density of supporters
     in the mouth of pen 4, where one can see a man with a
     black and white hooped rugby shirt on to his waist, a
     man wearing a red top to below his waist, and various
     other individuals, do show quite a low density? - A.
     Yes, that is the case.

Q. Can I ask you to go forwardthree           pages in that book to
   PR4/7? - A. Yes.

Q. Once again in that photograph do you see that woman
   Police Officer again? - A. Yes, I do.

Q. There is a bearded Police Constable near the entrance
   to pen 3? - A. Yes, that is P.C. Alexander.

Q. That is not you?        - A. No.

Q. Finally, can I ask you tolook  at onefurther
   photograph of you in pen 3 from the album MWL12, frame
   8A?

          MR. KING:        Sir, before we move onto that could we
     have ....

            THE CORONER:      Can you read us the time of that
     one?

          MR. RUSSELL:        It is the same time as the one
     before.

            MR. GRIFFITHS:      15.13, sir.

            THE CORONER:     What number is that?

          MRS. PERKINS:   The "C” number for the first one
     is C452 and the second one C453.

            MR. KING:      This is C453 now, is it?

            MR. GRIFFITHS:      This is C453, sir.

          MR. KING:        Sir, could we just go back a
     photograph.

          THE CORONER:        Put up the earlier ones.    What
     number is that?

            MR. GRIFFITHS:      450, and that is timed at 15.09.

            THE CORONER:      Where is 452?
                                                     J.   MORGAN


     MR. KING:   Sir, the photograph where the
Policewoman was first identified was C450, as I
understand it?

     THE CORONER:    When did we start writing numbers
down this afternoon?

     MRS. PERKINS:   C450 is the photograph on which
Sergeant Morgan identified himself, PR2/32.

     THE CORONER:      Put it up so that we can see it.

Is this the one where you found yourself, Sergeant
Morgan? - A. Yes, sir.

On the outside? - A. Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:      450.   Next one, please.

     MRS. PERKINS:   451 is the photograph showing the
WPC in pen 4, which is chopped actually on the acetate.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:       We have not got    an acetate ofit.

     THE CORONER:     That is right, that is       the one
which we were handing around, and then 452?

     MRS. PERKINS:   That is where the lady Officer is
shown in pen 4 and is on the acetate.

     MR. KING:      And the   time of that   one, sir, is?

     THE CORONER:Put 452 up.     What    time is that one?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:      15.13, sir.

     THE CORONER:      15.12 corrected, yes.      What is the
next one?

     MRS. PERKINS:   This is the one Mr. Russell is
just going to speak to.

     MR. RUSSELL:      That is right, it is frame number
MWL12/8A:

Although the pens appear very shortened because of the
telephoto effect, can you see yourself in pen 3,
Sergeant? - A. Yes, I can.

     THE CORONER:      What time is that one, please?

     MR. RUSSELL:   It is not easy to see. The frame
preceding is timed 15.15; the frame that follows is
15.16.
                                                 J.   MORGAN


     THE CORONER:       We will just leave the time off it
then, if we don't     know what it is.

     MR.   KING:    It is going to be between those times.

     MR.   RUSSELL:   It is about 15.15, or 15.14.

     THE CORONER: What number is that please, so        that
we don't get totally lost?

     MRS. PERKINS:      CA53, sir.

     MR. RUSSELL: Sergeant, when you were in pen 3
you were aware, I   think you told us, of a senior Police
Officer on the fence giving directions? - A. I was,
yes.

That was Superintendent Greenwood? - A. Superintendent
Greenwood, yes.

Before going round to the back of the stand, when you
were on the pitch, did you seek out the guidance or
orders of any Inspector or any Superintendent? - A. No,
I didn't.

Why not? - A. Because I don't need to. If there is a
situation to deal with then I would take it upon myself
to deal with it and to instruct Officers who were
nearby, whether they were in my serial or not, to deal
with it also. I would not need to be told what to do.

Sergeant, during the course of your evidence, just
towards the end of your examination-in-chief, you said
this: "I was concentrating on a very small area, like
tunnel vision.  I was not aware of things happening
quite close to where I was"? - A. That is right.

Would it be fair to say that that observation applies
to what you did and your knowledge, or rather lack of
knowledge of what other people were doing, reacting to
the situation that was all around you? - A. Of course,
even on the pitch. When I saw what I saw at the
perimeter fence, and having decided to go round the
back of the West Stand and enter through the tunnel, I
shouted to several Officers on the field, on the edge
of the pitch, to follow me. I am unable to identify
who I spoke to. I certainly spoke to a group of
Officers but my mind was taken up by what I had seen so
I wasn't speaking to individual Officers, I just
addressed the group who I perceived to be there, and I
could not tell you to this day who followed me round.
I have seen, obviously, P.C. Alexander and I have seen
P.C. Horsfield on the photographs, and I was aware of
P.C. Horsfield following me down onto the terrace, but
                                               J.   MORGAN


the others who followed, and I believe there were five
or six, maybe more than that, I have no idea who they
were.

One more thing Sergeant, as far as you know do
Merseyside Sergeants carry swagger sticks? - A. Yes,
they do. As I have mentioned, I was in Toxteth during
the inner city riots and I became aware then that
Sergeants in Merseyside carry those swagger sticks.

     MR. KING:   Might I borrow the bundle of
photographs because I might want to ask a question or
two arising out of the photographs?

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I wonder if I could ask a
question or two? Having missed part of this Officer's
evidence in chief I did not want to ask a question then
and, in fact, the questions I ask actually arise out of
what has been said anyway.

     THE CORONER:   That is perfectly all right.

     MR. ISAACS:    I am very grateful, sir.

            Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS

Sergeant, you have told us that on a number of
occasions when faced with urgent situations, emergency
situations, you have acted on your own initiative? - A.
Yes, I reacted to what I saw.

Those situations included reacting when you saw what
was happening outside the turnstile area? - A. Yes.

Seeking to calm or stop or direct the crowd when they
came in, the 200 or so, through gate C when it was
opened? - A. Yes, sir.

And as you have just said to Mr. Russell, and this is
just the third example that you gave, when you went
round the back and started acting again on your own-
initiative? - A. Yes.

Senior Officers would expect you to do that, wouldn't
they? - A. Of course they would, yes.

And they would be entitled to expect you to do that? -
A. As a professional, yes.

Thank you on that point. The only other matter I
wanted to ask you about was this: you have told us
that your impression was that gate B opened after the
                                              J.   MORGAN


opening of gate C that you were a part of, and before
gate C opened for the second time, when we know that
there was the larger in rush of people? - A. Yes.

Fans coming through gate B, for fans coming through
gate B, their most direct route to the terrace without
going through walls or any other way, would be to go
round the left hand side, wouldn't it? - A. Yes,
through the north west tunnel.

That would be their most direct route coming through
gate B? - A. Yes.

Thank you very much.

        Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

     MR. PAYNE:   May I just come back, please, on one
topic? Mr. King asked you a number of questions,
hypothetical questions, about the capacity of the
turnstiles. This may turn out to be quite important so
perhaps I might have this opportunity just to follow it
up. He drew to your attention that 10,100 tickets had
been issued for the standing area at the Leppings Lane
end? - A. Yes, sir, he did.

And that these were allocated with access to be gained
through turnstiles A-G? - A. Yes.

And he drew to your attention that there were seven
turnstiles here? - A. Yes.

Then using his calculator he did some arithmetic based
on the figures of 1,000 per hour for ticket holders in
an all ticket game such as this was, or 750 per hour
which is the Green Guide suggested figure in the case
where people are paying to get in? - A. Yes.

The result of this exercise he drew to your attention
that in half an hour one could then admit 3,500 people
and that 6,600 would therefore be two-thirds of the
total capacity, and if that 3,500 had to come through
in the last half hour, then the balance would have had
to arrive before 2.30.  I have taken you through that
just to bring the matter back to mind. - A. Yes.

As a matter of fact, leaving aside hypothetical
calculations, Sergeant Morgan, you were there in 1988,
weren't you? - A. I was, yes.

Although you were working inside the ground? - A. Yes.
                                              J.   MORGAN


But I expect you are aware that the same teams were
playing in the 1988 match, 12 months earlier? - A. Yes,
they were.

And naturally they were supported by the same batches
of supporters, including a batch of Liverpool
supporters for their team? - A. Yes.

And I expect you are aware that they were allocated to
the same sections of the ground as they were in 1989? -
A. I am aware of that.

And also that the ticket allocation was exactly the
same? - A. That specifically I have no knowledge about.

I see. Well, the Jury will hear evidence about that.
Are you aware that on that occasion in 1988 the whole
of the Liverpool crowd were safely admitted,
comfortably before kick-off? - A. Yes, they were.

That there was no crushing outside the turnstiles? - A.
As far as I am aware there wasn't.

No build up of a huge crowd? - A. No.

And that certainly the kick-off was not delayed? - A.
It was not, no.

The relevance of this may be directed to the point that
if some action had been taken earlier in 1989, when of
course, as a matter of fact, a large section of the
crowd arrived much later than they did in 1988, if some
action had been taken earlier then there might have
been some difference.  In fact, the evidence before the
Court is that when Police Constable Taylor and Police
Constable Scholey ....

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, what is the question?

     MR. PAYNE:    I can't really ask the question
without putting it in the context of what is, in fact,
the case.   I am trying to avoid the hypothetical
notions which were led an inch at a time, and of course
that can be done on hypotheses, but when one is dealing
with fact one has to actually remind oneself what the
facts are. I understand the criticism but it has got
to be done.

As a matter of fact in this case, the evidence is as a
fact that in 1989 ....
                                                   J. MORGAN


     MR. KING:   I am sorry, sir.  I do not know what
is about to come out but I do know that there was a
prohibition on addressing you, sir, and the Jury on
the evidence and the facts so far as I understand.

     MR. PAYNE: This is not an address on the facts.
It is just referring to a fact which has been given
and is in evidence.  It is not an address on it.  It
is a reference to a fact which does exist and that is
that when the perimeter gates were shut by Police
Constable Taylor and Police Constable Scholey...

     MR. KING:   Sir, I would ask you to rule on
whether or not Counsel is entitled to rehearse
evidence before putting a question.

     THE CORONER:   I am sorry?

     MR. KING:   Should he not put a question rather
than rehearsing the evidence? Certainly, sir, you
have stopped me many times rehearsing the evidence.

     THE CORONER:   Why not just put the question and
see whether he can answer it and then if need be you
will have to fill him if he is unable to answer.   I
do agree that I think we need to get to the point.

     MR. PAYNE: Do you know, Sergeant Morgan, that
when Police Constable Taylor and Police Constable
Scholey attempted to shut the perimeter gates against
the crowd they were, in fact, forced open bending the
retaining bolt? Do you know that that happened in
1989? - A. No, not really.

You saw the crowd though when you looked through the
turnstiles and you have given plenty of evidence
about what you saw? - A. Yes.

If there had been an attempt to shut the perimeter
gates earlier against more of the crowd than actually
happened by Police Constable Taylor and Police
Constable Scholey, suppose there had been an attempt
to shut the....

     MR. KING:   Sir, this witness just was not there
and if I have committed sins I have never committed
one quite as bad as this.

     THE CORONER:   I do agree actually with Mr.
King, I am afraid, Mr. Payne. You can ask him
whether he was anywhere near the perimeter gates and
you can ask him as to his assessment of the crowd but
you can hardly ask him; if he had said yes to your
first question then maybe but he did say no, that he
does not know anything about these two lads.
     MR. PAYNE: The point is that he was asked a
whole series of hypothetical questions culminating in
the question if 6,600 had to arrive before 2.30, if
there were going to be 3,300 in the last half hour, a
completely hypothetical exercise but behind it is the
undisguised argument being addressed to the Jury,
through the hypothetical questions, that something
different ought to have been done when there were so
many people arriving so late. Let there be no
mistake about it. That is the reason for asking the
hypothetical question.

     MR. KING:   What I object to, sir, is that my
learned friend has put to this witness as a fact, and
I do not deny that there is evidence as there is
evidence both ways as to how the gates came to be
opened, whether they were forced or not, but it
cannot be proper to put to a witness as a fact of
which there can be no dispute and then follow up that
with further questions based on that alleged fact.
When he gave evidence he did not even see what was
happening. This just cannot go on, sir.

     MR. PAYNE:   On the question of fact I have the
evidence of Police Constable Taylor open, "I was able
to keep the gate closed for a time"....

       MR. KING:   Could the Jury be asked to leave,
sir?    I wish to raise something.

       MR. PAYNE:   In my submission, sir....

     THE CORONER:   I think you must go out.  I think
there is absolutely no prospect of getting to Mr.
Eason today.  I am sorry, Mr. Eason, and we will have
you as soon as we can.

              (The Jurv retired from Courts

     MR. KING:     I do invite you to rule on that
which my friend is attempting to do.     If you allow
it, so be it, but I think you should rule on it, sir,
before in the presence of the Jury there is a
determined pressure on the gate to try and open the
gate of putting the evidence in, if I can put it that
way, before you have even ruled on it. I simply say
that this witness has given evidence that he could
not see exactly what was happening at the back. My
learned friend is putting matters to him from the
evidence of other witnesses saying that those are
facts which are not in dispute and then, based on
those facts, asking him to give his opinion about
further matters which he did not see.    I do not see,
sir, how you can allow it to continue with respect.

     MR. PAYNE: In fact, Sergeant Morgan has said
that he did see what was happening at the back and he
saw surging at the back. I am certainly entitled to
ask him what would have happened if the gates had
been shut at an earlier stage. The important point
is, and one cannot duck this issue, and I
deliberately did not interrupt Mr. King when he was
drawing his hypothetical questions to which this
witness has n o....

     MR. KING:      I am sorry, sir.   Could the witness
retire?

     THE CORONER:     Would you like to leave us whilst
we argue it out?

                 (The witness left Courts

     MR. PAYNE: Mr. Morgan has no first hand
knowledge about the arithmetic that was being put to
him and Mr. King cross-examined him for about a
quarter of an hour or twenty minutes in a very cogent
and useful piece of work from his point of view
eliciting a series of hypothetical answers. One asks
what is the purpose of this exercise and why did you
allow it to proceed? I did not interrupt him
because, quite frankly, it is embarrassing to
interrupt in front of the Jury and I would do it
very, very frequently if I objected to all the
improper questions which I submit are frequently
asked.

     I have tried to restrain myself, not always
entirely with success but I certainly did not
interrupt then on the policy that it is very bad form
to constantly interrupt, like in my submission it is
very bad form for Mr. King to interrupt now and
particularly to send the Jury out when we are
discussing something which in my submission they are
perfectly entitled to hear. There is absolutely no
reason why they should be sent out and I cannot
understand why Mr. King does not want to hear it said
as a matter of fact.

     On the issue you are now trying to decide, since
these questions have been asked on this hypothetical
basis, they are not just being asked to occupy time
and to fill up space on this day, but they are being
asked in support of the vigorous argument being put
forward by Mr. King that something different ought to
have been done. If he is allowed to do that then I,
in my submission, quite plainly ought to be allowed
to put the other side of the topic and I am trying to
do it not on the basis of hypothetical matters but on
the basis of evidence which has, in fact, been given.
Mr. King might not like the evidence. He might not
like the fact that there is evidence from two people
who actually tried to shut the gate and who had
actually had it forced open against them bending the
bolt. He might say there is evidence both ways when
in fact there is not. There is evidence that the
gate was forced open and that is the fact. He may
not like it but it is the fact.  I have to draw that
to the attention of the witness before asking him
what in fact would have happened in his opinion - so
from that point we go on to Mr. King's hypothesis -
if there had been an attempt to shut the gate, not
against part of the crowd as occurred but against the
whole of the crowd or a much greater part. That is
what I am trying to do. In my submission, sir, it is
perfectly proper.

     MR. KING:   I am trying to take it calmly in
stages. First of all, in my stibmission, sir, it is
entirely proper the Jury should retire while you rule
on this.

        THE CORONER:   Do not let us argue about the
Jury.     I have sent them out.

     MR. KING:   For the simple reason, so that my
learned friend knows, if you were to rule at the end
of the day perhaps against the submission then, of
course, the damage would already have been done.
That is why it is done and it is not improper at all.

    The second point, sir, is all I am saying is that
it cannot be proper to a witness the evidence of
another witness which may or may not be evidence
which the Jury have accepted because one does not
know, put it in a way it is a fact and, for example,
to say that the gate was forced. The gate was forced
carries with it two different points. One is that
the gate came open through the pressure of the crowd.
That could be described as the gate is forced or the
gate was deliberately pushed open by a hostile crowd.
That is a matter for the Jury to determine to on the
evidence. Certainly it is not a matter for a
statement to the witness to be put in that way.

     Secondly, this witness is not in a position and
could not be in a position to know what would have
been the case if and those certainly were not the
questions I put to him.    I was merely testing his
experience, which was raised by my learned friend, as
the basis for his opinion as to the unprecedented
arrival of the fans. All I ask is that a question be
put, not based on a statement of what the evidence
may or may not be   and a question directed, if it is a
question of fact,   to what this witness saw if it be a
question of fact. That is all I say, sir.

     THE CORONER:    I think Mr. Payne must be
entitled to ask whether from his experience shutting
the gates, if that is a point Mr. Payne thinks needs
exploring, given the crowd as it was at the time,
shutting the gates at an earlier time would have been
beneficial or otherwise as the case may be. All he
is then doing is exactly the same as you did which is
to test his experience.

     MR. KING:   Sir, can I just pause there? That
question is all right if one has a hypothesis of fact
which is being put to the witness at the same time as
to what is the state of the crowd at the stage when
the gates are being shut.

     THE CORONER:    Which is precisely what Mr. Payne
is attempting to do.

     MR. KING:   With respect, sir, not because at
the time when this witness is being asked to give his
evidence, there is evidence which has been put to him
of a crowd which is forcing the gate open, but that
is not the issue, sir. One has to go back in time
and it depends what time you choose as to when you
seek to close the gate. You could go back to a time
when there was not such a large crowd outside.  It is
a false point, sir, to ask the question if the gate
had been shut earlier unless one knows at the time it
is being shut and the time postulated the state of
the crowd on the other side. This is in the realms
not of the factual evidence of this witness and it
certainly is not testing the same matters I was
testing at all. One has to know the hypothesis of
fact upon which the witness in his experience is then
being asked to give his opinion.

     MR. PAYNE: All I wish to do is put the
question, sir, which you posed just now. I want to
restrict it to that.

     THE CORONER:   I think that is a legitimate
question and I am quite prepared to accept that
question.

     MR. KING:   Sir, could I just be reminded of
precisely the question which is going to be asked and
then I could respond to it.

     THE CORONER:   What I said was that I considered
it proper - I cannot give it you verbatim - but I
considered it proper to ask this witness whether from
his experience he could say whether shutting the
gates at an earlier stage as opposed to shutting it
at a later stage would have created greater or lesser
problems at the perimeter gate.  I think that is
right, Mr. Payne, that is more or less what I said.

     MR. KING:   Sir, all I submit to you as to why
that should not be put is, how can this witness know
in order to give that answer what the state of the
crowd was at the earlier stage when it has been
postulated that the gate should be shut? How can his
experience help him without knowing that factual
evidence which he does not know.

     THE CORONER:   He did not have the factual basis
for answering your questions, with great respect, on
the turnstiles either. You had to put that to him
with the aid of your calculator.  I did not object to
it because I could see that you needed to do that in
order to get to the issue of his experience.

     MR. KING:   It is very different because I was
putting to him a fact and on the basis of the fact
inviting his answer. Nothing is being put to him as
to the state of the crowd at the postulated time when
the gate should have been shut earlier.

     THE CORONER:   No, I think that is wrong because
what is being put to him is that he could see a crowd
which he described as surging.

     MR. KING:   Right.

     THE CORONER:   The question is, in his
experience would matters have been better if that
surging crowd had been held back outside the
perimeter gates at an earlier stage. We do not know
what his answer is going to be.  I have got no idea.

     MR. KING:   Sir, with respect, we do not know
whether that surging crowd on the evidence was there
at an earlier stage. That is my point.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, with very great
respect, if you have a crowd and you shut a gate
against it, which I do not think is disputed to any
extent, and you divide it by doing it in that way, if
that crowd whether it be by deliberate pushing, crowd
pressure, involuntary movement, that I agree with
you, I do not think one can put to the witnesses
"This gate was forced because somebody did something
wrong", all we know is that the gate came open and
that there was some damage to the bolt.

     MR. KING:   I agree.

     THE CORONER:    I do not think anybody is arguing
about that.  I am not arguing about it anyway. The
issue which Mr. Payne is trying to explore, at least
what I understand he is trying to explore, is that if
the situation was such at that point in time, would
it not have been even worse because there would have
been even more people outside, because you would have
restricted their entry, if you had attempted to do it
at an earlier stage?
     MR. KING:   Sir, it is the hypothesis which you
have just put which is only a hypothesis and not a
fact because if I can put the other argument, this is
why it is argument and not fact.  If one, in fact,
closes the gates at a stage before the great build up
of people, in other words to control the numbers
going into the area and keeping an eye on it before
there is a great build up, then the argument is that
you would not have the situation of the surging crowd
forcing the gates in the situation you are in because
you have controlled it at a much earlier stage. That
is why I say, sir, it all depends on the hypothesis
of fact and I can say no more.




                            /THE CORONER
                                                   J.   MORGAN


         THE CORONER: Yes.   I think I am quite satisfied
with allowing the question more or less how I formulated
it.

         MR. CATCHPOLE:  Before you call the Jury back,
could I just venture a very brief protest in support of
what my learned friend Mr. Payne was saying about the line
of questions asked by my learned friend Mr. King on the
basis of his calculator. With respect, that did not test
at all Sergeant Morgan's experience.  It was a well
rehearsed argument which was no more than a vehicle
through which Mr. King was putting an argument to the
Jury.  It led up to questions about planning, and in the
absence of Mr. Isaacs I make the same plea. Can you keep
some of us on the reign, because that sort of question is
as improper as anything that Mr. King has suggested that
Mr. Payne's question is improper.

         MR. KING:  Sir, I will not argue the point now,
but I want to put on record I do not accept that it was an
improper line of questioning of that witness.

          THE CORONER: Let us leave it at that.

         MR. KING: Sir, if the witness is going to be
asked this question, may I have the opportunity to
question him on the answer, if I so wish?

         MR. PAYNE: I would submit that keeping control
of events one does not want to be heard to say, "No, there
should not be any more questions", but I submit there
should not. Normally what would have happened is suppose
this were my witness.  I would have led him in chief, and
then he would have been cross-examined by Mr. King and I
would have been entitled to question him further, but only
limited to what he had been asked by Mr. King and that
would be the end of it. That is the Queen's Bench
procedure. He would not have any further come-back, that
is the end of it, and that is in fact what has happened.

         THE CORONER: I agree with you.  I think we will
call a halt. You can ask the question and that is it on
that point. Let us have everybody back.

          (The Jury and the witness returned to Court)

Q*        MR. PAYNE:   Are you ready, Sergeant Morgan? - A.
     Yes sir.

Q.   If the perimeter gates had been shut at an earlier
     time against the kind of crowd that you saw, what do
     you think would have happened? - A. If the gates had
     shut and had remained shut, then the situation in the
                                               J . MORGAN


enclosure between the outer perimeter gates and the
turnstiles would have eased as time past.

What would have happened outside the perimeter gates?
- A. The crowd would have built up to a massive
degree.

        Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Could we start with C450, please. This is 15.08 and
this is the photograph, if my note is right, when you
are seen in it, is that right Officer? - A. Yes sir.

     THE CORONER: On the outside.

     MR. KING:    On the outside. What I want to ask
you is we see a   number of Officers standing on the
touch-line in a   line watching by the look of it, a
large number of   Officers, do you see that? - A. Yes.

From your memory what were they doing at 15.08, that
whole body of Officers who were apparently just
standing and watching it looks like to me, but I do
not know? - A. Some of those Officers were Officers of
my serial. You see the ginger-haired female just in
front of me?

Yes. - A. She was on my serial and some of the others
who were standing there apparently just looking were
Officers on my serial.

Would you agree with me there is a whole body of
Officers apparently standing there and for whatever
reason not, in fact, doing anything as far as the
photograph goes? - A. They would appear just to be
watching.

Thank you. Do you ever recall a chain of Officers
being formed so as to allow those in difficulty in the
pen, perhaps bodies, perhaps those still alive, to be
brought out through a chain of Officers? Do you ever
remember seeing that? - A. I wasn't aware of that at
the time.  I have seen it since on the videos, but,
no, I was not.

That does not appear on the photograph at 15.08, the
one we are looking at, C450, does it? The chain is
not visible on that photograph? - A. It was not in
that position, I do not believe.  It was further along
to the right.

Yes, indeed, but I just want to see what one can see
on the photographs, if I may.  If I can then go to
C451.
                                                 J . MORGAN


     MR. GRIFFITHS:  Sir, this is the photograph but
it does not include the Policeman in it.

     MR. KING:  Right.
Again at C451, which seems to be at about 15.13 I
think we think it is, or possibly a little earlier, 12
minutes past, I am just looking at the photograph and
it looks as if we again still have Officers standing
and watching at the touch-line, is that right? - A.
The Officers who are standing in the foreground, again
I would think that they were not in a position to
assist at the fence because of the volume of Officers
who were already there.

So be it, but I just want to make sure that I
understand the photograph correctly.

     THE CORONER: He cannot tell you what they were
doing because he was inside.

     MR. KING:  Of course he cannot, sir, but we have
been shown the photographs which I have not seen
before and they may have been of help to the Jury
because we can actually see with our own eyes what is
there.
Can I go finally to C452. This is at either 12
minutes past 3, or something like that. Do you know
an Officer called Chief Inspector Nesbit? - A. Chief
Superintendent Nesbit, yes.

Can you see him on this photograph by any chance? - A.
I can't see him without examining the print closely.

So be it. Let me show you a totally unmarked print,
if Mr. Griffiths would show that to Mr. Russell to
make sure I am showing him the right print.

     THE CORONER: Do you want him to look for him?

     MR. KING:   Please, yes.     (Handed to witness)

     THE WITNESS:   No, I am afraid I cannot see him.

     MR. KING: One final question on that photograph.
Can you see on this photograph any sign of the chain
which was formed? - A. Outside Gate 3 there are a
number of Officers who are apparently, I would assume,
perhaps forming a chain.

This photograph appears to be at the earliest 12
minutes past 3? - A. Yes.

     MR. KING:   Thank you.     I cannot take it any
further, sir.
                                                     J . MORGAN


       THE WITNESS:       I can certainly see now.

     THE CORONER: I do not think it is exactly the
same photograph.  Sergeant Griffiths, we have had this
photograph, have we not? This is a new photograph we
are seeing?

     MR. KING: The photograph I have just shown the
witness, sir, was introduced by Mr. Russell.

       THE CORONER:       You did not want it marked.

       MR. KING:    No.

       THE CORONER: What number is it?

       MR. KING:    C452, sir.

     THE CORONER: You were going to say, Sergeant
Morgan, something or other? - A. I was just going to
comment about the group of Officers round that gate,
Gate 3, although when I was on the terrace I could not
actually remember that.

       THE CORONER:       I think that is all we need.

     MR. KING:      So be it, sir.      I am grateful for
that.

       MR. GRIFFITHS:      This is a different photograph,
sir.

       THE CORONER: Is that so, Mr. Russell?

       MR. RUSSELL:       I hope not.

     MR. JONES:       Can you read the reference off the
bottom?

       THE WITNESS:       It is MWL12EXHA.

      MR. GRIFFITHS:        It is 8A.   It is similar, sir, to
MWL8 .

       MR. JONES:     That we have not got recorded, sir.

       THE CORONER: They are similar these photographs.

     MR. KING: I do plead not guilty, but my learned
friend was helping and I do not blame him either.

     THE CORONER: What have we sorted out, it is the
same or it is different?
                                               J.   MORGAN


     MR. RUSSELL:   It is the same.

     MR. KING: The considered judgment of two
Counsel, sir, is that it is the same photograph.

     MR. RUSSELL:  I do have one or two more questions
to ask on this new subject of chain, but perhaps I can
deal with them after Mrs. McBrien.

     THE CORONER: We have got to draw this to a
close. What is the question?

     MRS. McBRIEN: As we have taken longer, I have
just thought of a couple of more questions I would
like to ask, if you will allow them, please.

     THE CORONER: Go on.   Be quick.   I am getting
impatient.

     Further by Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Sergeant, you told Mr. Isaacs that very often you use
your own initiative? - A. Yes.

You also said that the situation outside the
turnstiles was an emergency situation? - A. Yes.

Would you agree that that called for a major decision,
that sort of emergency situation, which could only be
made by the Ground Controller, that is the person in
overall command that day, and not by yourself? You
would not be able to take the initiative for everybody
there that day, would you? - A. Obviously not, no.

It was too big a situation for you? - A. It was a
major emergency situation.

Arising from the discussion about the perimeter gates,
it is just a small question really. You did say that
all the perimeter gates were open, did you not, when
you were there at 2.40? - A. I saw Gate 3.

No, I am sorry, I meant the perimeter gates of the
outside, the main gates, I do not mean the pitch.

     THE CORONER: The blue gates you mean, the park
gates right on the outside you are talking about?

    MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, the main perimeter.

    THE WITNESS:    As far as I can remember, yes.

     MRS. McBRIEN: Are you aware that they formed
three lots? - A. Yes.
                                                J.   MORGAN


There are six gates all together and there are three
lots of pairs, are there not? - A. Thegates in front
of where I was standing were open.

Do you know that the centre gates give vehicular
access? - A. Yes, I am aware of that.

And they are normally closed at 2.00 p.m. on a match
day? - A. I was not aware of that, to be honest.

It is in the Operational Order actually. - A. I will
take your word for that, yes.

Normally the side gates, the one by the river and the
left-hand side gates, are open to allow access to 1 to
16, the left-hand side, and turnstiles A to G by the -


     THE CORONER: What is the question, Mrs. McBrien?

     MRS. McBRIEN:  I am just confirming with this
Officer that that is the usual procedure.

     THE CORONER: But he has just told you that he was
not aware that they should be closed.

     MRS. McBRIEN:     All right, thank you.

     THE CORONER: That is what he has said?

     MRS. McBRIEN:     Yes.

     THE CORONER: So how can he tell you what the
usual procedure is if he said he did not know that
that was the usual procedure?

     MRS. McBRIEN:     I am sorry.

     THE CORONER:    That is right, is it not? - A. That
is right, sir.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Russell, and the same applies,
to you - brief.




                    /Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL
                                                     J.   MORGAN


          Further Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

You have been asked about what photographs might or might
not show a chain of Officers being employed or deployed
at gate 3.   Can I ask you to look at this photograph?

       THE CORONER:     Have we   got this one already?

     MR. RUSSELL:       Perhaps   we do. Sergeant Griffiths,
PR1/34A.

       MR. GRIFFITHS:     I am sorry, sir, I haven't got that
one.

       MRS. PERKINS:    That will be C.454.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sergeant, no doubt you can orientate
yourself on that photograph.    It is a photograph of pen
3 taken from the pitch side showing      the perimeterfence
from   gate 3, including gate 3, away    to the radialfence
with pen 2? - A. Yes, sir.

One can see a number of Police Officers at gate 3? - A.
Certainly.

Would it be fair to say that what is happening isthat it
appears that someone is being passed alongbetween two
lines of Officers leading away from gate 3? - A. That is
right.

The time on that photograph is 15.05 as shown? - A.
15.05, yes.

15.04 corrected, before the game had been stopped? - A.
Yes.

                 Further by THE CORONER:

The three Officers whom you saw at the bottom of the
tunnel.   Did you notice whether any of them had radios?
- A. No, I didn't, sir.

You didn't notice? - A.     I didn't notice.

So you don't know? - A.     I have no idea.

Did you either hear or see anybody convey any radio
messages to the Police Control Box about the problems
outside the turnstile area? - A. No, I didn't.    I
certainly didn't speak on the radio myself at that time.

You didn't? - A. No.

You didn't hear anything? - A. No.
A                                                                91

                                                         J.   MORGAN


     Q. Nineteen eighty-eight - do you know from your knowledge
        whether the gates of the tunnel leading to the centre
        pens were shut at some time in the 1988 semi-final? - A.
        I have no knowledge of that at all.
B    Q. You know nothing about that? - A. No.

    ' Q. Have you been to the Leppings Lane end when other teams,
         and some have been mentioned, Newcastle, Liverpool,
         Sheffield United, Everton, Leeds, all the major clubs,
         have attended at league matches? - A. Yes.

     Q. Are these, generally speaking, paying matches as opposed
C       to all-ticket jobs? - A. They are, yes.

     Q. It is a difficult question the next one.   Are you able
        to say on average how many fans come with the main clubs?
        - A. It varies.   Obviously the local clubs, and by that
        I mean clubs as far afield as Newcastle, ten to bring a
        rather large following.   Supporters for certain clubs
        tend to be a little bit more fanatical about travelling
        away to away matches than others, particularly the people
D       from the north-east tend to arrive in large numbers to
        support their teams.

     Q. So how many would you estimate, in round terms, at the
        Leppings Lane end? - A. For a normal league match?

     Q. One of the well supported large... - A. Well recently as
        many as 11,000.

E    Q. Is there a difference in a normal situation between the
        people who come to the terraces being expected to pay on
        the day, whereas people who go to the stands buy their
        tickets in advance? - A. Not necessarily.   Most matches
        there is a season ticket allocation anyway and they tend
        to use turnstiles which are dedicated to tickets.

     Q. We are talking about Leppings Lane, the away end. - A.
        There is a mixture in a lot of cases of people who have
F       bought tickets and people who are paying on the day.

              THE CORONER:  Sergeant Morgan, you have taken
        rather longer than I planned but thank you for being
        here.

             Mr. Brandwood.


G




H
                                                                    92

                                                     M. J .   BRANDWOOD


                    MALCOLM JOHN BRANDWOOD Sworn

                           By THE CORONER:
B
    Q. Malcolm John Brandwood? - A. Yes.

    Q- Of                                  Staffordshire? - A. Yes.

    Q. You were chosen to be one of the linesmen for the semi­
       final of 1989.

    Q. That, of course, is a privilege?. 7 A. Yes.

    Q- It wasn't in this particular instance because it was a
       disaster, but it would have been if things had gone well?
       - A. That's right.

       You came up to Sheffield the day before.   You stayed
       somewhere, met up with your colleagues and the next day I
       think you went to the ground fairly early on? -A. Fairly
       early.
D
       You walked around and had a look at what it looked like?
       - A. Took in the atmosphere.

       Yes and got yourselves acquainted.   You had your meals
       and various other things that one does and at about two
       o'clock you were back in the changing room? - A. By two
       o'clock, yes.

       I think the team sheets were brought into that room at
       about 2.15, is that right? - A. That is standard
       procedure.

       We have already heard from Mr. Motson, he was already in
       there getting a bit of data for his commentary? -A. Yes.

       It doesn't really matter what he was doing, but you were
       in there with the referee and the other linesmen? - A.
       And the stand-by official as well.   The reserve
       official.

       Whilst you were in there two Senior Officers came in? -
       A. That s correct.

       You, of course, didn't know who they were? - A. No.
       This happens all the time.   In total honesty we don't
       learn their names.   We don't remember their names
       because we might only meet them just the once.

       You recollect there was some conversation about what they
       thought would happen with regard to this match? - A. No.
       We have a sort of meeting with the Police before every
       match, but really they seem to be treating it the same as



H
                                          M. J .   BRANDWOOD


any other match, to a slightly larger degree, obviously,
because of the amount of fans, but at every game we
attend - referee and linesmen - we do meet the Police and
there are emergency procedures etc. and that is what we
were discussing.




    Q. So that is what you were
                                   M.J. BRANDWOOD


So that is what you were going through, at least they
were going through? - A. That is right, for
approximately five minutes or so.

They did not give you any reason to think that they
were anticipating any problems, they were just
rehearsing what would happen if there were going to be
any? - A. That is right, yes.

I think they told you the type of coded message which
they might use? - A. "Mr. Meadows".

Yes, and wasn't there some suggestion that the linesman
on the South Stand side would be the one who would be
contacted, if need be? - A. That again tends to be
standard procedure.

Because that is near the Police Control Box,
presumably? - A. That is right.

Was that you, as a matter of interest? - A. It was me.

They then left after about five minutes? - A. Yes.

That was the last you saw of them at that point? - A.
Yes.

You stayed in the dressing room, I think, until about
5-to-3, is that right? - A. About 5-to-3, yes.

Then I understand that there is a bell or something
which goes to say it is time to go? - A. Well, the
referee presses the bell but by that time the players
tend to be out anyway.

You and the referee and the other officials follow the
players, don't you? - A. Yes, it might be a minute or
so afterwards.

Indeed, did you do that? - A. We did.

So when you came out onto the field the players were
already on the pitch, right? - A. That is right.

And am I right in thinking the first thing you do is
run into the centre and photographs are taken, or not?
- A. That again can vary according to the referee.

In this particular match that is what did happen? - A.
I believe so but it has been so long now I can't swear
to the fact that I went to the nets first and then to
the middle, or the other way around.
                                                        95
                                    M.J. BRANDWOOD


Is it part of your job as a linesman to go and inspect
the nets? Not both of them, but ... - A. Yes, just the
one lot of nets. We have already done it earlier, of
course, and it is our way, I suppose, of getting used
the atmosphere, as well as checking the nets.

Are you checking to see whether they are there or
whether they have got holes in, or what is it that you
actually check? - A. Whether the pegs have been
dislodged during the kick-about.

Your particular goal, presumably you had agreed it with
your colleague, you were going to do the Leppings Lane
end and he was doing the Nottingham end? - A. That is
correct.

Did you, in fact, do that? - A. I did.

That means that you had to either run or walk towards
the Leppings Lane terrace, is that right? - A. That is
correct.

Right into the centre section, so to speak, of it? - A.
Yes.

Because the goal is in the middle, isn't it? - A. Yes.

As you approached it, not the net but the terracing and
the stands, did you see or notice anything of any
significance? - A. No. In fact, to be totally honest I
know it might seem strange but you just visualise the
goals. You don't tend to see what is outside of the
pitch area.

But does that mean that nothing impinged on you at all,
or that you did not see anything which you considered
to be worrying? - A. Certainly nothing untoward.  I got
the impression that the ground was nicely filled up and
certainly there was a lot ofnoise and that would be
it, just general impressions   of a large crowd.

Yes. I think you said that you tend not to look up too
much because you might get a reaction from the crowd,
is that right? - A. That is right.

What, an adverse reaction or a favourable one? I could
not quite understand that comment? - A. No. You learn
from an early stage in your refereeing career not to do
that sort of thing. Usually it is just a form, if you
like, of mickey taking, but we try not to encourage it.
We just concentrate on the job in hand.

You then looked at your nets,   you were satisfied, I
take it? - A. That is right.
                                     M.J. BRANDWOOD


And you go back to the middle ready for kick-off? - A.
If that was the way round that we did it on the day.
As I say, after this time I can't say which way round.

Or you might have gone forthe photographs, but you
finish up in the middle at kick-off, is that right? -
A. This is what I am saying, you see. With some
referees you go to the middle first, witness the toss,
have the photographs and then check the nets and take
up your position on the touchline.

Sorry, you misunderstood me. I meant on the touchline
but in the centre of the field?.- A. Yes, on the
touchline.

What I meant was when match kicked off you were on the
touchline in the centre of the field? - A. On the
touchline about ten yards from the centre line.

After that I think your job, of course, is to watch the
match and to control it? - A. Correct.

As appropriate, and that is precisely what you did? -
A. Right.

Did you see anything whilst the match was in play,
because we know from the video that the ball went up
and down the field several times, did you see anything
whilst the match was in play, at the Leppings Lane end,
which attracted your attention? - A. Nothing.

You didn't see people climbing up into the stands? - A.
Not at this time, not while the match was on.

What first alerted you to the fact that something was
not quite as it ought to be? - A. The match probably
had been going on for approximately five minutes or so
when I heard a voice behind me say words to the effect,
"Linesman, we have problems, we need to stop the match.
You will need to get the referee to stop the match",
words to that effect.  I don't know who said these
words because I did not look round, because the ball at
that time was still in play.  I presumed obviously it
was the Officer.

Or an Officer? - A. Or an Officer.

But you don't actually know who said it? - A. I do not.

Did you consider that comment to you as unusual or was
that what you would have expected if there was a
problem? - A. That is what I would have expected.
Having said that, it has never ever happened before.
                                   M.J. BRANDWOOD


What happened then? You heard this voice? - A. As I
say, the ball was still in play at that time and while,
if you like, the message was sinking in and I was
thinking how to attract the referee s attention, the
ball was then knocked out of play anyway.  It was at
that time, as I was waving my flag to attract the
referee's attention, who I believe was over on the
right wing, as opposed to my left wing position, I
noticed that people were starting to come on the pitch
anyway.

What happened after that? - A. After that more people
obviously came on the pitch.  I.believe a Policeman
came towards the referee; I certainly moved towards the
referee and then the referee informed the players to
leave the field of play and we left, obviously, with
them.

That is, in fact, when you then went back into the
dressing room or where did you go? - A. Most of the
players went directly into the dressing room. One or
two stood around and then went into the dressing room
but we match officials, the four of us, stayed at the
tunnel entrance for some time, watching developments.
In fact, I remember the fourth official, or it could
have been one of the officials of the home club,
brought us some tops, not that we really needed them
because it was such a warm day, but brought us some
tops to put on to keep us warm.

Do I deduce from that, that at that point you had not
appreciated that you were actually looking at a
disaster? - A. I certainly hadn't, no.  I think the
referee certainly wanted to stay out for a little while
to try and judge how disastrous or what the extent of
the trouble was, so that he could then go inform both
sets of players and managements, and that is what he
proceeded to do, after a few minutes watching
developments.

When did you first realise how bad it was? This is not
in any sense a critical question, I am just interested
to know. - A. Usually if it is slight crowd trouble you
would expect to restart play within five, ten minutes,
but having said that I have to state that has never
happened to be on the football league level.   I am only
surmising that from past experience having seen
incidents on the television, that usually after about
five, ten minutes you can reckon to get a game
restarted, but when 15,20 minutes had elapsed and we
again went down the tunnel to see what was happening
and more and more people were coming on the pitch, then
obviously we realised there were serious problems.
Having said that, we did not then realise that the
                                   M.     J. BRANDWOOD

serious problems were being caused by the tragic events
that did take place.

Does that mean from what you are saying that although
you must be an experienced referee/linesman, otherwise
you would not have been asked to do it, in your
personal experience you have been fortunate in that you
have not come across a lot of match trouble, for
whatever cause? - A. That is correct.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Mr. Brandwood, this is no criticism of you at all, you
frankly told us that when you go the nets you just
visualise the goals? - A. That is correct.

You don't really look at the state of the terracing
behind? - A. That is correct.

Because you got the impression that the ground was
filling up nicely, or nicely filled up, I think, was
your expression? - A. That is right.

Very quickly can I just show you 326a, please? Mr.
Brandwood, take it from me that this photograph was
taken of the Leppings Lane end on the day of the
disaster at 14.59. You can just see the time on the
electronic scoreboard, if you look carefully? - A. Yes.

It is just about before or at the time of or just after
kick-off. You can see the state of the centre pens,
and to the right you can see the pen we know as pen 6
on the photograph. Do you see that? - A. I do.

And do you see how that, in fact, at that time, from
what one can see on the photograph, is half empty,
isn't it? - A. It would appear so, yes.

You never, in fact, realised that yourself when you
went to check the nets? - A. Not at the time.

In fact, looking at that photograph we can see the
ground is not nicely filled up as far as that penis
concerned, that is right, isn t it? - A. As far as that
pen is concerned.

It is no criticism of you but it is a good example of
the fact that it is no part of your job to look at the
terraces and to take account of them? - A. No.

That is right, isn't it? - A. That is correct.
                                   M. J. BRANDWOOD

           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Brandwood, you said you always attend meetings with
the Police before a match? - A. That is correct.

And at those meetings you are reminded of the coded
message, "Mr. Meadows", I think you said? - A. That is
correct.

When would you expect to hear that sort of message? -
A. Bomb alert - in what sort of situations, do you
mean?

Yes. - A. Bomb alert, fire, crowd trouble as regards
violence and, of course, what happened on that
particular day, injury and death to fans.

So you would have expected a message that day? - A. I
would, yes.

           Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

You told us that in your view the ground was nicely
filled and you have since looked at a photograph, but
you also said there was a lotof noise. Can you
perhaps elaborate on that, as someone who had emerged
from the tunnel, been in the ground and then gone down
to the Leppings Lane end? What were the component
parts of the noise that you heard and what sort of
volume was it? - A. You just tend to hear a general
hubbub, fans chanting and that sort of thing, and if
there is a large crowd you get a large noise,  I just
got the impression on that day that there was a large
amount of noise, certainly more noise than I had ever
experienced bar one other occasion, so it was only on
that premise that I would say that there must have been
a large crowd.

I must just ask you what thatother occasion was? - A.
It was a European appointment in Athens, in front of
60,000.
So the Greeks make even more noise than they were at
Sheffield that afternoon? - A. That is correct but they
use other things to help them with the noise.

Klaxons and so on? - A. That is correct.

But this was more noise than you have ever heard in
this country? - A. Yes, that is correct.
                                          M. J. BRANDWOOD

       Further Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

Could the noise that day have been made because
people were in distress, that that would cause
greater noise?

     THE CORONER:   I do not think you can ask that
question. You can ask a question which is what, in
fact, Mr. Russell was asking quite correctly, as to
the type of noise he heard.

     THE WITNESS: The noise was general excited
noise, just typical fans' noise that amplified
because of the crowd numbers. There was no way that
I could have heard any other noise.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Did it sound different to you
that day? - A. No, just more of it, perhaps a touch
more excitement to it but just more of it.

     THE CORONER:   I am sorry you have been here all
day but we have finished and you can go home? - A.
Are you sure?

That is good, is it not, and I hope you have a good
journey? Thank you very much for being here. - A.
Thank y o u .

     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, we have
decided we are not going to sit tomorrow because of
the weather and if we are not sitting tomorrow we are
not going to sit on Monday. We will be back on
Tuesday at 2.30. So far as I know money is being
sorted out at the moment. There are some technical
problems when we do not sit with regard to payment.
I do not know how many days they are paying you but I
think it is important that those of you who are in
employment should not assume you will necessarily be
paid for the days when you are not here.  It niggles
me that but I have to live with it as well.

     If you are in employment you must check with
your employer whether or not he is expecting you in.
I do not know what he will say because we have not
had anything like this before. We wrote to them
originally and we know what they told us at the time
as to what they would expect but, of course, I cannot
remember the answers.  If for some reason they want
to make any comment about it then ask them to write
in because I do not want you to be unnecessarily
disadvantaged if that is the right word.  Everybody
has gone home while we have been sitting. They have
been skiving off although that is not quite the right
word but so far as I know there is some money waiting
                                            M. J. BRANDWOOD

for you somewhere. I warn you we may have to do some
juggling with the figures next week because I do not
actually know what they have done? Is that all
right?

     Can I just say this; although it looks as
though this is a never ending task, in fact, the end
is beginning to come in sight. We have got through
the bulk of the witnesses now and the numbers are
reducing.  It does not necessarily mean that the
witnesses will all be short. That is the big problem
in deciding how long we are going to take.   If they
took as long as this last witness then we would only
be a couple more days probably but if we take as long
as Sergeant Morgan I think it will take considerably
longer and so it is difficult. We are definitely
over the top so far as numbers are concerned, very
well over the top, and I just say this to you because
you know even less than the lawyers as to how long we
are going on for. I am very conscious I have kept
you from your normal activities for ever such a long
time but you have done well and we will continue to
do so I am sure.  I hope your little girl will be
fine and yours as well. Why don't you leave us and
we will just spend a couple more minutes with the
lawyers and I will see you at 10.30 on Tuesday.

            (The Jury retired from Courts

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Can I very briefly refer to the
matter that was raised yesterday in regard to Mr.
Ashton's remarks in the press? We have managed to
talk to Mr. Ashton and he wishes me to convey to
you - and these are his words not mine - his abject
apologies for the remarks made. He now realises that
it was extremely unfortunate that it was reported in
the press and the remarks should not have been made
in the first place.

     They were made during a Committee session of the
House of Commons Committee in relation to the Bill
the report was about. He wishes you to understand
that he is deeply sorry. He regrets any discourtesy
that may have occurred and certainly says it will not
happen again and that goes as well for anything that
the Club has said. I am quite happy to repeat that
in front of the Jury if you think it is fit, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I do not think that is necessary.
It is very kind of Mr. Ashton. It sounds as if, in
fact, it was in the House of Commons that the remarks
were made.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   He has sought to assure you,
sir, that any further remarks, whether inside or
outside the House will not contain references to
this.
     THE CORONER:   That is very kind and I am most
grateful to him, would you say, and I am pleased to
hear what he has said? Thank you.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:   You will remember that yesterday
we had finished and I came back and raised another
point? I did say that I would repeat it, so to
speak, for the sake of the record because having
forgotten the point in the first instance I then
forgot that we did not have a shorthand writer.
Because we have an alternative recording system which
was still running I have got some of what was said.
I will just read it out.  It is only for the record
so that we know what was said.  I said:

    "Mr. Payne, when we were talking about the
    unlawfully killed verdict you mentioned gross
    negligence, and I know that is what it says
    in Archbold, but I hesitate to say this but
    my impression from the cases which I have
    read is that 'gross negligence' is the wrong
    term to use at the present time, and indeed,
    Mr. King is looking it up, Smith & Hogan, and
    that is their view as well in the current
    edition. They are not very happy with that,
    Smith & Hogan, but that is what seems to be
    the position. The only reason why I mention
    this is to alert you to the fact that I have
    an opinion on it, right or wrong. When the
    time comes for you, if you choose to address
    me on the question of unlawful killing,
    perhaps you would consider whether or not
    that is a verdict which can at the
    present..."

This is an error in the typing.  I think what I was
trying to say is whether in addressing me on the
question of unlawfully killed the issue of gross
negligence can be left as part of that verdict or
whether, in fact, what one has to think about is the
Lawrence/Caldwell situation which in fact is
recklessness as opposed to gross negligence.  I go on
to say:

    "I did not have time to study Archbold but I
    did notice a little paragraph which did look
    as if it was still saying gross negligence,
    and so I do hesitate in criticising the
    leading text."

There was some trivial exchange about Smith & Hogan
and whether we were looking at the right edition.
Purely for the record so that we know what was said I
have read it out. There is nothing controversial
about it but I like to think we have got it all down
as near as possible.

     MR. KING:   Sir, for the record we were looking
at Smith & Hogan, Criminal Law, 6th Edition.

        THE CORONER:     Thank you.      Is there anything
else?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   If you have any idea of who
might be called on Tuesday.

     THE CORONER:   I have got no idea. We had
people booked for tomorrow and Monday already and at
the moment we are back again as we were right at the
beginning with a rather messed up list.

     MR. KING:   A gentle plea, sir.  I know it may
not be possible but if you could avoid on Tuesday
anybody dramatically contentious if I can put it that
way by which I mean one of the lead Police players.

     THE CORONER:   No, because we have still got Mr.
Doyle for a start if he is able to come back.

     MR. KING:   I only mention it because when we
were planning the weeks ahead it was thought that
beginning next week we might be on those witnesses.

     THE CORONER:   What has happened, of course, is
that we have fallen a little bit behind. We will not
have any of the principal actors on Tuesday.

        MR. KING:      You understand what I am saying,
sir?

        THE CORONER:      I do indeed.

     MR. PAYNE: On the question of the statistical
analysis of the blood alcohol content, I mentioned at
the beginning of today's hearing that we have in fact
circulated our analysis. Clearly it is desirable if
you are going to take that further with a
statistician that obviously that exercise should not
be delayed because we are, as you say, running up
towards the end of the Inquest. Perhaps if over the
adjournment people might have an opportunity to look
at our exercise and see if factually there is
anything wrong with it and then perhaps we might hand
it to you on Tuesday.

     THE CORONER:   I am actually meeting the
statistician on Friday to have a preliminary talk and
for him to look at some of the work which I have done
but that will not necessarily mean that we cannot
look at what you then, if it is agreed....
     MR. PAYNE:  I am not asking for agreement
actually when I circulate it.  It is not intended to
be put forward as that.  It may be that people do not
agree it or for some reason or other they do not want
it to go forward. So far as we are concerned, if I
may make it clear what it is, it is simply an
analysis of the evidence which already exists in a
digestible form so that it makes sense.

     THE CORONER:   When I say agreement, the
dilemma, if I may put it like that, that you are in
is that this is work which you have done.

     MR. PAYNE:   Yes.

      THE CORONER:  I am quite sure it has done, not
by you personally necessarily but by your instructing
team.

     MR. PAYNE:   Yes.

     THE CORONER:   It has been done to the best of
their ability but the difficulty is that if it is not
agreed, how can we introduce it? Who is the witness
shall we say?

     MR. PAYNE: The answer so far as we are
concerned, would be this; we were not as a matter of
procedure to make sense of it by circulating it, what
in fact I would have done is to send it to you by
letter yesterday or today saying that when a suitable
witness gives evidence - and I would have thought
that Dr. Nicholson for our purposes would be suitable
- we intend to ask him these questions and so perhaps
he will be kind enough to prepare himself to answer
these questions by us giving him this notice. That
is what we will do.

     THE CORONER:   Obviously, Mr. King, everybody
has got to look at it. I say Mr. King, and I do not
mean to pick on you, I am sorry, but clearly if it is
factually accurate...

     MR. PAYNE: That is what we are inviting
agreement about.

     THE CORONER:   If there are factual inaccuracies
that is what we want to pick up so that least the
database, if we use computer language, is correct.
What you do with it or what the experts do with it is
another matter.

    MR. PAYNE:    Certainly.

     MR. KING:   Sir, can I say that I simply reserve
my position until Tuesday?
     THE CORONER:   Yes, that is fine. What is going
to happen with the witnesses next week is that we
will try and catch up with the ones whom we have
lost, so to speak. Remind me again about Mr. Lock.




                             /MR. CATCHPOLE
         MR. CATCHPOLE: As I remember, Mr. Lock is not
available between 24th February and 3rd March.

         THE CORONER: We will try and have him well before
24th February.

         MR. CATCHPOLE: I hesitate to say that given the
knowledge that a lot of people have of his evidence at the
Inquiry it may be that Mr. MacKrell is actually the most
important Club witness and there was some confusion as to
Mr. Lock’s status at the Inquiry.  I do not know whether
that is going to come out to others, but it may be he is
very much the shorter of the two.

         THE CORONER: This is one of the problems, if I
may say so, because from a practical point of view it
would be infinitely better to have Mr. MacKrell first
because prima facie he looks like the principal witness
and Mr. Lock second, but if we put him on first, of
course, then one will tend to perhaps ask him questions
which Mr. MacKrell could more suitably deal with. But I
will consider that.

         MR. CATCHPOLE:   No doubt you will want to take
Mr. MacKrell in the context of Dr. Eastwood as well. The
danger is that he will be brought back as a result of what
has been said.

         THE CORONER: That is the difficulty.   Dr.
Eastwood is not available until the 18th, or thereabouts.
We want to have Dr. Nicholson in at that time as well, and
really ideally we should have Dr. Nicholson, Dr. Eastwood,
Mr. MacKrell, Mr. Lock, I would have thought in that
order, but the difficulty is that we are not going to be
able to fit it in possibly, it depends how long they are,
in the available time with Mr. Lock not being available.

         MR. CATCHPOLE: The only thing I can suggest is
it may be, given that Mr. Lock spans the experience of
both a Police Officer and as an employee of the Club, he
may be slotted in amongst the senior Police Officers
around about the 18th to the 20th. I cannot believe that
even on present performances anyone is going to take six
days with him.

         THE CORONER: No, definitely not. It is obvious to
you that I find it quite difficult to stop you. Ladies
and gentlemen, have a nice long weekend.  I hope you have
a safe journey. Be careful, we do not want any accidents.
We want you back on Tuesday.

         (The Inquests were adjourned until 10.30
              on Tuesday, 12th February 199ll
