                                                                                               MIR.15

                                                                                                                             f     t
    OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                  Date and tim e raised                                Number


    Ti t l e     1             j              C L lH .       f\J                   fc-rgre,    Tnoti P S o     M       <2 - S Z n ^ C 7    .

'   (Inclucfeqource an d a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)


    •Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                               Receiver




                                                                                                                                 Indexer
    Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

    No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                           Statement Reader
    Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                                 Indexer
    Indexed as indicated

    No(s) o f actions raised

    Examined - fu rth er action to be taken
                                                                                                        iUL
                                                                                                                       £


    Further action No(s)                                                                                                         Indexer


    When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master N um ber Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



       INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL,       1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

           PETER REUBEN THOMPSON




                       Before

DR. S.L. POPPER,    LL.B, B.MED.Sci,    B M , B S , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                         At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                         On

                   25th April 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                              INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT



                        PROF. STEPHEN JOIIES Called

                             Bv THE CORONER

                    B   POLICE INSP. I-IATTHEW ROBERT SAUERS Callod

                             B-v TIIE CORONER

                        POLICE INSP. I-UCHAEL LAYTON Called

                             By THE CORONER

                        POLICE INSP. 1L4TTREU ROBERT SAUERS Continued

                             T
                             iV
                              'r
                               jr..
                                  TU.T
                                     ..?iw
                                         ...-------------
                                            FRASER -




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
2 5th April. 1990


     INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF PETER REUBEN THOI-IPSON

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, you are now going to hear evidence
in relation to Peter Reuben Thompson. In this case
Peter's mum and dad are in Court, as is his wife, Linda,
with some members of the family. The gentleman on my
left is Mr. Crank, who is the f a m i ^ solicitor, but
his practice is a member of my group, sir, and I,
therefore, appear on the usual agency basis as a member
of the Hillsborough Steering Committee before you.

     THE CORONER:    Thank you.   Good afternoon to you.

     I am just briefly going to tell you the procedure
so that you can follow. It is not that difficult but
it is easier if you know what is following, so to speak.
First of all, I am going to read to you the evidence which
I took on the 19th April, 1989 and I am going to road it
with mistakes, if any, which there may be - in fact I
know there is at least one mistake in it. We will
correct it as soon as I have finished reading it but I
want you to hear what happened on that day. Then I will
tell you what Dr, Forrest said about the alcohol levels
and then we are going to turn to Prof. Stephen Jones and
he will come down and tell us the pathological evidence.
Prof. Jones has very kindly offered, not just to you but
to all the families with whom he has had dealings today,
that if at the end of the Inquest you feel you would
like to have a private word with him so that you can go
over anything that is still troubling you, then he is
very happy to meet you so to speak. That is entirely
up to you. You do not have to feel you must. You may
if you wish. When Prof. Jones has finished the West
Midlands Police Officer will present a summary to me,
and to the Jury of course, and Inspector Layton will
deal with the visual evidence and then, when that has
been done, we will conclude the hearing.  Particularly
when Inspector Layton gives his evidence, and this is
no fault of his, it is just the nature of things, he
has to give a lot of references, plan numbers and
photograph references.  It sometimes gets a little bit
muddling because there are so many. It depends on the
case. Some have many and some have few. But try and
ignore those numbers and just listen to the words
because the numbers are there to help us later on if
we need to look something up.

     Now, this is the resumed Inquest, ladies and
gentlemen, which I opened on the 1 9 th April, 1 9 8 9 * On
that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting Coroner's
Officer, said:
                                "The body which is the subject of this
                                Inquest has been identified to PC 1 2 3 6
                                Smith of the South Yorkshire Police as
                                that of Peter Reuben Thompson b}r John
                                Anthony Thompson, his brother. He was
                                3 0 years of age having been born on the
                                2 7 th April, 1958 at Widnes. He was a
                                single man and he lived at                1
                                                     "Wigan. He was an
                    B           engineer by occupation. He died at
                                Hillsborough Football Ground following
                                an incident there on Saturday, 1 5 th
                                April, 1 9 8 9 . PC Smith caused the body
                                to be removed to the Medico Lfegal Centre
                                and there he identified it to Detective
                                Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently
                    C           identified the same body to Prof. Jones.
                                It is the family wish that the body
                                should be cremated,"

                             Then I adjourned the Inquest and now we are going
                        to do the corrections,  I told you I would read it as
                        it was said. You must remember we were doing it pretty
                        quickly so the fact that there are mistakes is not
                    D   surprising.

                              The first thing is the place of birth is wrong.
                        "We said Widnes and I think it should be Whist on.
                        That is right, is it not, looking at mum and dad,
                        because you will know.

                              The second thing, of course, is that he is married,
                    E   and not single.   So I am very sorry.  I do not know how
                        it happened but obviously somebody made a mistake.
                        On the form we sent you and which, I think, Mr. Thompson
                        signed ---- which is John Thompson? You are the brother,
                        that is right. You confirmed that he was married.
                        Mum a nd dad, have we got all the rest of the names
                        correct? No other names, the date of birth and the
                        occupation?
                    F
                             MR. AND MRS. THOMPSON:      Yes.

                             THE CORONER:    Right. I knew weweregoing   to
                        have a few mistakes in the openings but I decided I
                        would risk that in the interests of speed. We have
                        always got to balance things.
                    G        Now, the alcohol which was estimated by Dr.
 f                      Forrest in the evidence which he gave us on the opening
                        day was, in the case of Peter, the resultwasnegative.

                             Now we go to Prof. Jones.


                H

                                               -2-
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                 PROF. S. JONES



                                 PROF. STEPHEN JONES Called;

                                      By THE CORONER:

                       Q. Prof. Jones, if you would give us your full names in
                          the usual way and just introduce yourself? - A. John
                          Stephen Philips Jones, Consultant Pathologist at the
                          Cit 3^ Hospital , Nottingham, Prof. of Forensic Medicine
                   B      at tlio University of Nottingham and Home Office
                          Pathologist.

                      Q. Prof. Jones, if you would please take us through your
                         post-mortem report in the usual way? — A. Yes. The
                         body of Peter Reuben Thompson, which had an identity
                         number of no, 7 8 , was identified to me by Detective
                         Constable T/eigold at the Medico Legal Centre. I
                         carried out a post-mortem examination and the main
                         features of the examination was that Mr. Thompson was
                         a man of average stature and of good general physique.
                         There was a very generalised blue discolouration of
                         the skin, cyanosis, particularly of the head, neck
                         and shoulders and of the fingertips. There were also
                         multiple small haemorrhages present on the eyelids
                   £)    and on the surface of the eyes. These haemorrhages
                         I will deal with in a minute when I discuss other
                         findings. As far as injuries were concerned, there
                         were some minor injuries on the right cheek. There
                         were some small superficial scratches. On the right
                         lower jaw there was a linear abrasion, a scratch mark,
                         and there were minor superficial abrasions on the
                         forehead and on various parts of the body, particularly
                   E     on the kneecap there were two abrasions. These latter
                         were probably associated with friction marks of
                         clothing against the skin causing minor flattened
                         abrasions. None of these injuries that were examined
                         externally were of any great degree of severity and
                         certainly none of them caused or contributed to death.

                          Further examination did reveal a number of these
                          petechial haemorrhages, these are little pinpoint
                          haemorrhages which were present on certain organs of
                          the body. They were present particularly on the heart
                          and on the lungs. The presence of these petechial
                          haemorrhages were indicative that death was due to
                          asphyxia and they are very characteristic of this
                          type of death and they were, indeed, present on a
                          large number of victims at this disaster.  So I give
                          the cause of death as traumatic asphyxia and there
                          was no evidence of any severe injury which might have
                          caused or contributed to death, A very small amount
                          of regurgitated vomit was present in the upper part
                          of the windpipe.  This is not an uncommon finding and,


                   H
                                                 —


J. L Harpham Ltd
                                                                 PROF. S. JONES



                           in. -my opinion, this has not, again, in any way
                           contributed to death,

                        Q. And no significant natural disease of any sort? -
                           There is 110 evidence of any natural disease at all,
                           sir,
                        Q, TJe have not dealt with it in every case but I think
                           we might just mention it on this one and that is the
                    B      loss of consciousness in a situation such as this.
                           Perhaps you could just remind me and help me on that? -
                           A. Yes.          In this type of situation the mechanism
                            involved in traumatic asphyxia is that the person is
                           unable to take in breath — their chests have been
                            compressed because of the crowd — and they are unable
                            to take in breath and, therefore, they are unable to
                            take in oxygen and the tissues of the body require
                            oxygen for the cells of the body to survive and it is
                            necessary then for oxygen to be supplied by the
                            heart’s action which pumps blood around the body and
                            supplies each individual cell with oxygen. The cells
                            c a n n o t •survive for more than a few minutes when there
                            is a lack of oxygen and particularly does this apply
                            to the cells of the brain and so, if oxygen is not
                    D       supplied to the brain, then the brain cells commence
                            to"die. It may be possible, within the time span,
                            to get the heart going again and this is what is
                            attempted to do in first aid measures by mouth to
                            mouth resuscitation and compression of the chest.
                            Those are attempts to get the circulation restored
                            and, indeed, if it is possible to restore the circulation
                            within a space of a few minutes it may be possible to
                    E       restore the person to life.        On the other hand, if
                            the changes, the lack of oxygen, has been of a
                            sufficient length of time and the brain cells have
                            undergone irreversible change and even if the
                            circulation is started again it may not be possible
                            for the brain to function properly thereafter.

                        0. But it is true, is it not, that the person would not
                           be aware for three or four minutes or so? - A. No,
                           indeed. The evidence that we have had from people
                           who have survived this tragedy is that many of them
                           were rendered unconscious. They were aware of the
                           crushing effect. They became unconscious and then,
                           when they regained consciousness, they were totally
                           unaware of what had happened in the interim period
                           and certainly in this case, as indeed all the other
                           cases that I have dealt with this morning, I am quite
                           certain that Peter Thompson would have been aware that
                           he was being crushed but he would have then lost
                           consciousness and all the changes that I have
                           described since that time he would have been totally
                           unaware of and so there would have been no suffering
                           on his part.
                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                   PROF. S. JONES
                                                                   H, R. SAUERS


                        O. Yes, that is what I am trying to establish.

                                  MR. FRASER:   That family have no questions, sir.
                             Thank you for that explanation.

                        Q.        TIBS CORONER:  Will you be willing to see the
                             family? - A. Of course I would, yes, and if I may
                             be released to speak to the preceding family and then
                    B        I would be very pleased to speak to this one.

                        Q. That is very, very kind of you and I do appreciate
                           your great effort and I know the families appreciate
                           it as well. - A. Thank you.

                                 POLICE INSP. MATTHEW ROBERT    SAUERS Called:

                                              Bv THE CORONER:

                                  THE WITNESS:   Matthew Robert Savers, sir,
                             Inspector, West Midlands Police.

                        Q. Yes, whenever you are ready? - A. Perhaps I should
                           say, sir, just at the outset I shall identify Peter
                           Thompson by his full Christian names and, indeed, his
                    D      wife by her full Christian names, which are Alida
                           Minna Olga Elizabeth, but I shall thereafter refer to
                           her as Linda, which is the name by which she is
                           commonly known.

                        Q. Yes, I am glad you have told me because I would not
                           have known what was happening? - A. At 114 5 hours
                           on Saturday, 15th April, 1989» Linda Thompson saw
                           her husband, Peter Reuben Thompson, leave the family
                           home. It was his intention to travel to Sheffield to
                           watch the FA Cup Semi Final Football Match at the
                           Hillsborough Stadium. He travelled alone in his
                           company car.

                             Shortly after 1515 hours the same date, following
                             the severe crushing in the West Stand terracing,
                             Police Constable Wright went down the tunnel, which
                             runs under the West Stand, and onto the terracing of
                             Enclosure No. 3. There he assisted two police officers,
                             as yet not traced, to carry the body of a man who he
                             now knows to be Peter from the front of Enclosure 3
                             near to the dividing fence between Enclosures 3 and 4.
                             They carried him back up the tunnel and placed Peter
                             in an area behind the West Stand, adjacent to the
                             River Don, where they left him.

                             Terrence Steven Pitt, a supporter, states he was in
                             the concourse area by the entrance to the tunnel under
                             the West Stand assisting to revive several casualties.
                             He describes trying to revive one person who was being
                             attended to by two unknown nurses, and they were joined
                H            by an ambulanceman with a resuscitation mask.



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                   -5-
                                                                   M. R.



                             Kevin Early, an ambulanceman, recalls trying to revive
                             a male person with a bag and mask by the concertina
                             gates leading to the tunnel entrance of the Vest Stand.
                             He states his attempts were unsuccessful. Both
                             Terrence Pitt and Kevin Early have identified the
                             person as Peter. They left Peter where tlie}^ found
                             him and moved on to treat other casualties.

                             It will be noted, sir, that the account of Police
                    B        Constable Wright differs to the accounts of Terrence
                             Pitt and Kevin Early, the ambulanceman. All the
                             aforementioned witnesses believe they dealt with
                             Peter.

                             At approximately 154.5 hours Police Constable Smith
                             was instructed to attend the Leppings Lane end of the
                             Hillsborough stadium where he saw several bodies
                             placed on the ground. The officer was assigned
                             responsibility for Peter’s body.

                             At 1 6 3 6 hours Dr. David Monaghan examined Peter at
                             the Loppings Lane end of the stadium and pronounced
                             life extinct.     Shortly afterwards Police Constable
                             Smith accompanied the body to the gymnasium where a
                    D        temporary mortuary had been set up.

                             At 0020 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 1989» John
                             Anthony Thompson identified the body of his brother
                             to Police Constable Smith at the temporary mortuary.

                             Police Constable Smith later escorted the body of
                             Peter to the Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the
                             identification to Detective Constable Weigold,

                             On Sunday, 16 th April, following identification by
                             DC Weigold, Prof. Stephen Jones carried out a.n
                             autopsy on the body and submitted a report giving
                             cause of death.

                             Found in Peter’s personal effects was a part match
                             ticket for the semi final match but, in the
                             circumstances, it cannot be ascertained exactly how
                             or when he entered the stadium.

                        Q.    I think just to get this clear in my mind, this is
                             quite a difficult case to summarise, is it not,
                             because it is difficult to reconcile the accounts of
                             PC Wright and Kevin Early and Mr. Pitt .... -
                             A. There are differences in their accounts, sir. I
                             am sure that each witness is doing their best to
                             accurately recollect their involvement but there are
                             conflicts, yes,

                        Q.   On page 10, Paul David Wright ---- perhaps I ought     to
                             turn to his first statement, I think when he gave     his
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                  -6-
                              first statement dated 10th July, 1989, that is right,
                              is it not? - A. It is, sir, yes.

                        Q. If you turn    to page h t at the top of the page he
                           describes a    person who he'assisted with and where
                           he did some    resuscitation, is that right? — A. Is
                           that page h    of this file, sir, or page 4 of that
                           statement?
                    B
                        Q. Sorry, page 6 . It is ray fault. I do beg your pardon.
                           He talks about somebody who he was helping to
                           resuscitate, is that right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

                        Q. I an not asking you who it is. I am just asking
                           you whether that is right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

                        Q. And then at the bottom of the page he says he assisted
                           in the removal of three bodies? — A. Yes.

                        Q. So that actuall}^ makes four peox^le, does it not, who
                           he is talking about on that page? - A. It does, sir,
                           ye s .

                    D   Q. The one at the top is a different one. And then when
                           you turn to page 1 0 he goes back to that statement and
                           says ;

                                      "I mentioned helping three bodies."

                              That is right, is it not? - A. It does, sir, yes.

                    E   n, And then he       describes one of the lads who he helped
                           and I think       if one then looks at page 14A, that
                           description       would seem to be Peter, is that right? —
                           A. It does,       sir, yes.

                              This is quite diffictilt because we have to flick
                              backwards and forwards. If that is right, in fact,
                              Peter is one of three people x/ho he assisted with
                              but ho does not say an3^thing about resuscitating them
                              as such. Can you remember that? I certainly could
                              not find any evidence with regard to that? - A. He
                              does not give any direct evidence concerning
                              resuscitation, sir, no.

                        Q. That does not mean to say he did not attempt it.     It
                              is just not stated in his statement? - A. It is not
                              referred to specifically in this or the other statement,
                              sir.

                        Q. And then I think we turn to Mr. Pitt on page 20? -
                              A. Yes, sir.

                        0..   He also helped with quite a lot of people, did he not,
                              some on page 2 0 but on previous pages at least three
                H             and possibly'more whom he dealt with? - A. That is
                              correct, sir, yes.

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                       -7-
                                                                  M R. SAWSR
                                                                  i.;.' t &t t o et


                        Q # And then on pages 19 and 20 he starts'describing
                            assisting somebody with some nurses and an ambulanceman
                            and so 011? - A. That is correct.

                        Q. And t think he has identified this person on page 24
                           as being Peter? — A. He does, sir, yes.

                        Q. And that is really the basis on which one relates him
                    B      to this 3^oung nan? — A. 'Hie basis of his identification,
                           sir, is from a photograph that he was shown.

                                MR. FRASER:   Peter’s family are grateful for the
                           additional information which the Officer has given.
                           There are matters which arise which I think Inspector
                           Layton will be able to deal with but, for the time
                           being anyway, there are no Questions, thank you.

                                TIIE CORONER:  If at the end you want the Officer
                           back, he is not going anywhere, he is staying until
                           we have finished.

                                    POLICE INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                                               Bv THE. CORONER:
                    D
                           Whenever you are ready, Inspector Layton? - A. Sir,
                           Michael Layton, Detective Inspector, West Midlands
                           Police.

                           Sir, an examination has been made of video film and
                           photographic evidence in respect of Peter and he has
                           been identified alive outside actually in Leppings
                    E      Lane on a BBC video.   Sir, that video is referenced
                           MAP 9 with a reference no. 0 0 :09:33s08. Sir, as I
                           have sa.id before, that is not an actual time. The
                           database was not set. But we do know that the filming —
                           that extract of film was part of a film which was taken
                           between 1437 and 1450.   Sir, Peter is also shown on
                           the terraces 011 video in Enclosure No. 3 and that,
                           sir, is shown on a BBC tape which is referenced MAP 1
                           timed at 1456:33:22 and that, sir, is an accurate
                           time.

                           Mr. Dennis Thompson, the father of Peter, has viewed
                           visual evidence. In fact, I should sa3>-. sir. that
                           Mr. and Mrs. Thompson, and in fact Mrs. Linda
                           Thompson, have all viewed visual evidence but
                           specifically referring to a photograph referenced
                           PR1/8A, Peter is shown alive in Enclosure No. 3 on
                           that photograph.  Could you give me a momentj sir,
                           and perhaps I could assist with a time.   Sir, that
                           photograph is timed at 1503*
                           Sir, PC Wright has viewed photographs. The photographs
                           referred t o are photographs of Peter’s clothing and
                H          the facial photographs that wo have referred to
                           earlier on in the proceedings. He has identified
                           Peter as the person that he assisted to carry from
                           the Enclosure No. 3 and, in fact, the officer has
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                   O
                                                                  M. LAYTON



                             signed a plan of the terraces indicating the
                             approximate location at which he believes he came
                             into contact with Peter. That plan is referenced
                             PD'j/1 .
                             Terrence Steven Pitt has viewed the signed
                             photographs, sir. He identifies Peter as the person
                             who he assisted, as you have alread}^ heard, and he
                    B        has signed a sketch plan of the concourse area showing
                             the location at which he came into contact with Peter.
                             That, sir, is referenced TSP/3.

                             Kevin Early, an ambulanceman, has viewed photographs
                             and lie identifies Peter as the person that ho
                             attempted to revive on the concourse area of the rear
                             of the West Stand and he has signed a sketch plan
                             showing that particular location. That, sir, is
                             referenced ICS/1 . As I have already said, Mrs. Linda
                             Thompson has, in fact, also viewed the visual evidence
                             and the family do agree with the identifications made.

                             Sir, can I refer you to a plan which has been given
                             the reference no. MI7JL 148?
                    D   Q. Yes, I have got it. C105. - A. That is a plan which^
                           refers to the concourse area and outside in the Leppings
                           Lane area.  Sir, a second plan, MWJL 53, which is a
                           plan of the terraces?

                        0.   Yes, I have got that as well. C106. - A.  Sir,can 3^ou
                             just confirm for me which other plans you may wish to
                    E        refer to?
                        Q. MWJL 1489 that includes Mr. Early*s positioning or
                           Mr. Pitt1s? I am not sure? - A. That relates, sir, to
                           TSP/3 so that is Mr. Pitt’s identification.
                        Q. C105; - A. Sir, if I can assist, there is a further
                           plan, MWJL 147, which, in fact, relates to the plan
                           KE/1 which is Mr. Early. It is the same location,
                           sir, to all intents and purposes.

                        Q.   I think we will just use the one because - the
                             only other one I think we need is PDW/1?  — A. Yes,
                             that is the plan by PC Wright.

                        0. Yes, and that will be C107.  Can you show us? - A. Yes.
                           If I can deal with, first of all, the plan which has
                           been given the reference no. MWJL 148? This relates
                           to this plan and, first of all, in relation to the
                           identification of Peter outside, we believe that that
                           is in this area here, actually in the vicinity of the
                           outer perimeter gate in Leppings Lane. It is perhaps
                           not quite chronological, sir, but also on that plan —
                           in fact it is not chronological - is a reference to
                H          the plan of Mr. Pitt which is referenced TSP/3.


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                   -9-
                                                                   H. LAYTON
                                                                   H. R. SAUERS


                          Yes, show us? — A# He refers to this area, the
                          concourse area, which is adjacent to the tunnel on
                          the one side and the turnstiles on the other. It
                          is this area here.
                        ■}. And what that means, of course, is that Peter was
                            brought back out through the tunnel and taken to
                            to the back? - A. Yes.
                    B
                        3. And just while we are there, Mr. Early's positioning
                           is substantially the same, is it not? - A. It is,
                           sir, yes.
                        Q. Yes? — A. Sir, in relation to the plan MWJL 53, in­
                           respect of the video identification on the BBC tape
                           MAP 1, if* 1 can refer you to the last one, this is
                           Enclosure No. 3 and we believe that Peter is shown
                           approximately in this location here. Then on a
                           photograph, again, which we have already referred to,
                           specifically on plan PR1/8A is referred to, there
                           are a number of photographs which the family have
                           seen which, to all intents and purposes, are in the
                           same location and that, sir, is actually here.
                    D   Q. There is the one where Mr. Wright found him initially?
                           A. That refers to the plan which has been given the
                           reference no. PDU/1 and, again, it is on this plan
                           here and the position that he is saying that he has
                           found Peter is here.

                        0. And that is, in fact, in line with one of the live^
                    E      identifications but a bit further down? - A. That is
                           right, sir, yes.

                                TIED CORONER:   Mr. Fraser, take your time.   Do
                           not rush.
                                MR. FRASER:   Sir, it is perhaps a point for
                           the presenting Officer more than Inspector Layton.
                           That family are concerned. They know that a half
                           ticket was found in Peter's possessions and they
                           just need reassurance that he probably went through
                           a turnstile. In the light of the previous evidence
                           which has been given before you I think it is ----

                                 POLICE INSP, MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS Continued:

                                                  Bv MR. FRASER:

                        q. It is just a point, Officer, that amongst Peter's
                           possessions were found a half ticket and the family
                           are concerned, so far as it is possible, if you can
                           assure them that it is likely that lie had half the
                           ticlcot bo cause the other half was probably tcdcon
                           as lie went through a tumstilo? - A. Yos, sir, I can
                H          answer that in two halves. First of all, I personally
                           returned the stub of the ticket and can confirm, as
                           a result of doing that, that it does have all the
                           appearance of being the retaining stub once the
J. L. Harpham Ltd

                                                   -1 0 -
                                                                     M. R. SAWERS



                             ticket had 130011 taken b 3^ a turnstile operator.

                        Q.         THE CORONER:   But, of course, what you cannot
                             say is that lie definitely went through a turnstile
                             "because nobody saw him? — A, I cannot say that, sir.
                             All I can say is that the description of the ticket
                             and the inference that may be d r a m from the
                             description of the ticket stub.
                    B   q. And I think you can probably say - though you were
                           not there - that despite the fact that' lots of people
                           went through Gate C, there were also quite a few
                           going through turnstiles? - A. Both those statements
                           are true, sir.

                        q. Both happening at the same time? - A. That is true,
                           sir, 3^es.
                                  TIIE CORONER:  Does that help you? The trouble
                             is that the Officer cannot say - because he was not
                             there - what is not in the statement because Peter
                             was alone and that is the difficulty, but I do not
                             really think there is much doubt that lie had a ticket
                             and that it had been torn in half. I am certainly
                    D        not worried on that score.

                                  Does it help }'ou at all, Mr. Fraser?

                                  MR. FRASER:     I am sure it helps the family, sir.

                                  TIIE CORONER: Yes, but I cannot allow him to say
                             what he does not know.
                    E
                                      MR. FRASER: I understand that, sir. It was just
                             that the reassurance is appreciated, I am sure. I
                             am asked, sir, to remain on my feet for a few seconds
                             again to offer a genera.1 thanks on behalf of Peter's
                             family to everybody who tried to help him on the day.
                             T r a g i c a l ^ their efforts were in vain but they
                             specifically want everybody who attempted to help him
                             to have their thanks recorded and also want to thank
                             the Vest Midlands Police Officers in general for the
                             assistance and support those Officers have given the
                             family following tlieir loss. They have had a
                             difficult job to do and they have done it, as far as
                             the family are concerned, excellently, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:   Well, I am grateful to you. Mr.
                             Fraser has expressed the words because that is the way
                             it is done but I am grateful to you for having it in
                             your heart to say and I am sure not only the West
                             Midlands Police Officers who are here but all the
                             people who, as you say, did try, unfortunately to no
                             avail, but at least they did try. It is nice to know
                             that you have recognised it. I am sure they would
                    H        appreciate it too and, in fact, I am sure they do



J. L. Harpham Ltd                                    -1 1-
appreciate it if they are here, even when they hear
about it. Thank you very much indeed for that.

     Mr. and Mrs. Thompson and Linda, can I say, first
of all, from what 3rou said it is clear that you have
built up a relationship with some of the Officers and
the people who you have had contact with and you will,
I think, therefore recognise that although we have
got to go through these statements and look at fee
photographs and get all the evidence, people are
human and they know and I try, as far as I am able
to understand as well, that this is a very, very
real tragedy for all of you and you, I think, Linda,
have had a baby, is that right?

     MRS. LINDA THOMPSON:    Yes.

     THIS CORONER:   Vhat is it?    Is it a boy or girl?

     MRS. LINDA THOMPSON:   A girl.

      THIS CORONER:  A girl, that is lovely. Veil, I
am sure that thatlittle girl will give you, and all
of 3^ou, a great deal of pleasure. I hope she will,
certainly over the coming years and that is lovely.
Can I express on behalf of all of us the fact that we
are sorry that you have suffered this terrible loss
and it is nice to see you with your family because, I
think, you actually come from abroad so you are or
might have been a little bit isolated but it is
obvious that you are not so that is nice. Thank you
all very much indeed.

     lie are going to rise now and have tea and then
we will proceed. Tell me when you are ready - a
reasonable length of time.
