                                                                                       M IR .15

                                                                                                                      /O/
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and time raised         4 ^0                     Number


 T itle   ’'T e & fi'S x z a t e T             rS   £ + .& i                                               S>~2t3

' (Include 'source and any document number i f relevant)
 \
^Kceiver's instructions — urgent action — Y e s /N o _______________________________________________
                                                                                                                        Receiver




                                                                                                                          Indexer
 Document registered/indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                    Statement Reader
 Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                          Indexer
 Indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                    O/M         SIO
 Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                          Indexer
  Further action No(s)

 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

             PATRICK JOHN THOMPSON




                     Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                       At

            The Medico-Legal Centre,
                 Watery Street,
                   Shef field.

                       On

                  2nd May 1990




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                                       INDEX


                    B   DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Called

                          By THE CORONER ...................................
                          Cross-Examined by MR- FRASER.....................


                        DETECTIVE CONSTABLE GRAHAM JOHN McCOMBIE - Called

                          By THE CORONER ................................



                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                          By THE CORONER ................................
                    D
                        DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Recalled

                          Further by THE CORONER .......................




                    E
                                                     -oo — oo-




                    G
!




                H

J, L. Harpham Ltd
                         ay 1990

                             INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF PATRICK JOHN THOMPSON

                               MR. FRASER:   Sir, the evidence you will now hear
                        relates to Patrick John Thompson, Pat as he was known to his
                        f irnily, sir.  Pat's wife Kathleen is in Court and his
                           others, Kevin and Joseph, and the social worker.   I
                       B present the family personally and I am here today as a
                        mlarnber of the Steering Committee in the usual way.

                             THE CORONER:   Which are the two brothers?  Yes-  You
                         re the wife, is that right?  Yes-  I will briefly describe
                       tjo you what we are going to be doing in a moment or two so
                       that you can follow the sequence. It is easier for you
                       lather than not to know what to expect.

                               I am first of all going to read what happened on 19th
                        ipril 1989 in this Court.      Then I am going to tell you about
                        alood alcohol levels, if any, and then I am going to turn to
                        )r. Slater who is going to tell us a little bit about his
                         inaings.      Dr. Slater is the Pathologist.  When he has
                         ompleted his evidence we will hear from the West Midlands
                       Police Officer who will summarise the evidence for us and he
                       will tell me and the Jury, of course, what he knows about.
                       'Pat.     When he has completed his evidence, Inspector Layton
                       will tell us of whatever visual evidence we have.       He will
                       describe it first of all which is a iittle bit confusing
                       when you hear it because we have got to give all the
                       references, the plan numbers and so on, but when he has
                       completed that bit he cornes over here and on those big plans
                       he shows what he has been talking about so that we can
                       follow it a little bit more easily.       Then we conclude the
                       ev id e n c e .

                            This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened on
                       19th April 1989.  On that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin,
                       Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                            "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                            identified to PC2002 Slack of the South Yorkshire
                            Police as that of Patrick John Thompson by Joseph
                            Thompson, his brother.  He was 35 years of age having
                            been born on 4th September 1953 at Liverpool■ He was a
                            married man aqd he lived at
                                           Liverpool.   He was a railway guard by
                            occupatlon. He died at Hillsborough Football Ground
                            following an incident there on Saturday, 15th April
                            1989.  PC 2002 Slack caused the body to be removed to
                            the Medico Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                            Detective Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently
                            identified the same body to Dr. Slater.   It- is the
                            family wish that the body should be buried."

                   H

J. L Harpham Ltd
                                                                 DR.   D A V I D NEIL S L A T E R



                                 I then adjourned the Inquest so that you could have the
                            funeral whenever you wanted to arrange it for.   I did write
                            to you and in fact, Josepth Thompson, you signed the form-
                            Which is Joseph?  Yes, on 7th May.   I don't know whether you
                            can still remember that.   I asked you to check whether we
                            had all the information correct and I think, apart, from
                            getting the date of birth of you, Kathleen, everything else
                            as far as Pat was concerned was correct, Patrick John
                            Thompson.  That is right, isn’t, it? Yes.
                    B
                                 Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol estimations in
                            respect of Pat and various other people.  He gave the
                            results and the evidence regarding this on the opening day,
                            which is two weeks ago now, and as far as Pat was concerned
                            the level was 93 milligrammes per 100 mils-

                                         DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER      Called,

                                                 B y THE CORONER:

                        Q. Dr. Slater. - A- My name is Dr. David Neil Slater.  I am a
                           Consultant Histopathologist and Fellow of the Royal College
                           of Pathologists, sir-

                        Q. This is a report which refers to somebody known as Patrick
                    D      John Thompson.   That is right, isn’t it? I think his
                           identification number was 49 and you recorded the identifier
                           as Inspector Wei gold? - A. Yes.

                        Q   We are quite satisfied we are talking about Patrick John
                            Thompson, a r e n ’t we? - A. Yes, sir.

                            Can you take me through the post mortem findings please? -
                            My examination of Mr. Thompson showed that the main finding
                            was that of asphyxia.  This was indicated by the presence of
                            blueness in the face and small haemorrhages in the face,
                            something we call petechial haemorrhages.  The autop>sy also
                            showed evidence of a scratch to the left side of the chest
                            and also over the right lower side of the chest.   This is
                            consistent with compression of that part of the body.




                    G
                            found no evidence of any natural disease, sir, and I
                            submitted my cause of death as traumatic, asphyxia.




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                   DR-   D A V I D NEI L SL A T E R




                        Q. You have mentioned a scratch on the tummy.  In fact, there
                           were some scratches on the back as well, weren't there i*
                        A. Yes.

                        Q.   It has been difficult to work out how those scratches could
                             have been caused, hasn't it? ~ A- Yes.

                        Q.   But they look as if they were per i--mortal , doesn't it?
                        A-   That is right, sir, yes-   On the left side of the back there
                    B        was a very scratch, something we call -a patterned abrasion
                             scientifically-  This was of a c u r v e d linear nature with the
                             area separated by a distance of about half an inch and this
                             would imply Mr. Thompson was positioned against some firm
                             object to actually cause this scratch either at the time of
                             his death or very shortly after his death, sir.

                        Q. As you have already told me on many occasions,
                           unconsciousness supervenes very, very quickly, doesn't it,
                           in this type of situation? - A- Yes, sir-   In asphyxial
                           death, as you have said, sir, unconsciousness occurs within
                           a few seconds and there is a report of it occurring
                           virtually instantaneously-  After that there is no sensation
                           of discomfort at all or pain at all and death occurs after
                           approximately three to five minutes.
                    D   Q. We have not heard the evidence yet but' I am just going to
                           put something to you-  It would seem as if we have visual
                           evidence of this gentlemen being within the terrace area,
                           lying at up to 1520 hours, in other words twenty past three,
                           and that he was subsequently taken out on to the field after
                           that time.  Do you feel in the light of what you have seen
                           and what you know about this incident that if he was
                           actually in a compressed situation up> to that time that
                           there was any hope for him from the point of view of
                           resuscitative efforts after that time? - A- In my opinion,
                           sir, he would have been medically dead, as I have said,
                           certainly after five to seven minutes and therefore there
                           would have been no hope at all.

                                  THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser.

                                            Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER;

                        Q. Dr. Fraser, just to clarify the position for the family, as
                           I understand it, once unconsciousness has intervened then
                           even before that five minutes elapses, before Pat had in
                           fact died, tViere would have been severe damage to the brain
                           occurring second by second almost and there would have been
                    G      nothing that anybody could have done once he became
                           unconscious and that damage began to take place? - A. Yes,
                           that is a very important point.   Certainly after thirty
                           seconds, unequivocally after a minute, there is irreversible
                           brain damage which really means that death is then
                           inevitable and nothing can be done, as you have said.


                H                                          3



J, L. Harpham Ltd
                                                             D.C.   GRAHAM   JOHN M c C O M B I E




                        Q. Despite whatever efforts may be made? - A. No efforts would
                           have had any effect at all.

                                HR. LIMB:    No, sir, thank you.

                                MR". CATCHPOLE:   No, sir.

                               DETECTIVE CONSTABLE GRAHAM JOHN McCOMBIE - Called

                    B                             Bv THE CORONER;

                        Q. Yes. - A. Sir, Graham John McCombie, Detective Constable in
                           the West Midlands Police.  1 have already taken the Oath,
                           sir.

                        Q. Whenever you are ready, would you give me the summary? -
                        A. Sir, at 9 a.m. on Saturday, 15th April 1989, Mrs.Kathleen
                    C      Thompson, saw her husband Patrick John Thompson leave the
                           family home with the intention of travelling to Sheffield in
                           order to watch the Cup Semi Final to be played at
                           Hillsborough Stadium.

                                Pat met his two brothers, Kevin     and Joe, and the three
                           brothers travelled by train together     to Sheffield.  On
                           arrival the three brothers went, to a    social club for a meal
                    D                                               to the Hillsborough
                           and drinks before travelling by taxi
                           Stadium.  They arrived at about. 2-30    p.m. and joined the
                           large crowd who were waiting to gain     admission in Leppings
                           Lane.

                                At about 2.50 p.m. to 2-55 p.rn. the three men entered
                           the stadium by climbing over a turnstile which would not
                    E      rotate due to the pressure of the crowd from outside the
                           ground.  Each of the brothers had tendered his ticket..  They
                           then went into Enclosure 3 where, as the match kicked off,
                           they were caught in a surge of spectators.

                                Joe Thompson was eventually dragged from the crush and
                           on to the pitch where he became involved in assisting
                           casualties.  Pat and Kevin remained trapped in the
                    F      enclosure-  Kevin could see that, his brother Pat was in
                           considerable distress before he himself became unconscious.

                                Upon regaining consciousness Kevin went to look for Pat
                           and found him lying on the terrace apparently dead.  Pat was
                           removed on to the pitch by unidentified persons and left
                           with Kevin.  Kevin himself had only just, regained
                           consciousness and was in no fit state to render assistance
                    G      even if it would have helped-

                                PC Keith Smith recalls assisting to carry Pat on a
                           makeshift stretcher from the. Leppings Lane end of the pitch
                           to the Spion Kop end where he attempted to revive Pat
                           without success.  He recalls a young rnan was present,

                H                                        4



J. L, Harpham Ltd
                                                                D.C.   GRAHAM   JOHN M c C O M B I E




                           apparently a relative, when this action was carried out.
                           This in fact was Joseph who was also present and also tried
                           resuscitation but again without success.

                                Having spoken to Joseph again this morning he informs
                           me that before they actually carried Pat into the gymnasium
                           he was examined by a female doctor who has not been
                           identified.  She stated he was dead and beyond help.
                    B           Uith assistance Joe carried Pat into the gymnasium
                           where a temporary mortuary had been set up-  At the
                           gymnasium Police Constable Simon Slack assumed
                           responsibility for Pat's body.

                                At 4 p.m. Dr. Matthew Bull examined Pat in the
                           temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

                                Shortly afterwards Joe identified the body of his
                           brother Patrick to Police Constable Slack-  The Officer
                           later escorted Pat's body to the Medico Legal Centre and
                           confirmed the identification to DC Ueigold-

                                On Monday, 17th April, following identification by DC
                           Weigold, Dr. David Slater carried out an autopsy and
                    D      submitted a report giving the cause of death.

                                Sir, evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                           blood sample from Pat where the presence of ethanol was
                           detected.  The witnesses providing continuity of the blood
                           sample are DC Green, Detective Sergeant John Turner,
                           Detective Sergeant James Fletcher, and the analysis was
                           carried out by Dr. Forrest.  That concludes the summary,
                    E      sir.

                        $. Just bear with me one moment-   It is just that you have used
                           the word "surge" about spectators.   In fact, what I think
                           Kevin says is that he got pushed down to the front.   That is
                           more accurate, isn't it? - A- Page four, sir.

                           I was reading it through and I couldn't find that word? -
                           Yes,:, six". He states, "We got pushed down to the front"

                              has been summarised into the. word "surge"? - A. That
                              word, sir-  I shouldn't have used t h a t , sir.

                                THE CORONER:      Mr. Fraser.

                                MR- FRASER:      No questions, sir •

                                MR. LIMB:      No, sir-

                                MR. CATCHPOLE:      No, sir.

                                THE CORONER:      Thank you, Officer.

                H                                         5


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                            D- I . MICHAEL LAYTON



                                      DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                                                      By THE CORONER:

                          Q. Mr. Layton. - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector in
                             the West Midlands Police.  Sir, an examination of video film
                             and photographic evidence has been made and Patrick hat» been
                             identified in Enclosure No. 3.
                    B               On a photograph referenced PR1/13A, which is timed at
                               1503, and also on a. BBC video tape, referenced WAP 7,
                               1520:08:13, these show scenes in Enclosure No. 3 and they do
                               locate the position of Pat.

                                    Keith Howard Bridges, a spectator, at the match, having
                               viewed video tape, specifically MAP 7 1528:43:22, and a
                               photograph which has been referenced MW 1/2, he identifies
                               Patrick Thompson as the person he assisted to carry across
                               the pitch on a temporary stretcher.    Mr. Bridges has signed
                               a plan of the pitch area indicating the approximate location
                               in which he found Mr. Thompson and where he carried him to
                               and that plan, sir, is referenced K H B 1 .

                                    Police Constable Smith has viewed photographs and
                    D          confirms that. Mr, Thompson was the person he carried across
                               the pitch and attempted to revive.   He signed a plan of the
                               pitch indicating the position in which he attempted to
                               revive Mr. Thompson.   Sir, that plan is K R S 1 .

                                    Sir, can I refer- you to a plan MWJL70 which is a plan
                               of the terraces'?

                    E     q. C206. - A. And then, sir, MWJ L 71 , which is a plan of the
                             pi t c h .

                          Q. C 2 0 8 - - A . I think Mr. Bridges, K H B 1 , sir.

                          Q.    Yes, I think so too, C208.I don't think we    need the other
                               one- - A. PC Smith, sir.    It shows a similar location, sir,
                               but slightly different.

                          Q.    Let us include it as well, C209. - A. (moved to p l a n ) Sir,
                               if Ican refer you to plan      MWJL7G, that is a plan of the
                               terraces, this is Enclosure No. 3.     Specifically on the plan
                               there is a reference to PR1/11A which is a timed photograph.
                               There are in fact a number of similar photographs which show
                               Mr. Thompson in the same location and that, sir, is
                    z-'        approximately in this position here ( ind icat irig ) - There is
                               a reference to the BBC video tape, MAP 7, which shows a
                               slightly different position and chronologically it is later
                               as well.    In fact it is later and that is in this position
                               here ( indicat in.g) - This here is Gate No- 3-



                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                      DR.   DAVID NEIL SLATER




                        Q. Yes,   I think one is 1503 and the other one is 15207' - A.
                           That   is right.

                        Q. Excluding the seconds in the frame? - A. Precisely.       In
                           relation to MWJ L7 1 , that is a plan of the pitch, there is a
                           video identification in this position here ( ind icat- in,g) and
                           this is Gate No. 3 and in this location here (indicating) -
                           Keith Bridges, KHB1 , indicated a position here on the pitch
                           ( indicat ing) a slightly different posit-ion-
                    B
                        Q- But that is a recollection,      i s n ’t it? - A- That is right,
                           sir.

                        Q. We have obviously had to allow for error? - A- As we have
                           said before, sir, there have been variances as to where
                           people thought they were.
                    C
                        Q. I think he refers to one at the Spion Kop as well? - A. Yes,
                           you are absolutely right.         The second position is at the
                           Spion Kop end of the pitch and it is in this location here
                           ( ind icat, in g ) . Then in respect- of PC Smith, he gives a
                           slightly different location, again towards the Spion Kop end
                           of the pitch and that is on KRS1 and the location he
                           indicates is there (indicat ing)■
                    D
                        Q. Again that is a. recollection and not the photograph7* -
                        A. That is right.

                        Q. As far as he can remember it approximately where he was with
                           Pat? - A. That is right, sir-

                                  THE CORONER:      Mr- Fraser, any questions on that.
                    E
                                  I1R. FRASER:     No, sir, the family have no questions.

                                  MR. LIMB:      No thank you, sir.

                                  NR. CATCHPOLE:      No thank you, sir-

                                         DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Recalled
                    F
                                                 Further by THE CORONER:

                        Q.



                    G
i




                    H                                       7


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                     DR.   DAVID NEIL SLATER




     The second thing I want to say is there were three- of
you there and obviously it must, have been very distressing
for you to have been in that situation particularly where
you could see your brother and there wasn't very much you
could do to help.   Was it Kevin who lost consciousness?
Yes.   You were then with your brother when eventually he was
brought out and you may be feeling, "Oh if only I had done
this" or "If only I had done that he would still be with us
today".   That is the reason why I was asking Dr- Slater what
he thought about life expectancy particularly taking the
timings which we happen to have in this particular instance
as to where he was within the enclosure.   I would have
thought it exceedingly unlikely, in fact it probably means I
can go further than that, I am sure anything you could have
done wouldn't have made the slightest difference.   The
damage was done long before you got anywhere near to him.
Although it doesn't bring him back, of course, I don't think
you should be sitting and thinking "Oh dear, it was my
fault.   I could have saved him".

     Having said that, I want to say to all of you,
particularly to you, how very, very sorry I arn that Pat
should have lost his life in these circumstances and I wish
that I could do more than have some other way of expressing
it but in the end we are limited by words and limited to
words.  I would like you to know that I feel for you and I
am quite sure everybody else does in the loss which you have
suffered.

     That is all we are going to do this rnorning. We. are
going to rise for lunch in a moment and then we will resume.
                        If we resume five minutes earlier at five to two, Mr-
                        Fraser, shall we deal with the little bit of evidence on
                        David Hawley, would that be convenient, do you think?

                              MR. FRASER:  I think that would be the most convenient
                        way of dealing with it, sir-  It certainly won't take very
                        long.

                    B          THE CORONER:   We have got some, if you like, new
                        evidence which has just been uncovered and we might as well
                        incorporate it into what is available.    You will hear about
                        it.    You don't have to be concerned.  Thank you very much
                        ind e e d .

                          (The Inquest into the death of Patrick John Thompson
                                 was adjourned until a date to be fixed)




                    D




                    E




                    G




                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
