                                                                                          MIR.15



  OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised   'T .'S     lu S   h v        Number


* title                      0T       C JX-       No                   R   jg > T > \                   r?^~£=>S   Q D

 yiHCludo source and any document number i f relevant)
                                                                                                   S°\^)
  Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No ____
                                                                                                                   Receiver




                                                                                                                   Indexer
  Document registered/indexed as indicated

  No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                             Statement Reader
  Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                   Indexer
  Indexed as indicated          'v^-kTs              CX^ •
  No(s) of actions raised

  Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                  SIO




  Further action No(s)                                                                                             Indexer


  When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                   KEITH McGRATH




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER,   LL.B, B.MED.Sci,      B M , BS , MRCGP

            (Her M a j e s t y 's Coroner)




                         At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery S t r e e t ,
                  Shef f i e l d .

                         On
                   4th May 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
           Official Shorthand Writers,
      5.5, Queen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors’ Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S.''SMITH              Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                                    INDEX

                                                             Page


               OPENING BY THE CORONER

                PROgi SSOR ALAN USHER Called

                            By THE CORONER                     2.
                            Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER       3.

                POLIC E CONSTABLE GILLIAN PARKS Called

                            By THE CORONER                     3,
                        c   Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER       4,

                DETEC TIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                            By THE CORONER



                        D




                        E




                        F




                        G
i




                    H

    J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        Friday.   4th May,   1990


                                        THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                                                    KEITH McGRATH
                    B
                                MR. FRASER:   Sir, the evidence you will now here
                           presented is that in relation to Keith McGrath.
                           Keith's mum, who has remarried, is in court with his
                           stepfather and a social worker.   Sir, the family is
                           represented by a practice which is a member of my group
                           and I therefore appear on their behalf in the usual way
                           through the steering committee.

                                THE CORONER:    Thank you, Mr. Fraser.   Good
                           morning, Mrs. Corrigan.   May I just very briefly
                           explain to you the format so you can follow it.    It is
                           easier to understand if you know what is coming next.

                                I am going to read to you in a moment the evidence
                    D      which I took on the 18th of April, 1989 and then I am
                           going to tell you about the blood alcohol level, if
                           any, and when I have done that I will turn to Professor
                           Usher.   He is the pathologist.    Professor Usher will
                           tell us a bit about the pathology and when he has
                           completed his evidence we will turn to the West
                           Midlands Police Officers who have done some summaries
                    E      for me and they will present them.    Inspector Layton
                           deals with the visual side of the presentation and he
                           describes it first of all.   He talks all about plans
                           and various other things.  When you hear that you may
                           find it a little confusing and a bit technical, but in
                           a moment, when he has finished talking he walks around
                           to here and on these big plans he shows us what he has
                           been talking about so it becomes very much easier to
                           understand.

                                This then is a resumed inquest which was opened on
                           the 18th of April, 1989 and on that occasion Neil
                           Anthony Parkin, acting Coroner's Officer said:

                                  "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
                                  been identified to PC 1883 Mason of the British
                    G             Transport Police as that of Keith McGrath, by
                                  Ronald McGrath, his uncle.   He was 17 years of
                                  age having been born on the 18th September, 1971
                                  at Liverpool.   He was a single man and he lived
                                  at                  Liverpool.    He was an
                                  apprentice painter by occupation.    He died at
                                  Hillsborough football ground following an incident
                                  on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.
                    H
                                                     -   1   -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                               PC 1883 Mason caused the body to be removed to the
                               Medico Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                               Detective Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently
                               identified the same body to Professor Usher.

                               It is the family wish that the body should be
                               buried."
                    B
                          I think I said I             and it should be
                                    It is Liverpool L 7.

                               Mary McGrath, that is you as you were at the time,
                          on the 26th of April, 1989 you signed a form.   I don't
                          know if you can remember, but you did.    You confirmed
                          that all the information which we have read out is
                          correct apart from the mistakes which I have just
                          corrected.

                               Dr. Forrest estimated the blood alcohol level and
                          he told us all about these on the first day.    In the
                          case of Keith the result was negative.

                                Professor Usher.
                    D
                                       PROFESSOR ALAN USHER Called

                                             By THE CORONER:

                        Q. Alan Usher, Home Office Pathologist and Professor of
                           Forensic Medicine here in Sheffield? - A. Yes, indeed.
                    E
                        Q. Professor Usher, are we talking about a case known to
                           you as Keith McGrath? - A. With the number 32, sir.

                        Q. Yes, that is right.   Can you tell me your findings
                           relating to this lad? - A. Yes, sir.   The body I
                           examined was that of a fair haired very heavily built
                           young white male, 180 cm in height, weighing 95 kg.

                           The external signs of traumatic asphyxia were very
                           marked.    The internal signs were not quite so marked.
                           The brain was swollen which is a feature of the
                           condition.    Otherwise I found no natural disease to be
                           present apart from a generalised dilation of the heart
                           which showed only petechia on the posterior surface of
                           the left ventricle.    There was no significant external
                    G      injury.    I believe he was normally developed and
                           healthy.    There was no natural disease which could
                           have caused or contributed to his death in my view.
                           He had a normal expectation of life for his age.

                           I give the cause of death as traumatic asphyxia and
                           that really means that at some stage his chest was
                           fixed so it could not move in or out.   When that
                H
                                                   -   2   -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             happens, once the chest is fixed the victim loses
                             consciousness very quickly in a matter of between 10
                             and 20 seconds.   Thereafter he would have no feeling
                             as to what was happening subsequently.   It would take
                             four to six minutes before he actually died.

                        Q. But he would not know anything about that once he lost
                    B      consciousness? - A. He would not.

                        Q. I suppose you would say that the dilation of the mitral
                           valve is probably due to the stress situation rather
                           than anything else? - A. Yes, I would think so.

                                        Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER:

                        Q. Professor Usher, you mentioned just briefly there was a
                           slight enlargement of the brain.   Just for reassurance
                           for Keith's mum, that is a perfectly natural
                           consequence of this traumatic asphyxia?   It is nothing
                           for her to worry about at all? - A. Oh, no.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   It would not have caused any pain
                             either? - A. No.   I should think probably with three-
                    D        quarters of the examinations I made the brain was
                             swollen.

                                  THE CORONER:       Any questions?

                                  MR. LIMB:      No, sir.

                    E             MR. CATCHPOLE:      No, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:       Anything else, Mr. Fraser?

                                  MR. FRASER:      No, thank you, sir.

                                    POLICE CONSTABLE GILLIAN PARKS Called

                                                  By THE CORONER:

                                  THE WITNESS:   Gillian Parks, Police Constable of
                             the West Midlands Police.

                        Q. Yes, Officer. - A. At about 0950 hours on Saturday,
                           15th April, 1989, Keith McGrath left his grandmother's
                           home with the intention of travelling to Sheffield.
                           Keith had a ticket for the FA Final football match at
                           the Hillsborough Stadium that day and was to travel by
                           coach.   Mrs. Mary Corrigan believed her son was to
                           meet other friends but so far no-one has been
                           identified who went to the match with Keith.

                             Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
                             terracing, Police Constable Philip Wyer assisted to
                    H
                                                     - 3 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
remove a number of casualties from the terraces.    He
then went on to the pitch and a man now known to be
Keith McGrath, was passed to him from the terraces.
The officer carried him on to the pitch where he
attempted resuscitation but this was without success.
Police Constable Wyer returned to the terraces to
assist others.

Stephen Robert Edwards was a spectator at the match and
with others carried a man, now known to be Keith, down
the pitch to near the half way line on a hoarding where
he left him with police officers.

Police Constable Bruce Russon saw Keith lying on a
hoarding near to the halfway line.  The officer
attempted resuscitation but again without success.   A
doctor, whose details were not obtained and who has not
been identified, certified life extinct.

Keith was then carried further down the pitch to the
Spion Kop.

Police Constable Geoffrey Mason, a British Transport
Police Officer, assisted to carry Keith into the
gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had been set up.

At 1606 hours Dr. Alan Paul Redgrave examined Keith in
the temporary mortuary and certified his life extinct.

At 0430 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 1989, Mr. Ronald
McGrath identified the body of his nephew Keith to
Police Constable Mason at the temporary mortuary.
Police Constable Mason later escorted Keith to the
Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
Detective Constable Weigold.

On Monday, 17th April, 1989, following identification
by Detective Constable Weigold, Professor Usher carried
out an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of
death.

Found in the personal effects of Keith McGrath was a
ticket counterfoil, but in the circumstances it cannot
be established exactly how or when he entered the
stadium.

That concludes the summary,   sir.

            Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER:

Officer, the point that Mrs. Corrigan is concerned
about relates to the ticket counterfoil.   I appreciate
the presence of the ticket counterfoil and the lack of
any evidence about exactly how Keith got into the
                          stadium does not mean you can say for certain that he
                          went through a turnstile, but is it reasonable on the
                          balance of probabilities to assume that because a half
                          ticket was found he more than likely got in through one
                          of the turnstiles?

                               THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, I don't think it is
                    B     fair to expect this officer to answer that question.
                          I will make a comment on it at the end.   She cannot
                          possibly answer because all she can do is say what is
                          in the statements.   I am not trying to be unhelpful
                          but it is impossible for her to do it.

                                MR. FRASER:    Very good, sir.

                                THE CORONER:       She can hazard a guess, but we can
                           all do that:

                        Q. However, you can confirm that what was found was a
                           ticket counterfoil? - A. That is correct.

                        Q. You can also confirm    from Mrs.   Corrigan's statement
                           that she says in her    statement   that he left quite
                    D      early, at about 8.00    am in the   morning he had breakfast
                           and then he set off?    - A. With   a ticket.

                        Q. With his ticket, yes.

                                DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                    E                          By THE CORONER:

                                THE WITNESS:   Sir, I am Michael Layton, Detective
                           Inspector of the West Midlands Police.

                        Q. Yes, Inspector. - A. Sir, an examination has been made
                           of video film and photograph evidence and Keith has
                           been identified alive in enclosure number 3 and also
                           later on the pitch.   Mrs. Corrigan, Keith's mum, has
                           viewed visual evidence and she has identified her son
                           on video film and photograph prints.

                           Sir, on a BBC video, referenced MAP.l, timed at
                           1451.03.02, Keith is shown alive in enclosure number 3
                           and that, sir, is timed at 1451.   If I could assist a
                           little bit further there, sir, there is an
                           identification also at 1446.19.08 on BBC tape, MAP.l -
                           MAP.l and the still print identification is 1446.19.08,
                           so, sir, we can say from that it appears that Keith
                           certainly did not go through the gates on the two
                           openings at 1448 and 1452.

                        Q. Yes.   In other words, what we are saying is that
                           unless he went through some other opening, which is
                    H
                                                   - 5 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
highly unlikely, he did not go through at either 1448
when some people went through, and he definitely did
not go through at 1452 when a lot of people went
through because he was already in the ground? - A. That
is right.

In addition, tickets were not separated when people
went through the gate? - A. That is correct.

     THE CORONER:    Will that help?

     MR. FRASER:    I am sure it will, sir.

     THE WITNESS:   PC Wyer has identified himself on
video assisting to carry Keith out of gate 2 and on to
the pitch.   This is referred to, sir, on a BBC video
tape, sir, referenced MAP.7, timed at 1524.14.12.

On a photograph referenced RTS.1/35, PC Wyer is shown
giving mouth to mouth resuscitation to Keith on the
pitch.

Stephen Robert Edwards has viewed a recent photograph
of Keith, one which was supplied by the family.    That
photograph was referenced RPOD/32.   He believes that
Keith is the man he assisted to carry across the pitch.
He has indicated on a plan of the pitch the position in
which he first came into contact with Keith and the
area where he left him with police officers.    That
plan is referenced SRE/1.

PC Russon has identified himself dealing with Keith on
the pitch on a photograph referenced DB.17/36, which is
timed at 1536.

On a further photograph referenced AH.14, PC Russon and
PC Mason are shown carrying Keith.   That, sir, is on
the pitch but it is difficult to say exactly where.   I
can indicate a location but there is not a great deal
of detail.

Sir, can I refer you to the plan?   There is a plan
MWJL.42, which refers to video identifications on the
terraces.

     THE CORONER:   C.241. - A. MWJL.119, sir.

C.242. - A. A plan by Stephen Edwards, SRE.l.

That will be C.243. - A. If I can deal with a plan
MWJL.42, that is a plan of the terraces and we have two
video identifications shown on there referring to the
BBC tape, MAP.l.   This is enclosure number 3 and the
position we believe Keith is shown is here.   The
dotted line indicates the barrier that subsequently
broke and then we also have another identification
which we believe is approximately this position h e r e .
Again in enclosure number 3.

These are the two timed ones which you have already
mentioned? - A. Yes, sir.

Sir, in relation to the pitch plan there is a          video
identification h e r e , near to gate number 2.        This is
at the Leppings Lane end.       That, sir, as you      have
heard before, a number of people were carried          from
different enclosures, 3 to 2.

That is effectively gate 2? - A. That is right, sir.
There is another identification on the pitch h e r e , sir.
There is a reference to a photograph DB.17/36, which is
the timed one, which is in this location h e r e , at the
Spion Kop end of the pitch.

I have forgotten what time you said? - A. It is 1536.
The photograph I mentioned AH.14 is now shown on there,
but I believe it is actually in towards the Spion Kop
end.

Then we have got the other plan? - A. Stephen Edwards'
plan, sir, SRE.l, which indicates two locations here
and also h e r e . Those are recollections, sir.

With recollections we always try to say that because it
is very difficult to remember exactly where something
happened, particularly on a day like the 15th of April.

     THE CORONER:          Mr. Fraser?

     MR. FRASER:         No questions,   sir, thank you.

     MR. LIMB:      No     thank you, sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:          No,sir.

     THE CORONER:      Mrs. Corrigan, I do not want you
to worry about this ticket.    The officer cannot say
what is not in the statement but you have heard that
from the visual evidence we know what time Keith was in
the terraces and we know he was in the terraces before
the relevant openings of the gate.   We know he had a
counterfoil and I think if I were in a position where I
had to decide which way he came in, certainly on a
balance of probabilities, given those two bits of
evidence, I would say he came through a turnstile.

     That would be my opinion and that should be your
opinion too.
                             Even if he had come through the gate that would
                        not reflect.   It would not matter.   We are just
                        establishing the fact of what people were doing.    As
                        far as Keith is concerned what we cannot say is when he
                        came through.   Nobody knows that because nobody saw
                        him at the time and the people he was with, we just
                        have not been able to find them.    That happens
                    B   occasionally.

                             Mrs. Corrigan, may I just say one brief word.    I
                        want you to know that we feel very, very sorry for you
                        and   for all the other people in the family, some of
                        whom, of course, have been mentioned in the statements,
                        at the loss which you have suffered with your son.    I
                        am very sorry indeed.

                            (The inquest into the death of KEITH McGRATH
                                was adjourned to a date to be fixed)




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                    H
                                             -   8 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
