   HER MAJESTY *S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                 (WEST DISTRICT)




        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Maiestv'b Coroner)




                      At

                The Town Hall,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

              7th December, 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harphaa, Ltd.
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                        INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                  Page
     R. H. SALT Sworn

          By The Coroner                           1
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne             13
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning           14
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King              17
     S. FRY Sworn

          By The Coroner                          18
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne             32
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning           34
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King              37
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole         44
          Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien          45
          Further by The Coroner                  50
          Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King      53
          Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning   55
STATEMENT BY MISS SINCLAIR                        57
VIDEO SHOWN TO JURY                               58
AI
                                                                  1




                         FIFTEENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                          FRIDAY. 7th DECEMBER 1990


                          RALPH HERBERT SALT Sworn
     B                         Bv THE CORONER:

         Q. Is it right that you are Ralph Herbert Salt? - A.
            Correct.

         Q. Your wife in fact is the licensee of the Owl public
            house but it is owned jointly by the pair of you? -
            A. We are the owners of the pub, yes.

         Q. You and your wife in fact acquired it in February
            1989? - A. Yes.

         Q. At which point neither of you had owned a pub before
            and had very little experience in fact of running a
            pub although your wife had done some work in a pub? -
            A. That is correct.

         Q. You yourself were inexperienced? - A. No, never had a
            pub before.

         Q. You have worked, I understand it, in licensed
            premises because of your profession? - A. As a
            musician.

         Q. In April 1989 you and your wife were not living on
            the premises? - A. No.

         Q. Pretty sensibly I suppose you engaged staff and you
            employed somebody by the name of Keith Norman
            Ollerenshaw? - A. Yes.

         Q. That was from March 1989 and he left in about June
            1989? - A. Round about then, yes.

         Q. He was definitely working for you in April 1989? - A.
            Yes.

         Q. There is no question about that. Sp far as you were
            concerned he was employed as a barman and a
            ceHarman, is that right? - A. Yes.

         Q. It is also right that on occasions he was left in
            charge of the pub? - A. He was.

         Q. But you would not have classified him as the manager?
            - A. No.
hjL
                                                                      2




                                                        R. H. SALT


          Q. Obviously when he was in charge he was looking after
             it? - A. He was.

      D   Q.   Would it be right to say he had more experience - he
               must have done - than you in running pubs? He had
               had previous experience? - A. Supposedly, yes.

          Q.   I want to just take you very quickly through what
               your takings would have been on a normal Saturday
               when there is no match and a normal Saturday when
               there is a match but not when there is a Semi
               Final? - A. Yes.

          Q. What you said was that on a normal Saturday with no
             match we are talking about the lunchtime afternoon
             session, not the evening session, you would expect
             not very many people, about twelve I think you
             said? - A. That is correct.

          Q. And total sales of around £40.

          Q. You might sell not very much on that basis? - A. No.

          Q. You said 12 pints and 2 bottles. What would the rest
             of the money be taken on? - A. Bottles of beer
             mainly.

          Q. Bottled beer? - A. Yes.

          Q. If it is a match day when Sheffield Wednesday are
             playing at home it is a bit better? - A. Yes.

          Q. You get around 40 customers you reckon and you sell
             you thought maybe £90 worth? - A. Yes.

          Q. You estimate that at about 80 pints and 5 to 10
             bottles of beer? - A. Yes.

          Q. A slightly different proportion of pints to
             bottles? - A. Yes.

          Q.   It is in that order anyway? - A. Round about that.

          Q.    Obviously   it differs from week to week? - A.   It
               varies, yes.

          Q. Do you know what your normal level of stock was at
             that time in 1989 of keg beer for a start? - A.
             Roughly I should think two to three barrels.

          Q. How much bottled beer? - A. 22 gallon barrels though.
                                                                 3




                                                   R. H. SALT



    Q. You are saying two to three gallons at 22 gallons a
       throw? - A. Yes, a barrel is normally considered 36
       gallons when we talk about a barrel of beer but mine
B      hold 22s.

    Q. How much mild would you say you had? - A. Mild, none,
       lager.

    Q. None at all? - A. No.

    Q. How much bitter? - A. At that particular time there
       may have been some.  I think there was actually.

    Q. That is what I am trying to find out.  I am
       interested in what it was like at that time. We are
       not talking about now but in 1989? - A. Yes, and
       there would have been two of lager, two to three of
       lager.

    Q. I think I am right in saying that Mr. Ollerenshaw did
       talk to you and your wife before the match? - A. He
       did.

    Q. And suggested that you buy in some extra stock? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. You agreed with that presumably? - A. Yes.

    Q. He also said to you, "We may have loads of people.
       There might be some damage" and you took certain
       precautions? - A. We did.

    Q. You moved all the loose furniture? - A. We moved what
       we could.

    Q. Whilst we are on the issue of damage, let us dispose
       of it once and for all, a juke box stopped working
       that afternoon? - A. It did.

    Q.    When you found out actually what was happening itwas
         just that the wires had been pulled✓Out of the
         plug? - A. Correct, yes.

    Q. The juke box was not damaged in any way? - A. No.     It
       was rented anyway.  It didn't belong to me.

    Q.   It was not damaged? - A. No.

    Q.    Apart from that, nothing of any moment was damaged on
         the 15th April? - A. No, no.




H
                                                                 4




                                                   R. H. SALT



    Q. I am going back to the 15th April now, it was also
       agreed with Mr. Ollerenshaw that you should increase
D      your staffing level because normally you just have
       one or two people in? - A. Yes.

    Q. But you were going to have four? - A. Yes.

    Q. Including him? - A. Yes.

    Q. You and your wife were going to come along a little
       bit later? - A. Yes, that is right.

    Q. You were going to come at about one o'clock? - A.
       That is what he suggested.

    Q. Then I think we will deal with quantities later but
       you or your wife received a phone call from somebody
       at about noon? - A. We did, yes.

    Q. Saying, "You had better hurry up and come.      We are
       very busy"? - A. Yes, I was in the bath.

    Q. You had to get dressed and you went? - A. Yes.

    Q. You arrived at about twenty past twelve, half past
       twelve? - A. Yes.

    Q.   When you   got there how many people were outside?
         Have you   got a car park outside? - A. Yes.

    Q. How many people would you estimate were out there at
       that time? - A. Quite a few.  I would think anywhere
       between 50 or more.

    Q. You had said 30 to 40? - A. I know I did but possibly
       there was more than that.

    Q. This was about twenty past twelve to half past
       twelve, something of that order? - A. Yes.

    Q.    Then you went into the pub quite najturally and what
         was it like inside at that time when you entered? -
         A. It was very busy. Full of people.

    Q. Could you estimate about how many people were in the
       pub at that time? - A. I would think between 100 and
       150.




H
A5
                                                                    5




                                                       R. H. SALT


         Q. Could you get through to the bar because obviously
            that is where you had to get to? - A. Yes, we even
            managed to park the car, just. There was one space.
     B   Q.    When you got behind the bar which I take it was where
              you were aiming for, is that right? - A. Yes.

         Q. I think one of your staff was there, a young lady? -
            A. She was, yes.

         Q. Then there were two regular customers who were
            helping her? - A. That is right.

         Q. Mr. Ollerenshaw had disappeared because he was
            getting some glasses I think from somewhere else? -
            A. Yes.

         Q. Anybody else helping as you remember at that time? -
            A. Yes.

         Q.   Who? Tell me how many? - A. There were the people
              you have just said plus there was a football
              supporter.

         Q. A football supporter? - A. Yes.

         Q. So you had four people there at that time and you
            came and made it six? - A. Yes. The football
            supporter was stood at the side of me.  I don't know
            how he got there but he was very good at it and so we
            kept him on. He was there for about an hour and I
            never saw him again. He disappeared.

         Q. Very wise of both of you! Mr. Ollerenshaw returned
            at some point, did he? - A. Yes, after a long time
            but he didn't work behind the bar again.

         Q. Was he feeding the pumps, so to speak, by connecting
            up barrels, or what was he doing? - A. He was a long
            time collecting glasses.  I don't know what he was
            doing to be quite honest. He wasn't behind the bar.
                                                  V
         Q. He was not behind the bar? - A. No.

         Q. Did anybody else join you behind the bar in the
            afternoon? We are now at half past twelve and the
            pub started emptying I think meaningfully at about
            half past two. Did anybody else join you at that
            time behind the bar serving? - A. No, other than the
            gentlemen I have said.




     H
'fXto


                                                                       6




                                                          R. H. SALT


            Q. The six of you in other words? - A. Yes.

            Q. Plus Mr. Ollerenshaw doing something? - A. Floating
        g      about, yes.

            Q. You are, of course, in what I would call the
               Nottingham Forest sector. You are nearest to
               Leppings Lane, is that right? - A. Yes.

            Q. Can you say whether all the fans in your pub were
               Nottingham Forest, all Liverpool, or were they mixed?
               - A. It was mixed.

            Q. Are you able to say in what proportions the mix
               was? - A. I can't.  I can't remember that now.

            Q. At that time I think it is fair to say that fans were
               well behaved. There was a bit of singing and
               chanting but nothing other than what you would have
               expected from a normal football crowd? - A. No.

            Q. You were not worried. In fact you were probably
               pleased to see so many people in your pub? - A. I
               thought they were quite well behaved, most ofthem.

            Q. There was a minor incident, of which I do not want
               any details, which was very localised and very few
               people involved, was there not? - A. At the end.

            Q. Well after? - A. It was one person.

            Q. We will forget that. What I am trying to establish
               that out of all these people who were there you only
               had problems with maybe one person? - A. That is
               right.

            Q. Did the numbers in your pub increase either inside or
               outside between 12.30 and 2 o'clock? - A. No, I would
               say it was steady all the time because as fast as the
               people left the pub we had others to replace them.
               It was a constant flow of people coming in and going
               out.                               „■

            Q. What you are saying is that you did not have one
               group of people who stayed there for a couple of
               hours? - A. No.

            Q. They came in and had their drinks or whatever, then
               they left, and other people came in? - A. They moved
               on and other people replaced them.




        H
                                                               7




                                                  R. H. SALT


    Q. Can you say approximately, and I am not pinning you
       down, but if you visualise how many people you had
       through the pub, not how many you had in one single
       instance, between 12.30 and 2.30, how many would you
B      guess you had through? - A. Through in that amount of
       time?

    Q. Yes, different people? - A. Possibly 200, maybe up to
       300.

    Q.   You would say 200 to 300 throughput so to speak? - A.
         In the whole of the time, yes.

    Q.    We have already discussed the ordering in that you
         were going to get in extra stocks and so far as you
         can tell now, having looked at delivery notes,
         nothing extra appears to have been reordered? - A.
         No, because I was annoyed about it at the time.

         THE CORONER:    Did you get that, Mr. King? It had
    been agreed that extra stocks should be ordered and having
    now looked at his delivery notes nothing in fact was
    ordered as an extra.

           THE WITNESS:   It was just a normal delivery really.




E




                                    /Q. During the afternoon..




H
                                                                   8

                                                    R . H . SALT




    0. During the afternoon you more or less sold out of your
       keg beers and lagers, is that right? - A. Yes, we did.

_   Q. You were then left with selling just bottled beer? - A.
B      Yes, we were left with cider from what I remember.

    Q. You mentioned that the bottled beer was sold,
       presumably people came along and said, "I want a pint",
       or half a pint bottle of whatever.  Are there pints and
       half pint bottles? - A. They are half pint - there are
       pint bottles of Newcastle Brown, yes.

    Q. Did people also buy these bottles by the crate? - A.
       Tney did, yes.

    Q. How many people would you say said, "I will have a
       crate of       whatever one buys?  I am not a pub
       person, so I don't know what one buys.

    Q. Quite a few towards the end because they were getting
       desperate wnen they realised we were running out of
       stock.

    Q. So you can you put a figure on it, how many individual
       orders you accepted for a crate of bottles? - A. How
       many individual orders?

    Q. Yes. - A. Possibly about as many as 20.

    0. Does that mean that you must have had at least 20
       crates of bottled beer somewhere in your cellars? - A.
       We did have stocks of crates of beer, yes.  That was
       the one thing we did have.

    Q. Is all the stuff that you buy from Mansfield Brewery?
       Is that the source of your supplies? - A. No, we have
       another one, but we didn't order any beer from anywhere
       else.  We do have another one, a wholesaler.

    Q. Yes, but you are saying over this period you were not
       ordering from that other wholesaler? - A. Only tobacco
       and sweets and things like that.

    Q. Not beer or alcoholic drinks? - A. No.

    Q. Gan you help me with what your takings were? - A.
       Remember the takings were for tne whole of the day.

    Q. Yes. - A. £1,192.

    Q. These are the alcoholic or wet sales? - A. No, those
       were the takings for the whole of the day.




H
                                                                       9

                                                        R . H . SALT




    Q. Ift the evening you did not do much trade though,
       because you opened up very late and you did not have
       much in the pub anyway? - A. No, I had to go to a
       workingmen's club.
B
    Q. Pardon? - A. I had to obtain some more from a
       workingmen's club, some more bottled beer, to carry on
       for the rest of the evening.

    Q. Would you say that the bulk of your sales were in that
       afternoon period or in the evenings as well? - A. In
       the afternoon.

    Q. How many pints, be they bottles, keg, lager, Newcastle
       Brown, what you will, would you estimate you sold over
       that lunchtime period?  Sorry, how many did you sell in
       the lunchtime period? - A. In that particular
       lunchtime?

    Q. Yes, on 15th April, 1989? - A. How many pints?   I
       should have to work it out  from the delivery notes.

    Q.    We know how much you took.  You told us about £1,100. -
         A. Sorry, yes, relating it to >ow much - if the beer
         was a £1 a pint, which it was ....

    Q.   Yes, in round terms. - A. Because I put the price up on
         that particular day to £1 a pint, and the lager was
         £1.20 a pint, if we were to average it at £1 a pint,
         that is at least 1,000 pints of beer.

    0. Mr. Ollerenshaw gave us a much higher figure, as you
       probably realise? - A. Yes.

    0.    Trie only thing that concerns me just a tiny bit,
         because you of course gave    us a statement after .... -
         A. When I read it in the papers.

    Q. Yes, that is right.  You were concerned, and we were
       interested, let us put it that way, and the only reason
       why we are interested is because we don't want to give
       either the wrong impression of your pub, and that does
       not actually concern me that much, what I am more
       concerned about is that we do not give the wrong
       impression about what was happening with regard to
       people wuo were coming to the match. - A. Yes.

    Q.   Because that would not be desirable.    When youwere
         telling me in your statement how much you bought you
         said that you only had about ten crates of bottled
         beer.    I just want to pick that one point up. This is
         w ;iat you said ....- A. Yes, I possible had a lot more
         than ten crates.




H
                                               R . H . SALT




Yds, because if you were selling them by the crateful
then you must have had more. - A. Yes.

Now, this is the issue:  I have seen delivery notes
which you have got lying in front of you, three of
those, and the purchases, starting on 30tn March or
whenever it is, are relatively small. - A. Yes.

But the problem is not how much you bought, but it is
how much you sold over that period, because it is a
question of how high your stocks had been built up.
This is what I want to find out.  Now, how sure are you
about your stock levels on 15th April? - A. Well, I
know from the previous delivery notes before that.  I
can go back to February, right from the beginning.

So you feel that you may well have under-estimated your
bottled beer stocks when you gave us your statement? -
A. Yes.

But you are pretty confident about the levels of stock
in. - A. Yes.

And that it was just average, standard stock? - A. Yes,
all the bottled beers will be on the delivery notes
anyway.

That is what I am querying   you see, because if you add
up the deliveries on these   delivery notes, I can't make
it come, on these delivery   notes, starting in March, I
can't make it come to even   20 crates.  I think that is
right, isn't it? - A. No.

And that is the difficulty, you see.  You must either
have got it from somewhere else, or you must have
carried stock forward? - A. We did not buy in from
anywnere else.

You did not? - A. Only Mansfield Brewery, because I am
contracted to them.

I am not trying to catch you out in any way, I am just
trying to establish the facts, and I am not really
concerned about your business side. - A. Yes.

Can I ask you this, you have told us already that the
fans were cheerful, well behaved - and I was talking
about the 12.30 mark - and you have told' me there was
only one incident where one person misbehaved, and that
is right? - A. Yes.

So in other words everybody was well behaved as far as
you were concerned, you were quite content with them? -
A. There was some abusive language.
                                                                    11

                                                     R . H . SALT




    Q. Tifere was abusive language? - A. Yes, but you expect
       that kind of thing at a football match anyway.

    Q. I see.  Did you see - it is difficult when you have a
B      full pub - but on the whole did you see people drinking
       moderate amounts, or were there some who were drinking
       greatly to excess? - A. I would think that they were
       drinking moderately.

    Q. Can you just look at the delivery note of the 20th
       April? - A. Yes.




                    /(). Because that might just




H
                                                                       12
* i

                                                   R.H. SALT



          Q. Because that might just help us with your stocking
             levels? - A. Yes.

          Q. I will just take you through that because that will
             give us the figures after the event, isn't it. Would it
      U      be right that was the delivery note where you were actually
             building up your stocks again? - A. Afterwards, yes.

          Q. I think you bought four casks of Mansfield Bitter, 22
             gallons. Right? - A. I make it three.

          Q.    Three, I beg your pardon, you are quite right, it is
               my eyes.   Then you bought what is the otherstuff,    some
               lager and this was only an 11 gallon cask and you bought
               two of those? - A. Yes.

          Q. You bought an 11 gallon cask of cider, just one? - A. Yes.

          Q. And some Foster's lager 22 gallon and there were three
             of those again were there? - A. Yes.

          Q. Then we go on to various bottled wine and things which
             we can ignore and some fags I think? - A. Yes.

          Q. Then we come to what I assume are the bottled beers.          Is
             that right? - A. That is right, yes.

          Q. And you bought 450 mis. x 12 Newcastle Natural.      Is that
             right? - A. Newquay Steam Bitter, yes.

          Q.   That's a beer? - A. Yes.

          Q. You had four of those? - A. Yes.

          Q. And 10 ounces of Holstein's Diet Pils and you had eight
             crates of those? - A. Yes.

          Q. That is 10 x 24, I beg your pardon.      Diet means low
             alcohol, is that right? - A. No.

          Q.   Then you bought half pint   by 24   Mackesons and you had
               two of those? - A. Yes.

          Q. And 1 pint by 12 Newcastle Brown and^you had ten of those?
             - A. Yes.

          Q. Then you had half pint by 24 Whitbread Forest Brown, you
             had one of those? - A. Yes.

          Q. And another one pint by 15 of Whitbread Forest Brown, one
             of those? - A. Yes.

          Q. And six ounce by 24 Whitbread Barley Wine.  Is that Barley
             Wine a beer or not? - A. Yes, it is a verystrong beer.




      H
                                         R.H. SALT



Q. You had two of those? - A. Yes.
       /


Q.   And half pint by 24 Guinness   you had two of those.   Is
     that right? - A. Yes.

Q.   Then you bought 32 els.   x 20 some German beer,   Itake it,
     Ratskeller or something   like that? - A. Yes.

Q. Four? - A. Yes.

Q. Then the rest of it is soft drinks.      Is that right? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Would I be right in thinking that that was, in fact you
   were restocking to your standard level? — A. Yes, because
   I was out of stock completely.

           THE CORONER:   Thank you.


                    Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q. This is not an account that you are being asked to do
   just to make an estimate, do you follow, of what was
   sold? - A. Yes.

Q. Just following it up on that basis: the best and most
   reliable arithmetic that you have given, probably, can
   be worked out from your takings because when you gave
   that evidence you looked at a book and presumably that
   therefore was a record, was it made that day? - A. It
   was, yes.
Q. Okay, so we can rely on that then as near as we can rely
   on anything, and that shows £1,192 worth of drinks sold?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Now how much of that has got to be taken off for the
   evening? - A. Very little.

Q. Well go on? Estimate? - A. At a guess I would think
   it would be under £100.

Q. So that brings it down to about £1,1*00 then? - A. Yes.

Q. £1,100 worth of drink sold at lunchtime? - A. Yes.

Q. Now can we rule out soft drink as making any significant
   contribution to that? - A. Yes.

Q. Did soft drinks, of that £1,100 did that make any signi-
   ficant part of it? - A. I would not say it was "significant
   There would be very few soft drinks I would imagine.
How much have we got to rule off then for our soft drinks?
-    Probably about £10 at the most I should think.

So we are still about £1,100 worth of beer type of drinks?
- A. Yes.

Not spirits? - A. No, no   spirits.

Working on that basis then, you have estimated 200 to 300
people altogether passing through the pub during the
lunchtime drinking session? - A. Yes, that is right.

And you have estimated, as just a working figure, a pound
per pint? - A. Yes.
So just taking those figures then.  If one rounds it all
down instead of saying £1,100 saying 1,000 pints between
200 people would work out at an average of five pints
each? - A. Yes.
Or if it was nearer 300 people that would work out at
an average of just over three pints? - A. Yes.

Do those figures match up with what you saw generally?
- A. I would think so, yes.

One other question: what time please did the last people
leave your pub to go to the match? - A. The last people,
well they dwindled and dwindled.  It is difficult to say
exactly.  Do you mean the majority of people?

Yes, when was the last significant group leaving? - A. I
would think, as far as I can remember round about 3 o'clock
ish.
So they were leaving right up to 3 then? - A. Yes, and may
be some afterwards as well.

      MR. PAYNE:   Thank you.


              Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

I will start there Mr. Salt if I may. Would it not be
right to say there may have been at 3 o'clock or there­
abouts as many as 50 people still left in the pub and
they didn't clear out till about 3.25? - A. Yes.

Can we just go back to the initial views of your stock
please. You said that your normal stock is two or three
barrels each keg of 22 gallons of bitter?- - A. Yes.

You said that you didn't have any mild in at that time
and then when pressed by the learned Coroner you changed
your mind but I was not quite sure to what you changed
                                                                   15

                                            R.H. SALT


         your mind? - A. The reason being we can't sell mild in
         the pub and it was just a trial thing that we tried at
         that time.  If you look on the delivery notes I think
         you can find some mild on there.

    Q. You can find some mild? - A. I think there       is some.
B
    Q. How much mild do you suppose you had in? - A. I think
       there is one 22 on there.

    Q. Had it come in that week? - A. It had come in previous
       to that week from what I remember.

    Q. And you had two or three kegs of lager? - A. Yes, between
       two and three lager and two and three beer.

    Q. Were those 22s as well? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you have any Guinness in? - A. Yes.

    Q. What did you have in of Guinness? - A. 1      x 11 of Guinness.

    Q. And what did you have in of     cider? - A.   1 11 of cider.

    Q.    Is the bitter Mansfield's bitter? - A. It is, yes.

    Q.    And   the lager is Foster'slager? - A.        Either Foster's
         or Marksman which is Mansfield lager.

    Q. And you are contracted to the Mansfield products? - A. I
       am, yes.

    Q. What about the Newcastle Brown, is that something that
       you can buy through the Mansfield or are you able to
       buy that separately? - A. You are but at that time I
       bought it from Mansfield.

    Q. So you didn't buy it from anywhere else? - A. No, it is
       on the delivery note.

    Q. Have you got a delivery note for what you bought from
       the Workingmen's Club? - A. No, no.  It was a gentleman's
       agreement.

    Q. Is it not possible, Mr. Salt, that what has happened
       here is there have been some other purchases made which
       are not on the delivery notes?

               THE CORONER:  I have considered this point very
         carefully and this is an incriminating question for this
         man. We are not investigating his business affairs.
         I think I would have to warn him before he answered that
         question.  I will explain something to you.
      You don't have to answer any question which may
incriminate you which might make you liable either to
a penalty or to a criminal offence.

      Now I don't know whether the answer to that question
is incriminating or not, the only person who knows that
is you, but if you choose not to answer that because you
think it might incriminate you you may say:  "I don't
wish to answer that question". Do you understand?

      THE WITNESS:   Yes.

      THE CORONER:   Do you want to ask the question again?

      MR. MANNING:   No, I don't press it, thank you.




                     THE CORONER:   He may be willing
                                               R. H. SALT



     THE CORONER:   He may be willing to answer,
Mr. Manning, I am not prohibiting the answer.    I am just
wanting to warn him because I don't want...

     MR. MANNING:   Perfectly proper, sir.    Exactly the
same warning one would give to any witness.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Salt, you are not being
privileged.   Anybody in your position would have been...
- A. Thank you for the advice.

     MR. MANNING:   It is right, Mr. Salt, that
eventually you were called out to the public house and
arrived there between 12.20 and 12.30? - A. Yes.

And you stayed until closing time? - A. We did, yes.

When you talked about the numbers of people in the public
house did you include the ones you thought were on the
car park?   You remember you mentioned there were fifty
people or more on the car park when you arrived? - A.
Yes.
Was that what you were talking about when people were
coming in and going out?   That was your overview of tne
numbers of people in there? - A. Overall, yes.

              Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Mr. Salt, first of all thank you for coming.   Thank you
for coming to put the record straight.   You must be
surprised at all the detail we are going into here? - A.
Rather yes.
The detail is required because of a suggestion that some
6,000 pints were sold in your public house... - A. I
thought it was 5,000.
If I have got the facts wrong it is my fault - 5,000
pints sold...
     THE CORONER:   It was 5,000-plus.

     MR. KING:   It matters not, perhaps.   That is an
absurd estimate, isn't it? - A. I think so, yes.    You
couldn't get enough people in the pub to drink that
amount.
The reason why I thank you is because not only are you
putting the record straight but it shows how important it
is to get the facts right.   Even if we take your figures
at the highest level, if you had 200 people going through
                                                 R. H. SALT


your public house they were spending about £5 each? - A.
Yefs.
If you had 300 people going through they were spending
just over £3 each? - A. Yes.   I have never seen so many
£20 notes!
Now the other matter I just want to understand the
concept of is this thing you noticed, this matter you
noticed of people not staying, but moving in and out, so
you were getting a different person over the period? - A.
Yes.
It wasn't a static crowd? - A. That's right.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Salt, that's it.   Thank you very
much indeed.

                    STEVEN FRY Sworn

                    By THE CORONER:

I don't know your first name so you had better   tell me
what it is. - A. Steven.

So it is Steven Fry? - A.   Yes.

Where are you based? - A. I am based at theMerseyside
Police Mounted Department.

It is PC 5043? - A. Yes.
So you are a Merseyside police officer? - A. Yes, sir.

Not a local man? - A. No, brought over from Liverpool.

We are talking, of course, as you know about the 15th of
April, 1989 in the main? - A. Yes.

I think I am right in saying that you had come over
together with some other colleagues to assist with the
policing of the semi-final? - A. That's correct.  I
believe there were twelve of us in the end.
                                    ✓
In fact it is quite common for mounted officers to travel
the country? - A. Yes, we have quite a large department
and we support lesser members, if you see what I mean,
sir, with horses.
Yes, not everybody can have hundreds of horses, it is
better to pool them? - A. That's it, yes.

Had you been in 1988 as well? - A. I have attended the
Hillsborough in the past, in 1988, yes.
Fcrtr the semi-final or for a different match? - A. I
believe it was for Everton versus Sheffield Wednesday.

So you weren't here for the 1988 semi-final? - A. No, not
for the semi-final.
I don't know what time you arrived and it doesn t really
matter but you met Inspector Hand-Davis who is the
Inspector of the South Yorkshire Mounted Division? - A.
Yes, sir, he gave us a briefing at about 10.30 on the
morning of the match.
He allocated Merseyside officers to the Leppings Lane
end, basically?   That would be right? - A. I think by
and large we were split around the ground. He put us in
company with local officers in order to make sure we knew
where we were.
Where were you allocated to? - A. My initial disposition
was to await the arrival of the train from Liverpool, the
special train.
At Wadsley Bridge station?   You m i g h t n o t know the name.
- A. I don't know the name of the station, sir, but
that's...
Before you did that did you do a sort of tour round the
area to familiarise yourself? - A. Yes, we were taken
right round the ground from Penistone Road, through the
car park and out on to Leppings Lane before making our
way up to the station.   At each point we had a sort of a
small briefing just to say this was the layout and how it
worked.
I wonder whether we could put the street plan up, C.284.
Just look at it for a moment because you are not familiar
with Sheffield.   Can you see Leppings Lane on it? - A.
Yes, sir, I have got that now.
You see Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground? - A. Yes.

Then if you follow Leppings Lane down you come to a
roundabout.   Can you see that? - A.v This is the junction
with Penistone Road?
Yes, that's   right.   You cross that and then you go up a
road called   Halifax Road and then there is a railway
station off   towards your left? - A. Yes, sir.

What time did you make your way towards that railway
station? - A. We turned out from the local stable at halt
past eleven so I imagine it had taken us about half an
hour, so twelve o'clock or thereabouts for my first visit
to-' the station.
Were there supporters around already at that time, as far
as you remember? - A. There were a very few, yes.

A few? - A. Yes.

Notice anything at all about them that is worth
commenting on or telling me about? - A. There was no
specific direction.   They seemed to be wandering.   Some
were going towards the ground, some were heading away
looking for shops, chip shops I imagine, that sort of
thing.
They were all, as far as you could see, in good humour? -
A. Yes.
Some of them might have been drinking out of cans but
nothing that concerned you, is that right? - A. Nothing
that I considered particularly unusual at the time.

What you would expect if you were looking at a normal
football match? - A. Yes, on the approaches to it, yes.

You didn't actually go straight to the station, you went
up a road called Wilcox Avenue? - A. Having made our way
as a group - I think there were six of us - to the^
station, to make sure we knew the location, we divided
into half sections which is twos and patrolled in pairs,
sort of setting off in different directions.   I made my
way up Halifax Road eventually reaching as far as Wilcox
Avenue.

I think Wilcox Avenue is off the map? - A. I think so,
yes, sir.   I estimated it to be about two miles away.

Was there any reason why you went up there or was it just
a way of passing the time of day and exercising the
horse, whatever one does? - A. It is always useful,
beneficial, to stretch the horse's legs before he may be
required to do some work.   It settles him for later on.
It also gave me an impression of the area and how things
were going as regards the fans making their way towards
the ground.

Did you form any impression? - A. As time went on it
became apparent that the numbers were increasing.    They
all still seemed to be in good spirits, but I noticed
there were queues forming outside food shops and off-
licences.

But, again, nothing you were concerned about? - A. It
didn't worry me particularly.   I had a radio so I was
                                                               21



                                                             S. FRY


         aware if there had been any disturbances in my immediate
         arfea.

    Q. Would it be right that you in fact started encouraging
       supporters to move towards the ground, is that right? -
B      A. Not from Halifax Road, that was later on after we had
       picked up the escort from the railway station.

    Q. Are you then saying that having been up there you then
       returned to the railway station? - A. Yes, just before
       the arrival of the train.

    Q.   That came about five to two? - A. Yes.   I am told it was
         on time so five to should should have been the time.

    Q. Anyway, it was not late? - A. No.

    Q. It discharged its load of passengers? - A. Yes.

    Q.    We can dispose of it quite simply that they were all very
         well behaved? - A. Yes, they were quite orderly.     I
         suppose you could call it herding.     We formed them into
         a group, horses spaced alongside and we walked them at a
         reasonable pace down towards the ground.
D
    Q. I presume what you mean is that you get the people on to
       the pavement and then you put the horses just on the road
       side of them? - A. Yes.    The general procedure is one at
       the front to control the pace, to make sure the people at
       the back don't left behind and we space ourselves out
       along the length of the...

    Q. However many there are? - A. Yes.

    Q. Do you remember how many mounted officers were doing this
       escort duty? - A. I did have a note of it at the time.
       There were the two Inspectors, Hands-Davis and our own
       Inspector Wilkinson and four Constables, all from
       Merseyside.

    Q. So about six of you? - A. Six of us in total, yes.




                        Q. Of course you had to.




H
&!
                                                                 22




                                                                 S. FRY



         Q. Of course, you had to go down Halifax Road at this
            time? - A. Down Halifax Road.
     B   Q. You entered Leppings Lane with your chargers? - A.
            Yes.

         Q. And escorted them up? - A. Took them up to the
            perimeter gates practically.

         Q. Did they go in quite readily? - A. There were a large
            number of horses already in the area waiting to
            receive them. They made their way towards the gate
            and I was satisfied at that time that they were being
            dealt with.

         Q. If you cannot answer this question, do not but can
            you recollect about what time you actually got to the
            ground with your chargers? - A. I can't put a
            specific time on but I would say between five and ten
            past.

     D   Q - Two? - A. Yes.

         Q. Did you at that point observe any difficulties in the
            area? - A. There were none apparent in the immediate
            vicinity, no.

         Q. Did you then leave the area? - A. I remained in
            Leppings Lane. There were quite considerable numbers
            gathered in the area by this time and under the
            instruction of Inspector Hand-Davis I commenced what
            we call a sweeping manoeuvre to encourage people in
            Leppings Lane to make their way towards the ground.

         Q. The idea is to take them and scoop them up, so to
            speak? - A. Yes, not to come into actual physical
            contact with them but to get behind a little bunch
            and chivvy them along towards the ground.

         Q. That is quite normal practice, is it not? - A. It is,
            ye s.                              /

         Q. There was nothing unusual about that day that you had
            to do that? - A. No, it is something I undertake at
            Liverpool and Everton's ground on a regular basis.

         Q. You did this for about how long would you say? - A. I
            think that probably occupied another ten or fifteen
            minutes or so.




     H
                                                             23




                                                             S. FRY



    Q. Then what happened after that so far as you were
       concerned? - A. I could see there was still traffic
g      coining along the road which concerned me rather.

    Q. Motor traffic do you mean? - A. Motor traffic and I
       took up a position to sort of half in the road
       encouraging them to move on to the pavement and carry
       on towards the ground so that I could use the buses
       and what have you because it was starting to get a
       little bit alarming.  People were all over the road
       and vehicles moving up and down.

    Q. There were quite a lot of people around by them? - A.
       Yes, it was quite full.

    Q. Did you say to anybody, "Should we shut the road?" or
       did you just hope it would be done? - A. I had been
       led to believe it would have been done but on my
       previous visit we had coaches and so on coming along
       there and so I didn't really think it unusual.

D   Q. What happened after that? - A. Between 2.15 and 2.30
       I would say, 2.15 is the last time I remember looking
       at my watch specifically, I got a call over the radio
       to return to the actual gates area of Leppings Lane.
       I was at that time perhaps 25 yards away from the
       perimeter gates.

    Q. You obviously obeyed that and you went back? - A.
       Yes, a colleague of mine was a bit further on. I
       rode up and collected him.

    Q. And brought him back? - A. Brought him back along
       with me.

    Q. So you were now approaching the ground from the rear?
       - A. From the rear of the crowd?

    Q. Yes? - A. Yes.

    Q. This was from the rear of the crowd, What, if
       anything, met your eye? - A. It was immediately
       apparent that the area inside the perimeter gates and
       to a lesser extent outside the perimeter gates was
       congested.  There were a number of mounted Officers
       there.  I can't recall how many exactly at the time
       endeavouring to make efforts to stem the flow, as it
       were.  I immediately rode into position close to
       colleagues of mine.  I could see they were having
       some difficulty and so it was my intention then to
stem the flow between the perimeter gates and the
turnstiles themselves to give them a chance to sort
things out inside.

What you are saying is that you positioned yourself
within the perimeter gates, would that be right? - A.
Across the perimeter gates.  It was just about wide
enough for my horse.

Do you remember whether it was the area covered by
turnstiles A to G or the area covered by turnstiles 1
to 16? - A. It was A to G. Access towards turnstiles
towards the standing area.

Could you turn to 258?   Does that ring any bells? -
A. Yes, I am familiar.   I have worked in Leppings
Lane before.

There are three gates, can you see them? - A. There
is three pairs of gates.

Which one did you try and position yourself outside
of? - A. Of the three there the left hand one as you
look at it.

The one that actually leads directly? - A. Yes, the
one he is pointing to now.

Did you position yourself head on to the crowd or
what? - A. Sideways on.

In other words, you were creating an obstruction with
the horse as well? - A. Indeed, yes.

The gate was open? - A. It was open.

Did you also communicate with the people as they were
coming towards you? - A. Yes, having appreciated what
was going on inside I appealed to them to wait and to
stop pushing with a view to getting them in. I tried
to explained we wanted to give the people inside a
chance to sort themselves out and then we could allow
them in.

What response did you get? Do we know what time this
was? You said 2.15 or a little bit after, is that
right? - A. 2.15 is the last time I recall looking at
my watch.  I would imagine this is around 2.30.
What, if any, response did you get at that point? -
A. There were a number of people who could see the
sense of the appeal and stepped to one side away from
the horse but there were others who were either
incapable or didn't care who pushed up against the
side of the horse.  It was purely his weight against
theirs which was preventing entry into the turnstile
area.

I take it you did not just say this once? - A. No, it
was something I was saying over and over.  I may have
varied the wording slightly.

These people who were moving forward towards your
horse and pressing against it, were they under any
pressure that you could see that they had to come
forward. Obviously if they had 200 people behind
them they may not have had any option? - A. Initially
when I took up the position I would say perhaps five
to ten deep against the horse and that steadily
increased as time went on.  It was not very much time
I must add.  It sort of seemed to me like seconds
rather than ten minutes.

You are saying there was a very rapid build-up? - A.
Indeed.

You have said that some people took heed and stepped
aside? - A. Yes.

Are you telling me that others could have done the
same? - A. I would like to think so, yes. Some of
the people made determined efforts to step aside and
get out of the rush. Others seemed quite content to
stay there.

What happened to your horse as a result of this? - A.
After a period of time he probably got fed up as well
as the pressure bearing down on him and we were
actually forced bodily sideways into the pen towards
the back of the crowd around the tujmstiles.

Try not to use the word "pen" because we use the word
"pen" for the inside of the ground? - A. I am sorry.

It is not your fault but it will confuse us. You
mean the enclosure between the perimeter gates and
the turnstile area? - A. Yes, the enclosure.
                                                              26




                                                              S. FRY



    Q. So now you were on the inside? - A. I was on the
       inside approaching the back of the crowd in front of
       the turnstiles.
B
    Q. Could you make any assessment of that crowd? Again
       you were behind the crowd. You were in the middle
       but you were also behind the crowd? - A. It was quite
       dense inside and there was a gap between myself and
       the back of the crowd in the enclosure of eight to
       ten feet, a horse's length.

    Q. You were actually at that point able to hold the
       crowd this side of the perimeter gate from the back
       of the crowd? - A. Yes, we generated a gap.

    Q. What was that crowd doing so far as you could see,
       and you were at the back remember? - A. Yes, I was at
       the back. Even those closest to me, in no direct
       pressure from people outside, appeared to be pushing
       towards the turnstiles.  I appealed to them in a
       similar manner to those I appealed to outside to back
^      off because I am aware from past experience that once
       a turnstile is subject to pressure from outside it
       fails to turn at any sort of appreciable rate.

    Q. In other words, if you pressurise a turnstile and you
       are speaking not in this instance but from
       experience, it slows down? - A. It does, yes, simply
       because the ratchet, the mechanics of the thing,
       cannot cope with the pressure I imagine.

    Q. It is counter productive to pressure it? - A. It
       certainly is.

    Q. You are quite sure about this, that the people close
       to you were not actually pressing forward? - A. Yes,
       they were leaning and I quite clearly got that
       impression.  I would have liked to have gone there
       and pulled them off but that would only have allowed
       the crowd in from outside and made the position more
       impossible.                        ^

    Q. You appealed to them? - A. I shouted to them to back
       off, stand up and stop pushing, to wait.

    Q.   It made no difference? - A. Apparently not.

    Q.    That you noticed? - A. No, they certainly did not
         make a change in their attitude to my appeals.
                                                              27




                                                             S. FRY



    Q. You were in this position for how long approximately?
       I know it is very difficult because you have not
n      looked at your watch and it was all happening.  Can
D      you just give me an indication? If you cannot please
       say? While you were in the perimeter gates. You had
       the turnstiles, there was the crowd, then there was a
       gap as I understand it of about a horse's length? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. Then there was the horse? - A. Yes.

    Q. Then there was the crowd who were pressing against
       your horse who were coming in from Leppings Lane? -
       A. That is right.

    Q. How long were you able to hold that position with
       that gap? - A. It is difficult to say. Between five
       and ten minutes I would think.

    Q. What happened after that? - A. After I had been
       forced into the perimeter area I turned the horse
D      face into the crowd and rode him back out through the
       gates in an effort to restart the exercise.

    Q. I think maybe you have misunderstood me.  I will ask
       this question again. What I have understood you to
       say was that having been physically pushed through
       the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

    Q. You were now within the perimeter gates but not
       touching the crowd or the group of people who were
       actually trying to get into the turnstiles? - A. No,
       I never came in contact with that particular side of
       it.




                                    /Q. And there was a gap..




H
And there was a gap there between your horse and that
group of people? - A. Yes, but that was closing rapidly
as I was going sideways.

And you then turned your horse to come out because you
were intending to start again outside the perimeter
gates, that was your intention? - A. Yes.

What I was asking you was how long were you within the
enclosure between the perimeter gate and this crowd,
before the two crowds merged? - A. A matter of seconds.

I see, yes. That is what I was asking, so you turned
the horse round and walked or pushed or whatever one
does with horses, out through the crowd? - A. Yes, I
walked him out.

At that point was a cordon, was an attempt made to form
a cordon right across the perimeter gates? - A. Not
immediately then, no.

What happened, as far as you were concerned? - A. I
remained facing the crowd on this occasion, again
making appeals to stem the flow, but from ray new
position, which was just outside the gate I had been
working in, I could see that similar problems existed
inside the other section of turnstiles.

1-16. - A. Yes.

I take it people were still passing your horse? - A.
They were still forcing their way past me. There were
mounted Officers on my left.

Did you then move away from A-G towards the other end
of the turnstile area? - A. I moved out across the
front of the perimeter gates leading up to turnstiles
1-16, and ended up close to the sweet shop, which is
the time we formed the second cordon that you mentioned
there.

If you don't know what time it was^ say you don't know
what time it was, but are you able to say? - A. I am
afraid I have no idea.

Was this a cordon then which was - I say nose to tail,
but it may, of course, have been nose to nose - was it
a cordon right across from the sweet shop right up to
the river? - A. From my position I could see that it
extended - I was actually up against the sweet shop,
and I could see it ran round to the parapet of the
bridge.
Db you know - if you don't know, don't guess - do you
know how that cordon was initiated? - A. I caught
something, I don't know now whether it was the radio or
there was a landrover present making announcements, but
I heard the suggestion to form a cordon with the
horses.  You appreciate I am wearing a large crash
helmet, my radio is on my chest and speaks out of the
front, and I heard a lot but it is very difficult to
determine which direction it comes from.

And there was also a lot of noise anyway? - A. It
certainly was noisy.

That is not surprising, is it? - A. No.

The cordon having been formed, and you were near the
sweet shop, did that appear to you to be effective for
a period? - A. It started to become effective. The
problems actually close to the turnstiles inside the
enclosure, from what I could see there, didn't appear
to lessen.

Didn't appear to lessen? - A. Didn't appear to, no.
There were still a significant number of people inside
the cordon, but it was a manoeuvre similar to my
intention when I first moved there, to stop any more
getting into the area while we sort out what is
happening inside.

Was there any difference in the crowds at the sweet
shop end as opposed to the A-G end, and when you
communicated with them? - A. No, the numbers quite
quickly built up again, against the outside of the
cordon.

Was there a pressure again? - A. Yes, my horse and the
one immediately in front of me, which was my immediate
area, both came under pressure immediately.

Apart from the pressure, anything else about the
crowd's attitude or behaviour? - A. I continued to make
the appeals as I had done before, £o wait.  This was
now becoming to be met with abuse, criticism, as I
expect - everybody seems to think they can do my job
probably better than I can - but what I found more
disturbing was the determination to pass the horse.
They squeezed between his tail and the shop front,
which is not a practice I would indulge in. They
passed underneath his belly, between his legs, and were
diving, ducking underneath his head.  My horse was
actually nose to nose with the next one, so they were
diving underneath that gap.
Ar^e you saying that there was a real, determined effort
by some people at least to get through, even though you
were positioned horizontally across? - A. Yes.

The position was relieved when you looked around and
you noticed that the area was clearing, is that right?
- A. Yes, I keep an eye open in both directions.
Clearly if there is some relief inside and things
appear to be under control in there, then you can allow
people then from where you are situated in a controlled
manner into that area.  So I was looking to see if
there was any relief in the immediate area of the
turnstiles, and we could then release people from
outside the cordon.

You did not see what happened to the crowd? You did
not realise that gates were opened, I think? - A. I was
not aware of the opening and closing of gates at any
stage.  From the position I was in at the sweet shop I
could not see any of them. The only thing I noticed
was that the relief in the area was very quick and much
quicker than I would have anticipated going through the
turnstiles.

How long have you been a mounted Officer? - A. Now
eleven years.

Have you had experience throughout that period of
policing matches? - A. Yes.

Football matches, I mean. - A. Yes, on a regular basis,
every weekend throughout the season I am either at
Anfield or Goodison.

Unless you happen to be in Sheffield or some other ....
- A. Loaned out, yes.

From your experience was this a usual situation that
you were faced with? - A. The size of the situation was
something outside my experience. We do have similar
problems occasionally at Anfield and Goodison, but the
layout of the ground allows us to work in a different
manner, and we can alleviate the problems, any problems
near turnstiles, quite simply by riding in front of the
turnstiles and pushing people back that way.  From my
knowledge of Leppings Lane entrances it is quite
impossible to get a horse across the front of the
turnstiles at any stage.

Yes, at that stage you say? - A. At that stage, yes.

Because I think you did see some of your Officers
within the enclosure? - A. They were inside
endeavouring to control the crowd and I don't either of
them could approach the turnstiles directly.  It is
very difficult to get into a crowd from the back.   If
we can possibly get in from the side or the front, it
is an awful lot easier and we are a lot less likely to
injure people because they will move away from the
horse.  If you work from the back they move away,
obviously closer into trouble.

In the wrong direction, that is right, and if they are
in an enclosed area, they can't actually .... - A. They
can't escape the horse.

That is right, I understand. You said you were
concerned about people passing below and round and
under your horse and so on. Was that something which
you had experienced before? - A. Not to that degree,
no. There are the occasional ones who will try but you
can warn them on an individual basis and remonstrate
with them, call them back or indeed chase after them if
you need to, but I was in a quite impossible situation
there to move.

We will break coffee at this stage, and then Mr. Payne,
if he has any questions, will ask you. - A. Thank you.

        THE CORONER:      We will now break for quarter of an
hour.

                       (Short Adjournment)

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, before you start will
you allow me to or three more questions? Mr.
Catchpole, you have spurred us on to look at the
photographs and we have found one where this Officer is
actually on it. Can you just put it up?   It is an
interesting photograph, (a) because it is the Officer:

And because it illustrates part of your evidence.        You
will have to turn round for this one I am afraid.

     MR. JONES:          This will be C314, sir. (Exhibit Ref.
MWL10/22A)

        THE CORONER:      Is that you? - A. It is, sir, yes.

It is timed, I think, at 14.28 - take it from me that
that is 14.27 because there is an error. - A. Right,
sir, I will.

What are you actually doing on that photograph? We can
see you are doing something, but what is it? - A. If
you recall I mentioned that I was concerned about the
traffic and the pedestrians in the roadway.  At that
time I was directing them from the roadway towards the
                                                                  32


                                                        S. FRY




      ground, hopefully using the footpaths to avoid being
      run down. This is shortly before I was called back
      towards the turnstiles.

B   Q. So what you are trying to do, you are trying to
       shepherd them between the houses and yourself
       basically? - A. Yes, forming a sort of open end of a
       funnel, if you like. You can see there are foot
       Officers loosely behind me. They were continuing the
       funnel effect.

    Q. Right in the distance I can see another Officer on
       horse.  Can you see him? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Is that the one you went to fetch? - A. That is the
       one, sir, yes.

    Q. I want to ask you two more questions to do with the
       question of people going below the tail, I think you
       mentioned, which worried you? - A. Yes.

    Q. You remember that? - A. Yes.
D
    Q. When you were near the sweet shop I think you were
       particularly concerned? - A. Yes.

    Q. Is that because the horse does not like it or because
       the people are in danger, or both, or neither? - A. The
       people are in danger from the hooves at the back of the
       horse.  It is an area that he cannot see and if
       something comes up behind a horse, if he cannot run
       away, which he would not be able to if I was in proper
       control, his only defence is to kick, and I have
       personal experience of ending up in hospital having
       been kicked by the same horse.  He is basically quite
       friendly!

    Q. The other thing I want to ask you, these people that
       were coming below the tail and so on, were they as far
       as you can remember, and if you do not remember again -
       I keep on stressing this because it, is very easy to
       make assumptions and I don't want you to do that I just
       want to tell me the facts - were these people going
       under voluntarily or were they being propelled so that
       they could not actually have any choice? - A. I would
       say they were voluntarily going under.   It is a case of
       ducking down to get low enough to get under the horse.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

    Q. Just following up the effect of this on the horse, the
       behaviour of the crowd and its effect on the horse
       itself, did anything happen, apart from people trying
       to push underneath it and go round the back and under




H
: L>                                                                     33


                                                                S. FRY




               the head as you have described, did anything else
               actually happen to the horse? - A. There were attempts
               to grab the reins and at one stage certainly one
       |J      individual struck him several times in the face, about
               the muzzle, which is a sensitive area.

            Q. Could you see why that was being done? What was the
               cause of that? - A. I imagine it was the frustration of
               my obstructing their progress towards the ground.   It
               is certainly not something that we come across on a
               regular basis.

            Q. I was going to ask you that. You have been asked by
               the Coroner to compare this situation with your
               previous experience of policing crowds on horseback? -
               A. Yes.

            Q. So you have in fact given the answer, that sort of
               behaviour towards the horse, how frequently do you come
               across that sort of thing? - A. From personal
               experience in eleven years, people have tried to wrest
       J)      control of the horse from me on perhaps three or four
               occasions, but in a less pressured situation and I was
               able to remonstrate with them on a one to one basis.
               It was certainly not in a situation as critical as this
               one.

            Q. So this was exceptional in that way? It was
               exceptional that the horse should be struck in these
               circumstances? - A. Yes, this was the only occasion
               that the horse has actually physically been beaten. As
               regards the grabbing of the reins, this is an
               infrequent but not unknown practice.

            Q. Right, and following up the same point about a
               comparison of this with other events, when you were
               inside the turnstiles and people who were not under
               pressure were still pushing forward to try to get at
               the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

            Q. Is this a normal experience that you have come across?
               - A, I have seen it before. There is one particular
               area that I work regularly at Anfield, they endeavour
               to push from the very edges of the crowd. Appeals to
               back off are usually met with "It's the people behind
               me

            Q. Are these visiting supporters at Anfield? - A. No,
               these are local people I deal with at Anfield.

                                 /Q. And also comparing ....




       H
r   ,
    \
                                                                        34

                                                    S. FRY


             Q. And also comparing this experience with other occasions
                you have said that your impression was that the very large
                crowd built up in seconds.  Have I got that right? - A.
                Yes, there was no sort of appreciable time at all before
                there was quite a large crowd.

        B    Q. Is this a normal experience that such a large crowd
                should suddenly build up. Have you come across that in
                all your experience? - A. Only if the access is a sort
                of confined area. Most of Anfield and Goodison are quite
                wide open spaces, there is plenty of room for people to
                move around. There is one area at Anfield and in this
                case at Leppings Lane where the area was quite confined
                so people were sort of funnelled into the area at a
                greater rate I would imagine.

             Q. You appealed to the crowd to move back which didn't have
                any effect, as you have described? - A. Odd individuals
                appreciated what I was trying to do and made efforts to
                stand aside or get out of the way but by and large it
                was ignored.
             Q. Now any policing situation such as this depends upon
                reasonable co-operation between the crowd and the Police
        TJ      who are trying to control the crowd, doesn't it? - A.
                There must be co-operation, yes.

             Q. Is it usually a waste of time just to shout to the crowd
                to ask them to ease back? - A. No, not as a rule.

             Q. I want you to compare this situation with your usual
                experience? — A. Well at Anfield and Goodison we spend
                a lot of the time talking to the people.  If it is
                getting out of hand we shout to the people.

             Q. And does it work usually? - A. Yes.

             Q. But this time it didn't? - A. No.

                        MR. PAYNE:   Thank you.


                                Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING;

             q   . in your first effort to create a baifrier to stop people
                   going into the turnstile area you positioned yourself
                   sideways between the perimeter gates, as we have seen?
                   - A. Yes sir.

             Q. And to that extent you were, for the five or ten minutes
                that you were stationed there, you were successful? - A.
                In my immediate area, yes sir.




        H
                                                               35

                                         S. FRY


    Q. And you have described that when a time came that you
       were pushed physically, pushed out of the way by the
       weight of the crowd, that there was a gap of some yards
       between you that you were then able to take up a different
       position? - A. Momentarily yes, I would say 8 - 1 0 feet.

B   Q. And that was the gap effectively which you had created
       by your positioning? - A. Yes.

    Q. The curious thing, Officer, is that even with the people
       who had no pressure on them, at the back of that crowd
       within the turnstile area those people themselves were
       pressing? - A. They were, yes sir.

    Q. So they couldn't, as my learned friend Mr. Payne has
       suggested it is always the man behind who is pushing
       me, I can't do anything to help him, they didn't have
       any pressure behind them? - A. No sir, they would not
       be able to use that as an excuse.

    Q. Your first action having been forced to retreat, if I
       may put it that way by the pressure of the crowd, was
       to see that there were people within the enclosure at
       the back who were pushing and to try and get them to
       desist? - A. I had been trying to do that while I was still
D      in position between the gate posts. When I was actually
       forced into the area my immediate concern was at my approach
       I would push them and cause them to go away from me
       further if they could, so I decided that the best option
       would be to remove the horse from that particular situation.

    Q. And your attempts to cause them, I think you said stand
       up that was because you could see ... A. Yes, they
       physically lean forward. You can see it quite clearly
       they are not upright.

    Q. Your attempts to do that met with no success? - A. No sir.

    Q. In your mind could people hear. Was there any reason
       that you could think ___   A. There were some who turned
       to face me.  I am not in a position to say whether they
       could hear clearly what I was saying with the general
       background noise, but they certainly heard I was shouting
       and I used my spare hand to indicate.
                                           ✓
    Q. I was going to say, on the photograph there you are quite
       clearly demonstrating what action you are wanting that
       particular section of that crowd at that particular time
       to do? - A. Yes, in that instance, yes, I was directing
        people towards the ground on that picture.

    Q. You have made a motion with your hand.  Is it right to
       say in addition to the spoken word you used your hand,
       the non-holding the rein hand to make it clear what you
       wanted the crowd to do? - A. Yes, I quite confidently




H
swap hands so I can indicate to left or right so they
could see clearly that I was talking to people, in that
cafse left-hand side which was towards the enclosure,
towards the turnstiles.

So there was one instance of double determination on the
one side of the gate, that where you were trying to stop
people coming in, a determination to come past you or to
push you out of the way if necessary? - A. Yes.

And the determination on the people who were already
there, notwithstanding they were buffered by your presence,
they were still pushing on down towards the gate? - A. Yes
sir.
And notwithstanding the logic, as you have already said,
of the pressure creating a slower flow of people through
the gates, an inability of the turnstiles to work efficiently
because of the pressure on them? - A. Yes sir.

The second instance of your being pressured and attempted
to be pushed out of the gates is when you formed the
second cordon? - A. Yes.
I am not going to take you through all that again, but
I just want to reflect please Officer on those three
parts that I have just mentioned and how you have
described earlier on, you have described going up to the
Station; collecting the fans from the Station; walking
down in an ordinary sort of way; seeing people around;
making a sweeping operation to try and bring them in,
all of that in a reasonable way, in a relatively good
humoured way and something which was perfectly normal
and acceptable? - A. For that size of crowd, yes sir.

What in your mind had happened here so far as that change
was concerned, what can you say? - A. Well I went
immediately from the position you see on the picture
there of encouraging people towards the ground and
clearly while I was there the situation had deteriorated
by the turnstiles which is why I was recalled, so between
myself, that position and the gates clearly the desperation
or something had occurred to the people that perhaps they
would not be able to get in on time for the start of the
match, which seems to be an understandable priority.

But is it understandable to you, as my learned friead
Mr. Payne put it to you, that there you are a Police
Officer ....

      THE CORONER:  I am going to stop you on that.
I don't think he can really express.  I am anxious not
to get into too detailed opinions and what you are
really now asking him is to tell you what was in the
minds of the people. He can tell you what he saw and
he can tell you what he feels, what he felt, but I don't
think he can tell you what they thought.
Then if I may re-address the question. How did you feel
al^out that attitude, that change of attitude of the crowd
and the way in which they were behaving towards you?
- A . It seemed to me that they were desperate to get into
the football ground at seemingly any cost which involved
taking on a rather large Police horse, which is not some­
thing that is normal.

      MR. MANNING:   Thank you very much.


               Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Officer, I was interested in your observations as to the
layout of the ground and comparing it with your experience
of grounds such as Anfield or Goodison.

      At Leppings Lane end we have a very restricted area,
don't we, between the Turnstiles A-G and the perimeter
gates? - A. Yes.

From your experience of policing grounds    on mounted horses
would you agree with me that in view of     that restricted
area that it is important that that area    does not become
jam packed with people? - A. I am sorry,    you have lost
me a bit there.

So be it. People in that area have to go through the
tunnstiles, don't they? - A. Yes.

Turnstiles slow people up? - A. Of course, yes.

Furthermore if you are on horseback trying to help control
you need a bit of space to get between the people to move
them around, don't you? - A. Indeed, yes.

So if you get too many people into that area between the
perimeter gates and the turnstiles it can have two effects:
(1) it can so slow down the turnstiles that they are no
longer operating efficiently, you agree? - A. Yes.

And secondly it can be so jam packed that you can't operate
properly on a horse because there is no space? - A. Yes, I
have explained it is very very difficult to try and work
a crowd from the back.

So in other words it is crucial, isn't it, for both crowd
control and efficient entry into the ground that that
area between the perimeter gates and the turnstile area
does not become too packed with people? - A. Yes.

And just looking at the layout that is fairly obvious,
isn't it, from the layout? - A. Yes.
When you received the message when you were on your horse
in' that photograph you were actually quite innocently,
I am not complaining, were directing people towards the
ground, weren't you? - A. Yes.

You weren't trying to prevent their going to the ground
you were encouraging them to go along? - A. Yes.

Now it must be the case that at that stage the situation
at the turnstiles were already deteriorating. That is
right, isn't it? - A. Well I am led to believe.  I was
not aware of what was happening there at that stage.

But you got a message, didn't you? - A. I was called from
that position, yes.
What was the message? - A. He didn't identify me by number.
He asked the Officers further up Leppings Lane to return
to the turnstiles and assist, or words to that effect.

Didn't you actually receive a message that the situation
was becoming difficult to manage? - A. I don't know if
those were the exact words.  That was clearly the
impression I got. It was to return because - I am not
sure I can remember the exact words - but it was to
return to the turnstile area to assist. Whether the
words "difficult to manage" were mentioned or not I would
not know that. That is why, one assumes, I was asked to
return.
Let me press you a bit more on that. Was the understanding
of the message to you that it was a situation which was
difficult to manage at the turnstiles? - A. My understanding
was yes.   If they were calling  me back they clearly needed
some help.
If you had known where you were positioned before then
that the situation was deteriorating at the turnstiles,
presumably you would not have wanted to encourage people
to join the throng which was outside the turnstile area,
you would want to encourage them not to go towards the
turnstile area. That is right, isn't it? - A. Oh yes.

You see at a later stage you describe this cordon of
Police horses from the sweet shop right up to the bridge.
That was very late on in these   events? - A. Yes.

Now that in fact was effective  for themost part in
preventing people joining the back of the throng in
the general area outside the turnstiles, wasn't it?
- A. Yes.
Because it was only the odd one or two who managed to do
the daft things you described .... A. In my immediate area.
I can't say what was happening. There were perhaps a
dozen horses in that line.
We have heard from Inspector Creaser and he gave his view
frpm where he was. His view was that it was effective
save for the odd one or two and that is your impression
too? - A. Yes.

Would you also agree with me this much, that if you are
at the front of a crowd, you as a spectator, and you are
being pressurised from behind, it is impossible for you
to do anything about the situation unless those behind
desist from pressing forward. You at the front are in an
impossible position, aren't you? - A. Not personally
having been in that position I cannot say but from my
position as a mounted Officer, yes.

The way to relieve pressure on a given area is to work
from the back, isn't it, rather than work from the front
of a congested area. That would be the sensible way
of doing it, wouldn't it? - A. Are we talking about using
the horse to do this sort of job?

Well whichever means we use.  If you have got a congested
area and the people at the front are jammed up shall we
say against turnstiles and this group of people goes fsurthes?
and further and further back, the way to relieve the pressure
is not to try and persuade the ones at the front to go back
but to persuade the ones at the back not to go forward?
- A. You must try and disperse them somewhere.




                  Q. Because if you are in the middle ....
                                                                  40


                                                             S.    FRY




    Q. Ye's, because if you are in the middle of that congested^
       area, no matter how many calls you receive to go back, if
       you have got pressure coming on you you can't do anything
       about it? - A. Depending on the degree of pressure, no.
B   Q. When you yourself positioned yourself at the perimeter
       gate to try and prevent further people entering the
       perimeter area, you told us that it was five to ten
       people deep away from you further into Leppings Lane? -A.
       Initially, and that built up.
    Q.    So there must have been a fair proportion of peoplewho
         were pressing against your horse who were doing so
         because they were being pressurised by the people
         building up behind them? - A. Indeed, yes, I have said
         so.
    Q. I am not trying to suggest for one moment that there
       weren't some people who may have been... - A. No, I quite
       appreciate there are people who are there who would like
       to be somewhere else and quite incapable of moving.

    Q. It isn't the case that people always deliberately move
       into horses.   For all we know they are being so
       pressurised from behind they just haven't got any choice
       about it, you would agree with that? - A.   Yes.

    Q.   That is the importance ofnot allowing the situation to
         develop, that you have this great congestion? - A. Yes.

    Q. When you yourself got into the perimeter area after you
       had unsuccessfully, despite your gallant efforts, stopped
       any further flow in, it was a matter of seconds before
       you were engulfed? - A. Yes, they were passing on both
       sides of me.
    Q. They were coming, these people who were engulfing you,
       through the perimeter gates? - A. Through the gates.

    Q. Because they weren't closed, they were open? - A. No.

    Q. They were coming through from the area where people were
       building up behind them? - A. Yes.

    Q. Again, as far as those people coming through immediately
       were engulfing you, we don t know whether they were
       coming in voluntarily or because they were being
       pressurised from behind, we just don t know? - A. No.

    Q. Given the   importance of keeping the numbers down in the
       turnstile   area, would information be useful to you if
       you, as a   mounted officer, were having to make decisions
       as to how   to control the numbers going in?   Would it be
\\>
                                                                               41


                                                                          S.    FRY



               useful to you to know how many more people were still to
               come to the ground at that entrance?    Would it be
               helpful in your planning ahead for a situation to know
               whether there were 8,000 more people expected, 10,000
               more people expected? - A. We can t say that.    If the
      B        8,000 people arrived at twelve o'clock.    It depends
               whether they arrive together in large groups, small
               groups.   It is the actual rate that they appear as
               the...

          Q. If, for example...
                    MR. PAYNE:   Sir, my friend will do it.   He
               interrupts before the witness has finished the answer.
               I don't want to keep jumping up.

                       THE CORONER:      I don't think he intends to do it.

                       MR. KING:      I also think, sir, I am not alone in
               that.

                       THE CORONER:      I do it too!

                    MR. KING:   My learned friend does it too. We could
               all raise our eyebrows and go, "Tut, tut," and it is not
               worthy of him, with all due respect.

                    MR. PAYNE:        We were talking about the rate of
               arrival.
                    MR. KING:   It has the effect, no doubt the designed
               effect, of completely losing my place:

          Q. Officer, clearly the area between the turnstiles and the
             perimeter gates could not cope in itself with 10,000
             people arriving at the same time? - A. It's too small.

          Q. It could obviously cope with 500 people arriving at the
             same time? - A. It depends on the manner in which they
             approach the gate.
          Q. Probably about 500.    I am not trying to pin you down to
             figures. - A. I would think 500 people would take up most
             of the space in there.
          Q. Would you say that 500 people is really the maximum which
             ought to be...   I am getting indications that you can t
             answer that and so be it.

                       THE CORONER:      Put it another way.

          Q.        MR. KING:   What is important, in the light of that
               answer, is that if, and I accept it is a big if, but if
               you had information or intelligence that a lot more




      H
                                                           42


                                                      S.    FRY


   people are likely to arrive in a short period of time for
   th'e area where they are expected to enter to cope - do
   you understand that? - A. Yes.

Q. If you do receive information like that, then you can
   plan how to stop them getting to the area, do you
   understand? - A. We don't want to stop people from
   actually getting there.

Q. You want to stop people entering it? - A. Our procedures
   at Anfield are to ensure that they enter orderly.   We
   form queues.   I mean, we can cope with any numberof
   people provided they wait in a queue.

Q. Say you have got already within the turnstile area a
   goodly number of people, so although they are going
   through the turnstiles it can't cope with a hug influx.
   Do you understand the picture?   A maximum sort of crowd
   but nonetheless it is coping, all right?   Can I just put
   that picture to you? - A. I would say if there is no
   pressure there the turnstiles are working as fast as they
   are capable.

Q. It's full but you are satisfied with the position?    All
   right?   Let me deal with that.   You are given
   information that there are another - and I am making
   these figures up for the moment - that there is another
   5,000 people who are likely to arrive in the next ten
   minutes and you look at the turnstile area, you would say
   to yourself, "Right, in order to get these people through
   in such a short period of time we are going to have to
   stem the flow of those people before they reach the
   turnstile area."   Do you understand? - A. You seem to
   indicate that we should be trying to stop them out on the
   road.   We don't want to stem the flow.   What we want to
   maintain in an orderly fashion is a queue as long as
   necessary.

Q. You don't want too many people entering the turnstile
   area for the reasons which we have already discussed when
   I started to question you - crowd control and efficiency
   of the turnstiles.   You agreed with me at the beginning?
   - A. Yes.

Q. If you had reason to believe in advance that a lot more
   people are likely to arrive in the next, say, ten/fifteen
   minutes than can be successfully coped with within the
   turnstile area, you would want to slow down the rate of
   entry into the turnstile area? - A. We would endeavour
   to, as I say, get them in some form of order, into a
   queue.   We would not want to block off the gates and say
   that only so many are allowed through at a time. We
   would have a queue all the way down Leppings Lane to
   Halifax Road if necessary.
                                                                 43


                                                            S.    FRY



    Q. If you don't do that in some way, how do you prevent the
       gr-eat influx of people adding the whole time on to the
       body already within the turnstile area? - A. We usually
       rely on people's nature to queue.

B   Q. Yes, but where are these queues going to be?   I am not
       talking now within the turnstile area I am talking about
       outside the turnstile area? - A. Yes, outside the
       turnstile area they would probably run down the footpath
       and out into the road itself.

    Q. So you would try to ensure that people were queuing in
       some way down Leppings Lane so as to slow down their rate
       of entry into the turnstile area, is that what you are
       saying? - A. Well, yes.

    Q. If you get so many people that queues are impossible...
       That situation can arise, can't it? - A. I would not say
       a queue is ever impossible.   It depends on whether the
       people want to join the back of it.

    Q. I am not now talking about within the turnstile area at
       all. - A. We have queues that range over quite long
       distances round Anfield and we rely on the fact that
       people would rather join the back of the queue than try
       to   • • •



    Q. In Anfield you have got a long stretch of wall along
       which they can queue? - A. Yes, for the most part.

    Q. The immediate area outside Leppings Lane on that
       forecourt you haven't got that situation? - A. There are
       no restrictions on one side.   It is a quite open area.

    Q. All I am suggesting to you - it is not meant to be a
       trick ques tion at all, Officer. - A. I don't believe it
       is.
       It would be helpful to you, wouldn't it, if you knew in
       advance the numbers of people who are likely to arrive
       shall we say in the last half hour before kick-off?    If
       you had that sort of information it would help you to^
       think, "How many more people have I got to cope with?
       A. If I was a supervisory officer, yjes, but as a
       constable it was my job to deal with the situation
       immediately.

    Q. I am using you because you have such experience.   I am
       not suggesting for one moment that you are the man who
       had to make any decisions on this. - A. No.

    Q. The point I am trying to establish is this:   if you know
       or have reason to believe there are a lot more people to
       come shall we say in the last half hour before a kick-
off, that information is very useful to you in planning
the next half hour, isn't it?   It must be? - A. It would
be useful in an overall picture, yes, but not to me
perhaps in particular.

Not only that, if you already have a congested area
within the turnstile area and you get this information
there are many more thousands to come, that is going to
be very helpful to you?   You could, for example, put a
cordon of police horses across as did happen eventually
in this case?   That is something you could do? - A. If
there were sufficient number.
Of course I accept that. That cordon when you eventually
put it into place, and I repeat, you weren t in charge,
you did in fact your gallant and excellent best.   I am
not trying to be patronising, because it clearly was.
At that stage it was effective for the odd one or two.
Did you yourself have a radio? - A. Yes.

Did you ever yourself hear any messages coming over the
radio telling anybody as to how many people were already
in Hillsborough at the Leppings Lane end and how many
more might have to be expected? - A. I don t recall any
messages particularly as to how many were within the
ground or were within the turnstile area, but there wer®
reports coming in occasionally to say that another coac
load had arrived or another train load had arrived, and
there was a steady flow or there wasn't a flow.

This is an all-ticket match so one can have a view if you
are inside the ground of how many people are already in
and you can work out roughly how many more people to
expect.  Do you understand that? - A. One would think so.
I have no experience of working inside football grounds.
I work outside.
Yes, but I don't think one needs much experience for that
proposition.   You know how many people are expected.
For example...
     THE CORONER:    Where is it getting us, Mr. King,
with this officer?    It's a good point, but this
officer...                           ^
     MR. KING:   I agree, sir.   The point I have been
trying to develop is when you have that information what
you can do with and I accept I can't take it much further
with this officer:
You have been very helpful, Officer, on that and can I
say I wasn't trying to criticise you.   I was trying to
get your experience of what one can do.
'?
 y


                                                                   44^



                                                                 S. FRY


                       Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

         Q. Officer, just following on very briefly from that,     You
            were   saying that you don't think queues are ever
            impossible. Obviously you rely     on forming a queue on
     3      the reasonable co-operation of the crowd? - A. Yes.

         Q. Would you look at the bundle of photographs, at C.282?
            That  is the scene at Leppings Lane at about twenty-five
            past   two? - A. Yes.
         Q. We see the line of police officers filtering fans into
            the turnstile area and that may be yourself on the horse
            there... - A. It is.

         Q. ...and there is another police horse further up.    When
            you were saying there was a queue right the way back down
            Leppings Lane, assuming the reasonable co-operation of
            the crowd you can do a number of things, can t you?    You
            can slow down the rate at which they are approaching the
            ground by talking to them, slowing their ent^y, going
            along that pavement? - A. It gives the impression here
            that we actually formed a queue down the road.   It
            isn't.   That is still at the point I was getting them
            towards the ground.




                          Q. I am saying this sort,




     H
                                                            45




                                                        S. FRY


     Q. I am saying from this sort of scene the Jury could
        get the picture if a queue had been formed? - A. Yes,
        it could certainly be run along the line that that
jj      picture gives the impression of, yes.

                   Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN;

     Q. We have heard from many, many witnesses, including
        yourself, that the Liverpool supporters were mainly
        good humoured and well behaved. Another thing that
        many witnesses noticed, including yourself, was that
        the numbers of fans arriving that day was far greater
        than you would normally expect. Do you agree with
        that? - A. The number of fans in that area, in such a
        concentrated area, was probably greater than one
        might expect. We do have crowds of this size at
        Anfield but we have rather more room to spread them
        out if you see what I mean.

          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I keep on interrupting
     you and I hope you will not take it amiss.  I do not think
     the Officer said that the number of fans was greater.  I
     think the point he was making from my recollection is the
     time of arrival, the number of fans who arrived at a
     particular time was greater, which is slightly different.
     Do you want to rephrase your question?

          MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, I understand.

          THE CORONER:    Can you see what I mean?

          MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, I quite understand.

          THE CORONER:   I do not want to interrupt you. Take
     your time but I think you ought to rephrase it slightly.

     Q.    MRS. McBRIEN: We have also been told that things
        were moving normally and orderly, as we can see in
        the photograph here, up to about 2.30.  Is that
        correct? - A. Yes, from my position which is shown on
        the photograph there.
                                           ✓
     Q. I made a note of what you said and you said a rapid
        build-up occurred after 2.30? - A. That was the time
        when I moved down to the perimeter gates.

     Q. The pressure then started to become intense, you say?
        - A. It was on my offside, yes.

     Q. From what I can understand from the notes I have made
        is that it did not seem to be the behaviour of fans
JLJr
                                                                     46




                                                              S. FRY


             but the pressure that was making them appear
             different, the numbers that were there all at one
             time? - A. For whatever reason there were large
             numbers of people there and they were clearly under
       B     some stress or other.   It made them angry,
             desperate, whatever you like.   I am not a regular
             football supporter.   I am a mounted Officer who sees
             what is in my immediate area and the impression I got
             was that there was a desperation for people to be
             getting past me, maybe not the ones immediately up
             against my horse but certainly the people who were
             behind them.

           Q. These quite large numbers had suddenly appeared at
              the gates at Leppings Lane? It had built up quite
              suddenly? - A. I think the picture there shows that
              there was quite a steady stream. The footpath there
              was quite wide and they were arriving not only from
              the direction which you see on the picture there but
              from behind me, from over the bridge, in an equal
              stream and into a very small area. As I say, at
              Anfield that same number of fans will arrive around
              three-quarters of the ground simply because we have
              the access. At Hillsborough here in Leppings Lane
              the access to half the ground is restricted to that
              one little area.

           Q. Did you notice the people at the back of the crowds,
              further down the road, were all of a sudden able to
              come past the ones that were nearer the entrance
              gates when the road was closed? Did these people
              from the back have easier access down? - A. I am
              sorry, are you talking about outside between me and
              Leppings Lane or on the inside between me and the
              turnstiles? I am sorry if I am confusing you.

           Q. That looks like an orderly queue coming down the road
              and what I was wondering was that once traffic was
              stopped from coming down could it be possible that
              the ones at the back would have easy access and come
              in front of the ones who were further down the road
              from them? - A. Yes, if there is no^traffic or no
              method of keeping them on the footpath they quite
              simply walk off the footpath and around.  I must
              point out that that picture isn't actually of a
              queue.  This was just to give an impression of that
              is what a queue could be like with the co-operation
              of people and a sufficient number of Officers either
              on foot or on horse but we still rely on the fact
              that people join the back of the queue and will not
              walk round it.




       H
Q. It looks organised from what I can see.  I was just
   wondering if people would become angry if they found
   people further back had been given easy access in
   front of them? - A. It is not our intention to give
   anybody from the back easier access. We always try
   to get the people into the ground in the order in
   which they arrive.  If people don't want to queue
   orderly and they walk round it then clearly there is
   going to be some frustration, and not just on the
   fans' part either.

Q. Would you say that the traffic itself is an effective
   control of a number of people? - A. It can be if it
   is heavy enough. A sufficient number of people
   walking in a road will stop the traffic anyway.

Q. I did not really mean that. Because there is traffic
   moving along a road people would normally keep to the
   pavement for their own safety reasons, would they
   not? - A. Yes, but I tend to find that they will walk
   out into the road, into traffic, and cause it to
   stop.  It is a regular thing. This is mainly
   something you see on the exit from the ground but it
   can happen on the approaches to the ground.  They
   simply walk into the road in sufficient number to
   stop or slow down the traffic and it then becomes an
   inefficient barrier; not only that but the vehicles
   then obstruct the working of the horses in particular
   who would far rather that there be no traffic around.
   You can control them against the wall if there is one
   available.

Q. What I feel is that if the process had been
   completely reversed, what you were seeing was what
   you...

     THE CORONER:   Hang on. This Officer did not stop the
traffic. He has told you what he thinks about it.   It does
not matter what you feel, Mrs. McBrien.  I understand why
you feel it. You can ask the Officer questions but you
must not tell him what you feel.  I fe§l very unfair with
regard to you because it seems to me that I spend most of
my time interrupting you and not interrupting anybody else.
I do not mean to do that.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Do you agree that all   Police
     Officers must do everything in their power   to avoid
     congestion at the turnstiles? - A. I would   think that
     was the understood thing. Our priority is    the
     protection of life.
                                                              48




                                                         S. FRY



    Q.    So it would be one of the guidelines you would be
         given? - A. Oh yes but we still rely on the fact that
g         people must co-operate and do as we ask.

    Q.    As Mr. King said, there must be control on the
         numbers in a very restricted area, would you agree? -
         A. The simplest method of control is to form a queue
         of some description and again I must state that if
         people are not willing to queue there is very little,
         without recourse to force, that we can do about it.

    Q. I have made a note that you said at one point people
       were supposed to sort themselves out in the turnstile
       area? - A. There were two colleagues ofmine close to
       the turnstiles and they were working with the people
       in that area. They were already within the crowd.
       They weren't trying to work it from the back which is
       the position I would have been in.  It was my
       intention to stop any more getting into the turnstile
       area while they, with the assistance of the mounted
       Officers in there, sorted the queue out.
D
    Q. How could they sort themselves if they were so
       tightly packed that even the Police Officers in there
       were not able to move? - A. If they listened to the
       appeal of the Police Officers and backed off from the
       rear of the crowd, as I say, the two Officers within
       the area were in a position to encourage the people
       to go back and this would have become effective.
       With relief from the back the turnstiles would have
       begun operating normally.

    Q. I thought from my notes it was a message to the
       people who were in the congested area to sort
       themselves out and not the ones further back? - A.
       This is perhaps a bad term I have used which has
       misguided you. By relieving the pressure from the
       rear, which was my intention, and to some degree it
       worked because the gap opened up between myself and
       the back of the crowd in front of the turnstiles, by
       relieving that pressure the people ^t the back could
       stand up, back off slightly and come back towards me
       thereby eventually relieving the pressure from the
       front.  I asked the people to do this, the two
       Officers inside were making similar appeals, and I am
       afraid it proved to be fruitless.

    Q. Did you ever get in touch with the control room when
       you saw real problems outside? - A. My impression of
       the radio traffic at the time I was working, I was




H
                                                             49




                                                          S. FRY


       using one hand to control the horse and another to
       gesticulate to the crowd. There was a lot of radio
       traffic, a lot of talk on the radio.  There were
       Sergeants and Inspectors in the area.  It would be
B      their place to be the principal communicators rather
       than have every Constable, such as myself, trying to
       break through as well.

    Q. So you did not personally get in touch? - A. Not
       personally, no.

    Q. Do you think that horses can be dangerous to the
       public? They are rather large animals, are they not,
       to be walking around? - A. I don't know whether we
       work on a sort of element of fear if that is what you
       are trying to put across but the horse commands a
       certain amount of respect. The position is that we
       can do the work of twelve men on foot simply by our
       size and our presence, by our height because we can
       see a good deal further into a crowd or along a road
       than somebody on foot can. The presence of a horse
       is invaluable in crowd control.
D
    Q. I was just wondering if some people may have been
       trying to escape from that area, even underneath the
       horse, just because of its sheer size by the side of
       them? - A. In each case where I had people up against
       me they could move along   the side of the horse and go
       away, in my case towards   the back of the horse.
       There were some people escaping into the sweet shop
       at some stage to avoid pressure. A horse is not in
       its nature a dangerous animal.

    Q. It could be if it kicked though? - A. Yes, it can
       kick.  It can tread on people and it can bite people.
       It is not a problem that   we have.If I approach
       somebody at a walk you are quite likely to stand
       there.  If I approach somebody at speed or apparently
       out of control they will run away from me. When I
       was pushed into the area of the turnstiles it was my
       first thought that the speed and apparent lack of
       control, though it wasn't actually,^would frighten
       the people near the turnstiles and have them force
       themselves away from me which is why I turned and
       rode away.




                                 /Q.   Also I think....




H
                                                                   50



                                                          S. FRY




Q. Also I think people may just move out of the way of the
   horse. You don't know what a horse is going to do
   along a pavement, if I could put it like that. A horse
   can make quite a lot of mess - they can avoid a horse
   because of that, can't they? I know when I go for a
   walk into a woodland area near my home ....

          THE CORONER:   What is it you are trying to
     suggest, Mrs. McBrien ....

             MRS. McBRIEN:    I am just saying that a horse ....

             THE CORONER:    I am not quite clear what the point
     it.

          MRS. McBRIEN:   I am just saying people may just
     get out of the way of a horse.

          THE CORONER:   Are you putting to the Officer that
     the people who were ducking beneath the tail of the
     horse, going underneath its belly and other things that
     he described were actually moving forward because they
     were trying to avoid it?

             MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Have you understood the question? -
     A. Yes, sir.  In a normal queue it may be two by two,
     or four deep, moving along past a horse, if somebody is
     genuinely frightened of horses, and I accept that there
     are many people who are, they will move to a point as
     far away from the horse as they can. The people who
     are more confident will walk alongside the horse, even
     brushing along the side of him.   I understand that if
     a horse appears to be out of control though anybody
     will run away - I do.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN: I  would certainly be scared
     standing by the side of a horse.   Do you think
     personally that it would have been a good idea to delay
     the kick-off?

             THE CORONER:    No opinions of this witness on
     that.

Q.            MRS. McBRIEN: I   think that isenough.   Thank
     you,     Officer. - A.Thank you.

             THE CORONER:    Anything else?

                       Further bv THE CORONER

Q. I want to just ask you one or two more things which
   arise to a certain extent out of what Mr. King has
                                                    S. FRY




   said. That picture you have already said three times
   is not, in fact, the formation of a queue? - A. No, it
   gives an impression of what one might be like.

Q. But if you had wanted to form a queue, or if you were
   forming queues at Anfield, that is what it would look
   like approximately? - A. Approximately, yes.

Q. You have also already told me that at some point the
   road was sealed off for vehicular traffic? - A. No
   further traffic came down to my knowledge.
                  I

Q. Sorry, perhaps I should not have put it like that. You
   noticed that there was not any more traffic. - A. It
   has been put to you that one has to limit the number of
   people who enter a confined space and you agreed with
   that^ didn't you? Mr. King put that to you. - A. Yes.

Q. And that is sensible, commonsense.  If you just turn
   round and look at the model, it is right, is it not,
   that there is a bank of turnstiles all along there,
   there are then two confined spaces, yes? - A. Yes.

Q. Then there are some gates which in fact we will assume
   were open for the sake of what I am saying, and then
   there is an expanse of paving and then an expanse of
   road, is that right? - A. Yes, that is my impression.

Q. And that road, you patrolled at least from Halifax Road
   down, and Leppings Lane is quite a longish road, isn't
   it? - A. It is, yes.

Q. It is not a mile long but it is a longish road? - A.
   Quite a long, straight line, yes.

Q. Did you see anything which prevented people, instead of
   entering the confined areas, remaining further back and
   moving forward as space cleared ahead of them? - A.
   There were no physical barriers of that sort in
   operation, but the fans were coming from different
   directions and as far as the horses allocated to
   Leppings Lane originally, I was not one of them, the
   number of different directions fans were approaching
   from, and the number of different areas of the ground
   they were trying to enter, I think made perhaps a long
   queue of that nature probably impractical at the time.

Q. The second thing that I want to ask you is, it was put
   to you that to clear a crowd that is pressing forward
   you have to start at the back, that is right? Mr. King
   put that to you and, in fact, I put it to you as well,
   and you would agree with that? - A. The practice, if it
   was available, would be to ease the pressure from the
   back. At Anfield we can start this exercise by
actually putting a horse in at some stage near the
middle, and moving that section back, so we could
equally approach from the side if it was possible.

That is the point that I want to ask you.  When you
positioned yourself outside the perimeter gates in the
first instance. - A. Yes.

Was that in fact what you were trying to do, you were
trying to split the crowd so that you formed, and in
theory, I suppose, one could have split it in segments
all the way dowri Leppings Lane if one had the horse
power, would that be right? - A. Either horse or
manpower, yes.

Is that what you were trying tp do, in fact? - A. Well
I would not say that was my overall view of the thing,
to operate that system all the way down Leppings Lane.

No, sorry, I asked you two questions in one. The first
question is when you positioned yourself at the
perimeter gate, broadways on as you have described, to
hold the people who were coming down Leppings Lane, was
it your intention, in fact, to relieve the pressure at
the back of the people who were already within the
turnstile area? - A. Yes.

And the reason why you were frustrated was because the
pressure of the people who were coming forward moved
you in to the perimeter gates? - A. Eventually, yes.

But you had actually managed to create a bit of space?
- A. I created a gap there.

That is right.  People could have moved back if they
had wished at that point in time, within the turnstile
area? - A. Within that area, yes.

Not the ones at the front, I am not talking about
those, I am talking about the ones at the back? - A.
Yes.

The other thing I just want to ask you is am I right in
thinking that if you were, say, anticipating a riotous
assembly, where there might be real trouble, is it
possible to dress the horse up in protective clothing,
to try and shield it? - A. We do have protective
equipment. The South Yorkshire Force I believe use
some different to our own.

Yes, but you have some - none of that was used on this
instance? - A. Not on the Merseyside horses, no.
Q. Was that because you did not anticipate any .... - A.
   There was no anticipation of any trouble.  We have
   found, Merseyside personally, that it creates more
   problems than it solves on occasions, because we have
   lack of experience of actual physical abuse of the
   horse, the blinkers and visors and such like that we
   put on them restrict the horse's view.

          MR. KING:   Can I just ask a very short
     supplemental arising out of your questions?

          THE CORONER:      Of course.

              Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Q.   Taking the three     points which the learned Coroner has
     put to you. - A.    Yes.

Q. Do I understand this, that before you got the message
   to go to the turnstiles, that was when you got the
   radio message, before then when you were in the
   position we saw on the photograph, to your knowledge
   and eyes there were no' positive steps slowing down the
   progress of fans down Leppings Lane, or any positive
   steps being taken to prevent their progress along
   Leppings Lane, that is correct, isn t it? - A. It was
   not something that was required at the time.

Q.   No, in other words they    were being allowed to go along
     Leppings Lane to get to    where the ground was? - A. Yes.
     My function was just to    get them off the road, because
     there was still traffic    there.

Q. I just wanted to know whether there were any steps in
   place, and the answer was there were not.  Number two,
   the learned Coroner put to you that you were, when you
   were by the perimeter gates, relieving the pressure on
   those who were behind you, in other words those in the
   perimeter area, in the turnstile area. - A. Between
   myself and the turnstiles.

Q. Again, this is just a fact, where you were was not
   relieving the pressure on the back of the people who
   were ahead of you, was it? You were merely seeking to
   relieve the pressure of the people behind you.  In
   other words, you were in the middle of two groups of
   people.  In front of you, when you had your back to the
   perimeter gates, there was a .... - A. I was broadside
   on, across the gates.

Q. Across them, there was a bank of people, you told us,
   five to ten deep? - A. This is between me and Leppings
   Lane outside the perimeter, yes.
Q. Yes, you were not at the back of those people,
   obviously not? - A. No.

Q. So all I am saying is you were not seeking to relieve
   the pressure of the people at the back of that group? -
   A. No.

Q. Thank you very much.

        THE CORONER:   It is impossible to relieve the
   pressure at the back of a group in two places at once,
   isn't it?       *

        MR. KING:   Sir, the point I am making, the point
   I was trying to put to the witness - he was doing his
   honest best - the point I was putting was that you have
   to relieve pressure from the back, and you have to
   identify what the back is for the purpose of relieving
   pressure.  That is what I am trying to put.

        THE CORONER:   The point I was putting to the
   witness - I think we need to get this clear:

Q. If you have a column of people, you can relieve
   pressure by interspersing, by breaking that column up
   into segments, would that be right? - A. With
   sufficient manpower, yes.

Q. Yes, the point I was asking you was, were you creating
   what one might call the first segment of a break of
   such a column? - A. Yes.

Q. You can't break it up into dozens of segments on one
   horse, but were you trying to create a segment? - A.
   That was the area, to ....

        THE CORONER:   Does that help, what I am trying to
   understand from this witness?

        MR. KING:   I do, sir, but I will put it to the
   witness because I will get into trouble for making a
   speech:

Q. You were doing your best to relieve the pressure on the
   backs of those people already in the turnstile area? -
   A. Yes.

Q. But you were being pressurised from the people who were
   coming towards you? - A. Yes.

Q. And the people in the front row who were pressurising
   you were being pressurised further back, that was the
   point I was putting to you? - A. Yes.
                                                               55


                                                      S. FRY




Q. So although you were you thought at the back of the
   turnstile group of people, you were in effect in the
   middle, and the effect of your stopping people coming
   towards you, the front row of that bank of five to ten
   people, you were trying to stop them coining forward,
   weren't you? - A. Yes. Well, I was trying to stop
   everybody coining forward.

Q. Yes, of course. - A. I was not talking to the immediate
   half dozen people pressed up against the horse, I was
   shouting as far back as I could.
                   i
Q. But for the purpose of that segment, they were at the
   front? - A. The ones against the horse were, yes.

Q. And the, point I was putting to you was that to relieve
   the pressure on people who were at the front you have
   got to go from the back, that was the only point I was
   putting? - A. Yes.

Q. Thank you very much.

            Further Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING

          MR. MANNING:   I just want to, I am afraid, put
     something which is supplemental to that and which may
     be a statement of the obvious, but the Officer in
     answer to Mrs. McBrien said the simplest method of
     control is to form a queue, and if people are not
     willing to form a queue there is very little that one
     can do without the exercise or recourse to force. The
     question I want to ask the Officer is:

Q. If you have got one person with whom you are creating a
   barrier and stopping that person going forward, and a
   person, a single person, comes behind and begins to
   press because he will not queue, the only way to
   relieve that pressure, as between two people, is to put
   yet another barrier, in other words another Policeman
   or another Police horse, between the two people? - A.
   That would be one method of doing it, yes.

Q. If you had hundreds of people you would need hundreds
   of Police Officers to separate one from another, to
   make sure each person did not put pressure on the one
   in front of him? - A. Working on that theory, yes, sir.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Mr. Fry, thank you very much
     indeed. You have given, I think, very clear evidence
     and I very much appreciate your coming. - A. Thank you,
     sir.

          THE CORONER:   (Addressing the Jury) We will rise
     for 10 to 12 minutes and then we will come back and
                                                 S. FRY




watch about an hour's video or thereabouts, the first
half of it. Let us make it 20 minutes.   It may be that
when we come back there will not be a single lawyer
sitting here, and Mrs. McBrien might go as well -
indeed, it might be totally empty because a lot of
people have seen the video not once or twice but half a
dozen times or even more.  I have explained to them - I
did it yesterday after you went out - that I take no
offence if they are not here.  I do not consider that
it means that they are not interested, nor do I
consider that they are letting their side down, if I
can use that term, and I don't want you to think that
either.

     The purpose of looking at the video is because you
have only seen it once and you may have to see it even
a third or fourth time, I don't know yet. We will see
how we go, but it is certainly necessary to see it more
than once.




                 /MISS SINCLAIR:
      MISS SINCLAIR: Sir, I rise at this point precisely
because you indicated yesterday that those of us who are
familiar with the video need not view it again with the jury,
and sir I anticipate some of those seated alongside me may
not be here after the break.  I would like all the representative:
and of course the jury to hear what I am going to say.

      Sir, it has been decided for a variety of reasons that
Dr. Eastwood will not be represented in this Court during the
time that is left before you rise on the 19th December.

      Sir, Mr. Maxwell on behalf of Sheffield City Council
expressed that a similar view had been taken on the Council's
representation on Wednesday.  Sir, he made it clear then that
no disrespect was intended by that decision either to you, sir,
to the jury, to the families, or indeed to those who lost
their lives. Sir, on behalf of Dr. Eastwood I would echo
those sentiments and emphasise them.

      Sir, you reminded the jury yesterday that they should
not draw any inference from the absence of representation
during the Inquest. No doubt they won't need to be reminded
of that again.

      Sir, finally representation will of course be resumed
in the New Year, perhaps not immediately.  I anticipate
that my learned friend Mr. Justin Fenwick will be representing
Dr. Eastwood then.

      Sir, we are mindful of your wish that proceedings should
not in any way be delayed by the absence of a representative
for Dr. Eastwood. We intend to liaise with your Officers
sir, if you will allow us, with a view to obtaining witness
lists and to keeping a close eye on the progress of the
proceedings.

      Sir, unless I can assist you further those are my
submissions.

      THE CORONER: Miss Sinclair, I quite understand what
you have said and it is absolutely true that up to now we
have dealt with very very little that affected or could
possibly have affected Dr. Eastwood so I quite understand.
I accept what you say and I am sure the jury will as well.
There is absolutely no point in having people represented
if in fact we have not got to the stage where their involve­
ment becomes more active.

      The only problem is, as you know, and this is what
I said to Mr. Maxwell, although it looks on your part
like we have got quite a little time to go b.efore we get
near to Dr. Eastwood's part, shall we say, you never know.
A witness might come along and may say something which might
be relevant but I would not want to adjourn at that stage.
In a sense that is the risk you are taking but I have no
objection at all to you consulting with my Officers, keeping
a watch on the lists, assessing the witnesses as to whether
or not you should be present. We will do whatever we can
by supplying the same information as we have supplied up to
now to you or to your instructing solicitors.  I hope that
helps.

      MISS SINCLAIR:  Sir, I am very grateful and I would
say again that it is not in the least our wish to delay the
Court by an adjournment and we are planning various means
of keeping an eye on what is going on. Thank you.

      THE CORONER:  Is there anything you want to say in
the absence of the jury so that you don't have to wait until
we have finished with the video.  If there were I would send
them out and deal with it now?

      MR. MANNING:   Witnesses for Monday, sir?

      MR. JONES: It is intended P.C. Grunhill; Sergeant Smith
subject to his fitness to return to duty Inspector Hand-Davis;
Sergeant Thomas and Police Constable Wilson is also warned
as well sir.

      THE CORONER: These are all, I think, mounted Officers
of one sort or another.

                       (Short adjournment)


      THE CORONER: Right, we are going to watch the
compilation tape, as it is known. You will remember it
is split in two. We will watch to the end of the first
section.

             (Compilation video shown to the jury)
     THE CORONER:   Can you just pause there for a minute?
The Jury have asked whether a particular gate is opened.
They have given me a little drawing.   In fact it is the gap
in a wall within the concourse area.   It is not in this
picture. That was not actually a gate.    There was a gate
there but it was a gap in the wall so you could get
through.

              (Compilation video was resumed)
              ( In   th e   absence   of   th e   Ju ry)

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I wondered if it is your
intention when resuming the showing of the video on
Monday, also to show the Jury the split screen, 1988/89
comparison?

     THE CORONER:   The answer to that, I don't think
we will necessarily be resuming the video on Monday.
It may well be that we will do the same as we have done
today and do it on the Friday because it is convenient
that way.

     The split screen job, shall I say, we have re­
done, because it was a    goodpoint that you made. It
has been re-done but I    havenot    yet viewed the re-done
version.  As soon as I    havehad    an opportunity tolook
at it, we will be showing it at some point. That is
certainly the intention and we have time to improve it
in the sense of balancing the views a bit more
successfully. We cannot alter the pictures we can just
produce a better comparison.

       MR. KING:      Can I confirm it is 10.30 on Monday,
sir?

       THE CORONER:         10.30 on Monday, yes.


        (The Inquests were adjourned to Monday,
             10th December at 10.30 a.m.)
