                                                                                                   MIR.15



       OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and tim e raised       ^                         Number

         t      :©s
       T itle   ~~^jftc^>3c32j^rr           CX-             ^         ‘ ^*V AgJTV ^           ^>Q\ v-jN^      i   «=1    Q

^     jjnclude source and any document number if relevant)
    ifi * «                                                              C     t   .O Z _ _         \c > V    .
       Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/N o   ____
                                                                                                                             Receiver




                                                                                                                             Indexer
       Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

       No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                        Statement Reader
       S tatem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                             Indexer
       Indexed as indicated

       No(s) o f actions raised

       Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                      SIO




                                                                                                                             Indexer
       Further action No(s)


       When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER
          ON THE 15th OP APRIL 1989


           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

               MARTIN KENNETH WILD




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER,   LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

              The Memorial Hall,
                  City Hall,
                  Sheffield.

                        On

          Thursday,   19th April,     1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harphara, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER             Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                          Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH              Medical and Dental Union of
                          Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                          Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN          Trent Regional Health Authority and
                          South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                          Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                INDEX


PROF. JOHN STEPHEN PHILLIPS JONES - Called

  By THE CORONER ............................


POLICE SERGEANT JULIE APPLETON - Called

  By THE CORONER   ............................

DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

  By THE CORONER ............................




                            — oo— oo—
                        19th April   1990

                                 INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF MARTIN KENNETH MILD

                                MR. FRASER:  The position, sir, so far as the Wild
                          family is as it was before.  I understand somebody may come
                          but they are not here and I think in the circumstances you
                          may wish to proceed on the assumption that they are not
                          corning.

                    B           THE CORONER:    I think we ought to do that because that
                           was the initial information we had and whilst obviously I
                           did say right from the word go we would have to run to time,
                                             doing quite well with our timings today but
                           I think we ought as a matter of principle to proceed, and
                           you are here.  We have got the transcripts.

                                MR. FRASER:   Sir, perhaps for the record, the Social
                    C      Worker who gave me the information might be asked to confirm
                           the position because the original intention was that the
                           family would not be here but the news they might be is
                           fairly late news.

                                 THE CORONER:  Where is the Social Worker? Can you
                           come forward because I can't see you at all? What is the
                    D      posit ion?

                                POLICE OFFICER:   We had some information about five
                           days ago from the Social Worker that possibly the father may
                           be attending but as of now he is not here.   It was fairly
                           uncertain information.

                                THE CORONER:   Would you convey to the Social Worker
                    E      who I suspect you have contact with that we did decide to
                           proceed partly because the time has arrived and partly
                           because it was so uncertain as to whether or not he was
                           coming.   The transcripts are available and there is no
                           question of trying to snub him or in any way to harm him but
                           it is a matter of getting the work done.

                                MR. FRASER:   Sir, again for the record, I appear as a
                    F      member of the Steering Committee and the solicitors who
                           represent this young man's family are a member of our group.
                           They are aware of my existence.

                                THE CORONER:   Yes, thank you.  Whilst we are waiting,
                           Mr. Fraser, we have got several people, as you know, who are
                           scheduled as non-attenders. Tomorrow the Rogers are on that
                           list but they have changed their mind.  They are coming.
                    G      Somebody has written to me-  Are you aware of any of the
                           others next week who we can say with certainty will not be
                           coming? We know the Coxes are definitely not coming.

                                MR. FRASER:   No, sir,   I don't know that information


                                                         1
                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
offhand but I can have it for you in the morning if it is
mentioned within these documents.

     THE CORONER:   The reason why I am asking is I may want
- it depends on our timings - if we have time to bring cases
forward (a) to fill the space and fill up gaps but I don't
want to do it if it will prejudice any members of the
families.  If you can't, fair enough, but if you can be
certain that they are definitely not coming then, of
course, it doesn't matter whether we do it at two or at
four, whenever.

     MR. FRASER:   From the information I have I will
extract what may assist and let your Officers have it in the
morning.

     THE CORONER:   I have a letter from Bishop and Co.
dated 12th April, to do with Kenneth Wild, saying:

     “We have discussed attendance with the father of the
     deceased and it has been agreed that neither he nor
     ourselves will actually attend."

So unless there has been a change of heart since then we
will rely on that letter for the time being and on the
facts.

     Ladies and gentlemen of the Jury, the reason why I am
fussing about this - you might think, "What is he playing
at?" - is because I don't want any of the families to think
we have started and not bothered about their wishes.   It is
very important to me - I know a lot of  it may be formal -
that each one of these families knows that it is their
interests we are dealing with and not just any old thing.

     Now then, this is the resumed Inquest then which was
opened on the 19th April 1989 and on that occasion Neil
Anthony Parkin said:

     "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
     identified to PC 1961 Lawrence of South Yorkshire
     Police as that of Martin Kenneth Wild by John Murray,
     his friend.  He was 29 years of age having been born on
     the 15th July 1959 at Stockport.  He was a single man
     and he lived at                              | Cheshire-
     He was a printing worker by occupation.  He died at
     Hillsborough Football Ground following an incident
     there on Saturday, 15th April 1989.  PC 2233 Lawrence
     caused the body to be removed to the Medico-Legal
     Centre and there he identified it to Detective
     Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently identified the
     same body to Prof. Jones.  It is the family wish that
     the body should be cremated."
                                                                       PROF.   J.   S.   P.   JO N E S

                          Then I adjourned the Inquest and in, the usual way I sent out
                          a form to the family and Hr. Kenneth Ernest Wild, the
                          father, signed it and he confirmed that the name was Martin
                          Kenneth Wild.  The address
                          Stockport, Cheshire.  This lad was born on 15th July 1959 at
                          Stockport and that he was a printing worker and that he was
                          sing l e .
                    B
                               We also had the blood alcohols dealt with yesterday by
                          Dr. Forrest and the result in this case is negative.

                                  PROF.     JOHN STEPHEN PHILLIPS JONES - C a l l e d :

                                                     By THE CORONER;

                        Q. Prof. Jones, you have already been sworn.  You are, in fact,
                           Prof. Stephen Jones, from Nottingham.  Prof. Jones, you did
                           the post mortem in relation to this young man, Martin
                           Kenneth Wild, that is right? - A. Yes.

                        Q. He was' identified to you by Simon Weigold and you also
                           checked the paper work and so on in the usual way? - A. Yes,
                           indeed.
                    D
                        Q. You are quite satisfied we are dealing with the right
                           person? - A. Yes, I am indeed.

                        Q. Prof. Jones, if you would be good enough to give me the
                           cause of death and as you did in the earlier case confirm
                           the reasons for your findings? - A. Yes.   The cause of death
                           was traumatic asphyxia.   In this case there was no evidence
                    E      of any external injury.  There were no bruises or abrasions
                           to the body at all but there was very marked cyanosis, blue
                           colouration of the skin, of the face, the ears, the neck and
                           the upper shoulder region.   There were internal petechial
                           haemorrhages present in the lining of the voice box and on
                           the surfaces of the heart and lungs and there was very great
                           congestion of the lungs.   These findings were all entirely
                           in keeping with death due to traumatic asphyxia.   There were
                           no internal injuries at all in this body and the findings
                           then were consistent with him having been involved in
                           crushing in a crowd with these resultant changes.

                        Q. To all intents and purposes absolutely no natural disease? -
                        A. There was no evidence of any natural disease at all in this
                           case.

                                THE CORONER:        Mr. Fraser, any questions?

                                M R . FRA S E R :   I have no questions, sir, thank you

                                THE CORONER:   Any questions from any of you?  It is
                           clear, isn't it? (no response) Prof. Jones, I am very
                           grateful to you and please feel free to leave us or stay as
                    H                                  3



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                        D .S - J. APPLETON

                             you choose.     Are you scheduled for tomorrow mornings

                                     THE WITNESS:    Yes.

                                     THE CORONER:   We look forward to seeing you in any
                             case.     Can we have the presenting Officer please?

                    B                  DETECTIVE SERGEANT JULIE APPLETON - Cal l e d ;

                                                      Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q. You already have been sworn? - A. Yes.

                        Q.   This is your first case? - A. Yes.

                        Q.   Could you give your full name and your status? - A. Yes, it
                             is .Julie Appleton, Detective Sergeant of the West Midlands
                             P o 1 ice.

                        Q. You have got a copy of the summary in front of you? - A.          I
                           have, yes.

                        Q.   Can you take me through that at your own pace and whenever
                    D        you are ready to start? - A. Just before I start that, sir,
                             if I could say that in the break I telephoned Mr. Wild and I
                             spoke to his mother and she did not think he was attending
                             the Inquest.

                        Q. Thank you very much indeed.   That is helpful. - A. At about
                           1230 hours on Saturday, 15th April 1989, Mr. Andrew Kirby
                    E      travelled by private car with Mr. John Leslie Murray and
                           Martin Kenneth Wild from Stockport to Sheffield.   They
                           intended to watch the Cup Semi Final football match at
                           Hillsborough Stadium and had tickets for the Leppings Lane
                           terrace.  They arrived in Sheffield at around 1330 hours and
                           met other friends including Mr. Leslie Duncan Lloyd who had
                           travelled in another vehicle.

                                  At about 1430 hours the four men joined the large crowd
                             in Leppings Lane near the turnstiles.  At about 1450 hours
                             they entered the stadium via a large gate to the right of
                             the turnstiles, Gate C.

                        Q. Can you just pause for a minute?  (To the Jury) Can you
                           remember where Gate C was? Thank you. _ A. They walked
                           together into Enclosure 3 and Mr. Lloyd followed Martin Wild
                           across the terraces.  Soon after the kick off Mr. Lloyd was
                           aware of a tremendous surge of pressure from behind and he
                           lost sight of Mr. Wild who had been standing to his rig h t-
                           Mr. Kirby and Mr- Murray were subjected to crushing.
                           Mr. Kirby last saw Mr. Wild in Enclosure 3 and he saw he was
                           in difficulty but he was unable to assist him.


                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  D.S.   J.   APPLETON

                                  When the pressure in Enclosure 3 eased Mr. Kirby saw
                             Mr. Wild lying on top of other casualties.  He saw he was
                             apparently dead and after attempting to lift him, he went to
                             meet his friends.  Mr. Murray saw Martin being carried by
                             two men towards the back of the terrace, out through the
                             tunnel, and into the concourse at the rear of the West
                             Stand.  They placed him on to the ground and attempted
                    B        resuscitation but were unsuccessful.  Mr. Murray describes
                             these men as St. John Ambulance men but it is now known that
                             they were Police Officers.

                                  Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
                             terracing Police Constable John Robert Lawrence went into
                             Enclosure 3 to assist casualties.  With assistance from
                             another Officer who has not been identified he carried
                             Mr. Wild through the tunnel to the concourse at the rear of
                             the West Stand.  Attempted resuscitation was unsuccessful
                             and the Officer covered Mr. Wild with his jacket, with his
                             Police anorak it was.  A nurse, who has not been identified,
                             examined Mr. Wild and confirmed he was dead.

                                  Police Constable Lawrence carried Mr. Wild to a service
                    D        road adjacent to Gate C.  At about 1635 hours Dr. David
                             Monaghan examined Mr. Wild and certified life extinct.
                             Police Constable Lawrence escorted the body of Mr. Wild to
                             the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had been set up.

                                  At 2235 hours Mr. Murray identified the body of Martin
                             Kenneth Wild to Police Constable Lawrence at the temporary
                             mortuary.  The Officer later escorted the body of M r . Wild
                    E        to the Medico-Legal Centre and confirmed the identification
                             to Detective Constable Simon Weigold.

                                  On Sunday, 16th April 1989, Prof. Stephen Jones carried
                             out an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of death.

                                  Mr. Murray confirms that Mr. Wild did have a ticket for
                             the match which was not used due to their entry via Gate C.
                             Mr. Murray was in possession of this ticket.  This
                             concludes my evidence, sir.

                             Can you just bear with me for one moment? We had a bit of a
                             problem with Mr. Lawrence’s evidence because he dealt with
                             more than one person? — A. That is corr e c t .

                             There was some confusion as to which one he dealt with
                             first? - A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q. I think in the end he has now confirmed that the first
                           person he dealt with in his statement was actually Mr. Wild?
                        A, That is right, sir, yes.


                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                     n.I.   M.   LA Y T O N


                                 THE CORONER:    Any questions?

                                 MR. FRASER:    I have no questions of the Officer,           sir,
                            thank you.
                                 THE CORONER:   Any questions from any of you?  (no
                            response) It ie an unueual case because his friends were
                    B       close by and saw quite a bit of what happened.  Thank you
                            ever so m u c h •

                                  DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called:

                                                  Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q. Yes. - A. Michael Layton, Detective Inspector, West Midlands
                           Police.   Sir, an examination of video film and photographic
                           evidence has been made but to date no visual identification,
                           no actual identification, has been made.       Police Constable
                           Lawrence has signed a plan of the terraces where he found
                           Mr. Wild and the Officer has identified himself on a video,
                           a BBC video tape, which has been given the reference number,
                           Map 7, 1520:20:09, and this is specifically in Enclosure No.
                    D      3.  The sequence d o e s n ’t actually show Mr. Wild at this^
                           point.   It merely indicates PC Lawrence’s position within
                           that enclosure.
                                 The reference number in relation to the plan which he
                            has completed is referenced J R L 1 •

                        Q   I suppose the visual evidence basically confirms PC
                    E       L awrence’s recollection that he was in Pen 3? - A. That is
                            correct, sir, yes.

                        Q   In that sense supports his evidence that he says he was
                            working or helping? - A. Exactly, sir, yes.

                        Q What is the number of this? 21.     Was there something else?
                        A. If you referring to a plan it is J RL1.

                        Q   And it is C 2 1 . Could   you just show us where it is? " A - If
                            I can refer you, sir,     again to the terrace plan this is
                            again Enclosure No. 3     and the point at which PC Lawrence has
                            actually indicated is     in this spot here close to Gate 3 and
                            close to the fence.

                                 THE CORONER:    Any questions, Mr. Fraser?

                                 MR. FRASER:    No, thank you, sir.

                                 THE CORONER:    Any questions from any of you, ladies
                            and gentlemen?   (no response) As I say, it is extraordinary
                            in some respects that there is no visual evidence and yet

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
his friends were so near to him and yet the cameras, if they
have picked him up, haven't been found.  That is just how it
is.  That is all the evidence I am going to take in this
case at this stage.

        Ladies and gentlemen and everybody else, that concludes
the cases we have got scheduled for today and we are going
to stop.     It is a little bit more realistic than yesterday,
i s n ’t it, but d o n ’t raise your hopes. Although you can see
what the pattern is, it is impossible to predict each
individual case and I repeat, whilst we have not got endless
time, I want each case to have as much time as it needs,
full stop.     If we overrun some, we overrun some.    That is
how it is.

     Tomorrow please remember we are not here.   We are at
the Medico-Legal Centre.  Do you know how to get there?    I
know you know, Mr. Fraser, because you have been?    I take it
most of you know how to get there.   You recollect we are
starting at 9.30 so be there a bit before that so we are
ready to start promptly at 9.30.   We will see how we get on.
Thank you all very much indeed.   Nobody wishes to say
anything to me before I rise.   No, good.  Thank you.

   (The Inquest- into the death of MARTIN KENNETH MILD
          was adjourned to a date to be fixed)
