      HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                     (WEST DISTRICT)


            INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

         VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                     STADIUM DISASTER

                ON THE 15TH APRIL,         1989




                           Before

    DR. S. L. POPPER, LLB. B.MED.Sci.         BM» BS, MRCGP

                 (Her Majesty* s Coroner)




                             At

                      The Town H a l l ,
                        Sheffield.

                             on

0                    27th March,    1991




                TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




         From the Notes of J. L. Har p h a m L t d . ,
              Official Shorthand W r i t e r s ,
          55 Queen S t r e e t , Sheffield, SI 2DX.
                   SEVENTY NINTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                     WEDNESDAY 27th MARCH.    1991


                    (In the absence of the J u r y )

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, before I invite the Jury to
come in I just wanted to say I had not overlooked the point
you had raised yesterday afternoon.

     I did in fact consider it and I also took note of what
Mr. Payne had said and looked at the transcripts and I
decided that having looked at what was actually written down
I did not judge there was any need to say anything further
and that is the reason why nothing more has happened on that
score.    I wanted you to know that it wasn't simply that I
had ignored it.

     MR.   KING:     Thank you, sir.

                   (The Jury returned at 4.16 p m )

     THE CORONER:   Good afternoon.   I want to ask you
again a very similar question I asked you yesterday
afternoon.   Is there any prospect as far as you can see
that you are likely to be able to come to a verdict within,
say, the next hour or so?

     THE FOREMAN:      No.

     THE CORONER:   You do not think so.   In that case we
will do what we did yesterday.  I would like you to carry on
until half past or thereabouts and hopefully arrangements
will be satisfactory.   I hope they were yesterday and I
hope they will be tonight as well.

     Similarly, just as yesterday, when you leave this place
cease your formal deliberations.    You have had a long day.
I take it you have been thinking and it is hard work and it
is better for you and also correct that you should not
formally be considering your verdict when you are not here.
Once you hav e left relax and do what I suggested yesterday.
I am not going to repeat that.

      To m orrow then - was 9.30 all right?   You were happy
wit h that?     Shall we say then 9.30 tomorrow?

     There are two more things which I need to say to you
because I do think you need to be aware of of this. ^ I
have, of course, already indicated to you the order in which
you have to take the verdicts and I just remind you of that:
unlawfully killed first, which has got to be beyond
reasonable doubt;  then accident/misadventure - on the
balance of probability and finally open verdict.

     I also told you yesterday that I wanted you to reach a
unanimous verdict.   Indeed I still would like you to do so,
but it is probably right for me to tell you now, and I did
not want to do it at an earlier stage and this is not an
invitation for you not to reached a unanimous verdict, but
if it were to be that you were unable to reached a unanimous
verdict I would be prepared to consider a majority verdict,
provided that the minority does not exceed two.   In other
words, at least nine of you must be agreed.   However,
please remember that in my judgment it would be infinitely
better if we were able to have a unanimous verdict from you.

     I do not want to know anything about your deliberations
at all because that is the whole point.   It is a matter for
you.   I am merely indicating to you that there is that
possibility, but do not use it if you can in fact come to a
unanimous view.   Is that all clear to you?   Good.

     Well, in that case there is nothing more to be said
tonight as far as I am concerned.   Why don't you leave us
again?   Again, like we did today, when you arrive go
straight to your room.   I cannot see any^advantage in
coming in here and saying, "Good morning."   Carry on.   I
will not accept a verdict between one and two o clock, nor
will I accept any questions you might, but subject to that
we will be available whenever you wish.

     Was there anything that you wanted to ask me?         Yes,
all right, very well.

                 (The Jury retired at 4.21 p m )

     MR. KING:   Can I just ask what the reply was of the
Member of the Jury to you when you asked him whether or not
there was anything.

     THE CORONER:      I understood him to say, "W^ have
resolved it."

     MR. KING:      I could not hear him,   sir.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, that is all right.   That was my
understanding so I did not pursue it, because obviously
there had been something which they had been discussing.

     MR. MANNING:     I would agree with that, sir.

     THE CORONER:     Do you wish me to call them back so you
can hear it more loudly, Mr. King?   Bring them back.
Let's make quite sure I haven't misheard.
               (The Jury returned at 4.23 pm)

     THE CORONER:   When I asked you whether there was
something else you responded to me, but people could not
hear what you said.   I asked if there was anything else and
I understood you to say, "We have resolved it."   Is that
what you said, or what did you actually say?

    THE FOREMAN:     No,you have given us some help.

     THE CORONER:    So I did not hear it correctly. I am
glad I brought you back.    Very well then leave us.  I am
sorry about bringing you back but it was just as well
because I had obviously misheard you.

               (The Jury retired at 4.24 p m )

     I suppose in a way it means the same thing but I would
rather we knew exactly what they had said.

     Ladies and gentlemen, I am going to stay until half
past four.   They are not going to come back before then but
I will wait for them until that time.   We have had a long,
long inquiry, if you like, and it is good that they are
taking the matter seriously.  I am not at all surprised in
view of the interest which they have shown over the last few
months, but we will see you tomorrow at 9.30.

         (The Inquests w e re adjourned until 9.30 am
                     the following d a y )
