CC 5 16 Z.
          O M                                                              'S IS                                                                                     /
                                                                                     US!

                                                                            ■K '~ ■i|l[B5
                                                                           -t           K

                            Silverman*Livermore
                           r O                       L           I -C-I                        -T H d                    •r • s
                                           11/13 Victoria Street, Liverpool L2 5 Q Q
                            Telephone: 051 227 1871.        D X : 14190.        Fax: 051 255 0216

                                                                                                   _         f                DRF/SB
                                                                                                   O ur rer;

                                                                                                   Your ref:

    Dr S F Popper                                                                                  W hen calling please ask for:
    HM Coroner for South Yorkshire
    Medico-Legal Centre                                                                                                       MR             ERASES
    Watery Street
    Sheffield




    9th March 1990

    Dear Dr Popper

    Following what I thought was a very useful and Informative meeting on
    Tuesday I have issued a letter to all members of our group who act for
    bereaved families putting them in the picture and I think it might be useful
    if you have a copy of the letter and the form to which it refers so that if
    you get queries direct from Solicitors about anything which is said in the
    letter then at least you wi11 know what they are taking about!

    I trust that the suggested procedure in terms of questions meets with your
    approval, I do hope I interpreted what you said on Tuesday correctly and
    although I anticipate that very few families will have any queries to raise
    having seen their particular summary I think that if there is a form of
    common approach by them either directly to your office or through me then it
    will be easier for all concerned.

    If you feel that the letter or form is not truly reflective of your wishes
    please let me know as quickly as possible and I will issue an adendum.

    Your^sincerely




                                                                                                                        Ufa.                    id c^uat
                                                                                                           —*      Shy                        LeXltj*
                                                                                                              jo        6U          ^iA jJ_ ixw ot               ,




                A .F . F A R R A N D L L .B . , C.P, S T E B B I N G L L .B ,, E .M . S H E L V E Y L L . B . , D . R . F R A S E R , J .L . W A L K E R LL.B.
                        A ls o at: R u t l a n d H o u se Mai?, Shoppin g Cit y, R u n c o r n W A T 2ES, Teh1 C928 714121, Fax: 0928 718135
                                                      137 L e a th e rs L a n e , H a le w o o d , I..26 0TS, Tel: 051-486 01 3 1 /2
                          A n d in A s s o c ia tio n w ith L A M B E R T et A S S O C IE S B -tl SO L e Aven-je D e f r e 19 Brus sels B elgiu m .
                                    T h i s firm is r eg u late d bv th e L a w Society in th e co ndu c t of I n v e s tm e n t Business.
                                                                       V A T Rce . N o . 164 4312 81

V
        HILLSBOROUGH                        STEERING                      COMMITTEE


                      c/o CastCc Chambers, Cook_Strcct, LivcrpooCL2 9 S 9 1
                        TcC: 051 2 5 5 0 6 2 8 T cvq 051 2 3 6 0 0 4 7 ( D X 1 4 10 0




                                                                     Our ref:           DEF/SB/INQUESTS

                                                                     Your ref:
To All Solicitors Acting For
Bereaved Families
                                                                     Date:       9th March 1990


Dear Sirs
Hopefully you will by now seen Bulletin 14 issued on the 5th March, this is
the letter to which Liz Steel refers at the beginning of the second
paragraph on page one.

In response to his invitation to this Committee I appeared before H.M
Coroner for South Yorkshire Dr. S. L. Popper at the Medico-legal Centre,
Watery Street, Sheffield on Tuesday of this week and having         heard
representations from myself and Solicitors representing various other
interested bodie Dr. Popper confirmed that he will resume the 95 inquests
on a strictly limited basis on the 18th April 1990.

H.M. Coroner has been under considerable pressure from a variety of sources
notably this Committee, the Hillsborough Family Support Group and Messrs
Hammond Suddard acting for South Yorkshire Police on the instructions of the
M.M.I.   to release certain informat ion in advance of the resumption of the
Inquests .. . the majority of that pressure relates to the release of what
Dr. Popper calls "non-controversial information" which many of the families
want and which, strictly speaking, has nothing to do with any potential
criminal proceedings.
As a result of their investigations into the Hillsborough Disaster for Lord
Justice Taylor and then for the Director of Public Prosecutions and also for
H.M Coroner himself officers of West Midlands Police have amassed a great
deal of information about the movements of most (but not all) of the 95 fans
who died and that information is contained in the statements, still
photographs, sections of video film etc held by West Midlands Police in
Birmingham. It is not possible for either West Midlands Police or H.M.
Coroner to release all the information they have at this stage because some
of it relates to the "criminal" aspect of the investigation but it is
possible to summarise from each of the 95 separate files            detailed
 information about the movements of each deceased from the time they iett
home until the time death was certified in the temporary mortuary at the
ground or in hospital and such summaries are currently in the course ot
preparation.
 The summaries are being prepared by senior officers from the West Midlands
 Force and are being scrutinized by other more senior officers and then by
 Dr.   Popper himself before they are to be released to ensure that they
 contain no controversial details and that they are accurate and as detailed
 as possible in the circumstances.
 The Director   of   Public     Prosecutions has confirmed to a H.M.                         Coroner that
this non-controversial information may be released now to the families in
accordance with a strictly laid down procedure and this procedure is as
follows.
As soon as possible copies of the 95 summaries will be sent to this
Committee and a copy of the summary relating to each i n d i v i d u a l deceased
will be sent to the Solicitors on record with H.M. Coroner as being           the
practice acting for the immediate next of kin.

No photographs or video film extracts will be issued but references to these
will almost certainly be included in the summary and if for any reason the
family particularly wants to see the photograph or video film extract then
the Coroner will consider each request for this information on its merits.
The Coroner does not feel that the supplyinyg of photographs etc is
necessary at this stage, the pictures may cause further grief and many of
the families have seen them anyway during discussions with West Midlands
officers.   There is also the problem of logistics and the Coroner is trying
to keep everything as simple as possible for the time being.

A "flow chart" may also to be issued (although no firm decision has been
made about this) and this chart will show movement of each deceased within
certain time bands and will indentify the individual (whether a relative, a
member of the public or police officer) who identifies the deceased at a
particular spot or time either prior to or following his or her death.

It is for you to advise your cl ient when you have received this summary, we
strongly recommend that you do not simply send the summary to your client
without prior warning as they are likely to contain information which may
cause distress if seen without prior warning and although it is of course up
to you to decide how you impart this information to your client we recommend
that you tell your client that you have the summary available and invite
them to either request a copy or preferably see them to go through it with
them before deciding whether to release a full copy to them for their own
use.
 The summary should be read in conjunction with the Post-Mortem Report which
 we anticipate you will have already obtained.

 In our view it is likely that sane families will not want to be made aware
 of the contents of the summary in detail but we feel that it is important
 that they at least have the option to choose whether they avail themselves
 of the opportunity to see it or not, at present they do not have tha
 option.
 We believe that it is likely that many families having seen the summary will
 be satisfied with the factual information it contains and will not want to
 take any further action. Their summary will simply be presented in a formal
 way in open Court in Sheffield and thus taken into public record.

 For details of what we suggest you do in the event that your clients have
 queries arising from the summary or they want to attend the Inques
 personally please see below.
 Each summary will be presented personally by the officer w h o prepared it to
 H.M. Coroner in accordance with a timetable which will be published as soon
 as possible and it is hoped that eight summaries a day can be received by
 H.M. Coroner sitting in Open Court with a Jury.

  At the conclusion of the presentation of the 95 summaries the Coroner will
  adjourn his Jury without asking them to return any verdict.

  In the event that the Director of Public Prosecutions then subsequently
  instigates criminal proceedings against any individual or organization n
  connection with this disaster then it is likely (but not certain) that
 Coroner will not resume the inquests again following the decision of the
 Crown, Court Jury. If on the other hand no criminal proceedings were brought
' then H.M. Coroner would reconvene his Jury following the announcement by
  the D.D.P.    of his intention not to pursue the matter and decide what
 evidence he would then call to enable him to invite the Jury to return
 whatever    verdict   seemed   most   appropriate  in   the   circumstances.

 The hearings at which these summaries will be presented will therefore be
 "low key" and not afford anyone the opportunity to cross examine police
 officers, club officials etc as they will not be giving evidence.

 These hearings are intended to be an exercise in distributing informat ion to
 fami 1ies about precisely how their loved ones died and where and not an
 attempt to discover why or who was to blame.
 The hearings will take place during the period 18th April to 4th May
 inclusive at the Medico-Legal Centre, Sheffield and as soon as the timetable
 for the hearings is known we will circulate it to all firms who receive this
 letter and it will be up to you to notify your individual clients of the
 date and time upon which their Inquest will be heard.

 There is no obligation on any family to attend the hearing but they are of
 course more than welcome to be present when their summary is presented if
 they wish.

 In some cases families will have queries either on contents   of   Post-Morten
 Reports or on the summary itself

 As a result of our discussions with H.M.        Coroner we recommend that the
 following procedure be adopted in such cases.

 Families who have such queries should instruct you to set out their
 questions in a short form and that form should be copied to H.M. Coroner
 and ourselves.

 We enclose such a form for your use.

 West Midlands Police to ascertain the information required (if it is
 available and felt to be appropriate) and have the details available at the
 individual hearing.
 In r-aca=»c; Qf particular queries concerning the contents of Post-Mortem
 Reports if the information cannot be supplied by letter or would be best
 explained to the family by the pathologist concerned then he may be asked to
 attend for that particular inquest to deal with the question from the
 witness box.
  This Steering Committee will be represented throughout the entire period of
  the hearings and as your client's Inquest is reopened the question which you
  have previously given notice of will be asked on your client's behalf by the
  Solicitor present and if the information is available it will be given by
  the summary presenting officer as part of his evidence. We will report that
  information to you and if you wish you can bespeak a copy of the shorthand
  transcript which will be available for each Inquest.

  If for any reason your client is not willing to allowthe member of       this
  Committee present in Court to put his or her question for any reason     then
  you may attend on his or her behalf and put the question yourself,       H.M.
  Coroner anticipates that there will be some families who will wish to    have
  their own Solicitors present to represent than.

  We should however sound a note of caution about costs at this stage.

  After great difficulty we have persuaded the Municipal Mutual Insurers to
  fund the cost of "block representation" and this means that a member of this
Committee will be present throughout the entire period the Inquests are
running but if your client wants you to appear personally you must deal with
the question of your costs for doing so directly with the M.M.I. They have
not said that they would not meet any individual Solicitors costs but they
have indicated that they would only be prepared to do so in exceptional
circumstances and this is a matter which you must take up with the Insurers
yourself before deciding to travel to Sheffield to represent your client.


The M.M.I have accepted the proposition that you will be entitled to recover
your reasonable costs for going through the summary with your client and
corresponding with H.M.     Coroner and ourselves prior to the Inquests ...
these costs can simply be included as part of your general profit charges in
connection with the civil claim for damages.




We must stress that as this is an information dissemination exercise by H.M.
Coroner he is unlikely to accept any questions which might be regarded as
being of a controversial nature and he will only accept questions which
clear up any ambiguity in the summary.

Before H.M. Coroner begins dealing with the 95 individual Inquests on the
19th April he will receive a generic evidence on Wednesday the 18th April.

This generic evidence is likely to come from a variety of witnesses.

The first witness is likely to be Dr. Forest. He will formally present the
94 blood alcohol level Reports which were prepared (no sample was taken from
one very young fan) and he will explain the basis of the work he did. This
will have the effect of formally bringing into public record his Reports, we
hope to be able to obtain copies of the blood alcohol level Report for each
fan in advance and we do not anticipate that there will be any real issue
over the blood alcohol level present in any individual deceased.

A senior police officer will then give evidence to explain certain terms and
expressions used in the summaries and on the "flow charts" and again we do
not anticipate that his evidence would be controversial in any way.

It is then proposed to call Professor Usher to given an overview of the
pathology of the types of injuries which were sustained. This will again be
evidence of a general nature and is unlikely to make reference to any
individual and will for example explain what happens to the human body when
it is compressed due to pressure and unable to absorb oxygen ...         his
evidence is likely to be distressing to families but will hopefully clear up
much anxiety and show that many fans simply "went to sleep" without any
great discomfort because of lack of oxygen.

Finally, H.M. Coroner may call such further evidence of a generic nature as
he feels appropriate as the 18th April approaches.

As we have said wo will have a presence throughout the 95 Inquests and we
are more than happy to act as your "Agent" and put your client's questions
to the summary presenting officer and report back appropriately to you,
there will be no agnecy account rendered by us to you or your client for
this service.

We stress again that the next of kin and wider family are welcome to attend
if they wish to hear their particular summary being represented but they are
unlikely to be able to put quesitons to the summary presenting officer
unless those questions have previously been notified to H.M.    Coroner and
ourselves in writing, please bear in mind that the Coroner will be trying to
get through 8 Inquests a day over a 3 week period and any timetable drawn in
advance must be strictly adhered to if families are to have their particular
Inquest heard at the time previously notified.

Any family who indicates an intention to attend and who are late for any
reason will not have their Inquest held up pending their arrival ’
Coroner is very sympathetic towards all the families involved but once these
Inquests start to run the timetable must be strictly adhered to if everybody
is to be satisfied.
We are not able to tell you when you will receive your client's summary or
summaries at the moment, they are not all prepared but you may rest assured
that they will be sent to you by H.M.       Coroner as ^                '
                                                                        are
available.   If you have not already obtained a copy of the Post-Mortem
Report from the Coroner's office in Sheffield we urge you to do so
immediately.
Please return a separate copy of the enclosed questionnaire in relation to
each deceased for who you act to ourselves and forward a copy to KM.
Coroner as soon as possible after you have seen the summary and in any event

no later than Tuesday the 10th April in any event as any questions notified
after that date may not be capable of being investigated and dealt with
before the Inquests begin.
For our part we believe that this move by H.M.            Oaranear to inipert
information to families is to be applauded and we have taken the liberty    f
making that point in open Court and through the press. The
no obligation to act in the way that he is and we believe that his sta _
intentions to assist families in any way he can by providing this
information are entirely genuine and we trust that those             who you
represent will accept this move on his behalf in the way in which we believe
that it is intended.

 Although the primary intention of Dr Popper is to give f   1ieJff
 about how their loved one died, one of the beneficial side effects o y
 receiving these summaries now will be that you will be in a better
 5tTass2s the pre-death terror/pre-death pain and suffering element in the
 damages claim and you will in due cause receive our further views^ on this
 aspect in a future Bulletin, together with a report on our continuing
 negotiations with the Insurers.
 At the meeting on Tuesday H.M.Coroner was at pains to stress that he has no
  inside^nforraation" a i Z t the intentions of the D.P.P. as regards crmina
 proceedings and he stressed that his motives in reopening the Inquests at
 this stage were directed only at supplying information to families.

 It is unlikely that we will issue a general Bulletin dealing      solely     with
 Inquests before they reopen but the writer will te more than     h^PPJ7
 with individual queries which arise either as a result of the     contents
 this letter or as a result of problems raised by clients, or     let ers
 be directed to the Law Library quoting the reference shown in    the heading at
 this letter.
  If there are any significant changes to the information   set   out above     we
  will get back to you.

  Yours sincerely
  ,
  ____ A____ I___
    *■ H I L L S B O R O U G H          STEERING                 COMMITTEE


                      c/o Cos tie ChamBcrs, Cook^Strctt, LivcrpooC L2 9S9f
                        <Te[: 051 255 0628 J cvq 051 236 0047 <DX14100




NAME OF DECEASED:


NAME OF SOLICITORS:


ACTING FOR:


RELATIONSHIP TO DECEASED:


QUESTIONS (please keep these
brief and confine than to
matters arising from the
Summary and Post-Morton
Report only).




If you have queries to raise please ensure that this form is returned to us
and copied to H.M. Coroner, Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield as
soon as possible and in any event no later than 10th April 1990.
J MERVYM J O N E S MSc-                                                    FURNiVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                  Furnival Gate
 H IL L S B O R O U G H I N Q U I R Y T E A M   £ / ’/?»                   Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                           Telephone: 0742 731546
                                                                           Fax:        0742 731483
WEST M IDLANDS POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                                     M e d i c o Legal C entre
Colmore Circus Queensway                                                   Telephone: 0742 726105
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                          Fax:          0742 726247
Telephone: 021-236 5000, extn. 2025

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                                              Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                          Our Ref:     JMJ/VSC
Telephone: 021-359 3332
                                                                           Date:         22 March 1990



            Dr S L Popper LL.B B.MED Sci BM BS MRCGP
            HM Coroner
            South Yorkshire (West District)
            Medico-Legal Centre
            Watery Street
            Sheffield
            S3 7ET




               I have prepared a note for your file with regard to the meeting of
               6 March 1990. I am satisfied that it contains a reasonable resume of
               what took place, although the narrative has been rearranged to ensure
               a logical flow. If you would like to alter any part of the record
               please let me know.




                    KA\             / *■y   ■




  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T                           Lloyd House,_Birmingham
DRAFT NOTE FOR FILE - to be agreed.
Meeting between HM Coroner Dr Popper and legal representatives of persons
who died at the Hillsborough Disaster


At 2 pm on Tuesday, 6 March 1990, HM Coroner for Sheffield, Dr Popper,
held a private meeting in the Coroner's Court, Medico-Legal Centre,
Sheffield to discuss interim measures with interested parties.


Dr Popper explained that although the court-room was being used
a judicial process was not taking place, quite simply the room and the
layout was suitable for the numbers and business involved.


Dr Popper asked the various people present to identify themselves which
they did as follows


    Mr Fraser, Solicitor for the Steering Committee, Liverpool
     Solicitors.    He represents about 150 practices of which about 50 were
     directly involved in litigation.    All told these practices represent
     the families of 92 of the deceased.


    Mr Gregory, Solicitor representing Sheffield City Council.


     Mr Peter Doyle, Solicitor? representing Sheffield Wednesday Football
     Club.


    Mr Callaghan, Solicitor? representing Trent Regional Health Authority
     and South Yorkshire Ambulance Service.


     Catherine Thorpe, representing Eastwood and Partners.


     Belinda Norcliffe, Legal Assistant, South Yorkshire Police.


    Mr B Devonside and Mr Trevor Hicks, Hillsborough Support Group.


     ..........     (The man who came in late.   Details not obtained)
                   p<r            — O ST fcf-»»4 <

Also present were members of Sheffield City Council Social Services
Department.


Dr Popper asked if there were any relatives in the room who were not
represented by a solicitor        No-one indicated.
                                                       /Cont'd ....
ACC Jones sat on the right of Dr Popper and was introduced as the
"Coroner's Officer" for the purpose of the inquiry.


Dr Popper explained that the purpose of the meeting was to seek the best
way forward for the bereaved families bearing in mind that the inquiry was
nearly a year old and they had not received, in an official sense, clear
explanations of where their loved ones died, how they died (in a
pathological sense), what efforts were made to revive them and where they
were identified.   He explained that if the authorities could somehow hold
a "mini-inquest", it would provide an interim stage in the proceedings, so
that the healing process for the bereaved could be brought one step nearer
a conclusion and that this would be of enormous help to the relatives.


Dr Popper said that this proposal did not mean that the DPP had
informed him of any decision.   He reiterated this again and explained that
the DPP has not, indeed could not quite simply because, as yet he did not
have the papers and would not for some time to come. Because of this
prolonged phase of the inquiry he was proposing an interim step.


He explained that this present course of action was brought about by a
letter from Miss Steel who highlighted the advantages of allowing the
relatives an official explanation (albeit limited) of what had happened
without compromising the criminal inquiry that was taking place
simultaneously.


Dr Popper adumbrated three scenarios that would have to be followed if an
interim measure was not adopted.     They were:


1. If a prosecution for a major offence was commenced (such as
    manslaughter) then the inquests would be adjourned in accordance with
    Section 16 of the Coroners' Act and after the criminal prosecution it
    would be open to the Coroner to resume the inquests. Regardless of the
    Jury's verdict this was a practice not followed in his jurisdiction.


2. If the DPP declined to prosecute for whatever reason, but a private
    prosecution was commenced, then the post trial circumstances described
    in (1) above would also apply.


3. The DPP decides not to prosecute and no-one else does, then inquiries
    would be completed in the normal way via an inquest with a jury.


                                                      /Cont'd
It was explained that whatever the case, these would be lengthy procedures
and so an interim solution had been sought.   The DPP had been consulted
and, subject to any comments made by the representative parties today, the
"mini-inquest" interim measure would seem to offer some relief to the
families.


The inquests would seek to establish:
a. How the person arrived at the stadium.


b. Where they were in the stadium.


c. When they died.


d. Cause of death.


The sequence of events at the "mini-inquest" could take the following form:


a.   Prior to the inquest the Coroner's officer would prepare a summary of
     the case that was factual and non-adversarial.


b. After approval by the Coroner the summary would be offered to
     representatives of the deceased for their comments.


c.   Subject to the approval of the deceaseds' representatives the summary
     would be presented at the "mini-inquest" by a Summary Officer after
     evidence - probably written - from the pathologist as to the cause of
     death and injuries.   It was anticipated that Dr Forest and Professor
     Usher would give general evidence covering most of the cases in the
     first day or two of the "mini-inquests" so that their time at the
     hearings was reduced to a reasonable level.   If possible eight cases
     per day would be the objective of the interim inquiry.


     Cases would not be taken in numerical or alphabetical order because
     listing was seen to be a difficult problem in terms of minimising the
     waiting time for the families involved. It was hoped, that where several
     deaths related to the same family, these would be dealt with
     together regardless of the order that the pathologist examined the
     bodies.


     The Coroner reserved the right to set the order of cases according to
     the best interests of justice and with due regard for the feelings of
     the bereaved.
                                                           /Cont'd ....
d.   Plans and "Ana-Kappa" diagrams would be available to the representatives
     prior to the hearing but it was likely that these would be viewed at a
     time and place suitable to the Coroner's officer and the
     representatives.


e.   Witnesses may be called to assist the Coroner and the Jury, but
     specifically no member of the South Yorkshire police force will be
     called to give evidence.


f.   The use of video tapes or photographs would not be used as they have
     already been seen by the families and their representatives.


g.   Transcripts of the hearings would be made available but they would not
     be immediately transcribed, there will be delay, and there will be a
     charge.



Dr Popper summarised his proposals to the representatives and families
by saying that he was asking their approval to hold a limited inquiry
taking evidence in a particular form that would not obstruct the DPP's
options.     He asked if there were any questions.


Mr Fraser asked when the summaries would be available?     Dr Popper said that
they would be sent out in a steady stream as and when they became available
to him.    It was anticipated that the first drafts would be available in
the very near future.


Mr Fraser asked Dr Popper to specify the time period covered by the summary
and was told that it was hoped that each report would span the period from
when the deceased left home to when he or she was identified in the
temporary mortuary.     In some cases it would be possible to extend that
time span.


Dr Popper was at pains to point out that the short inquests would not deal
with how or why each person died.     He took time to explain that the
hearing would not admit evidence of a controversial nature or which was
critical of any person or which would imperil the scope of action that
the DPP might want to take. He said that this was not a new approach to
such cases. There have been precedents set elsewhere.




                                                       /Cont'd
Dr Popper then asked for the views of all those present.     Mr Fraser
expressed "a warm feeling for the idea" and commended the Coroner on his
pragmatism and his empathy with the deceaseds' families.     Other persons
present also indicated their approval for the proposal.     There were no
objections made at all.


Dr Popper proposed that the "mini-inquests" begin at 10.30 am on Wednesday,
18 April and thereafter at 9.30 am.     Sittings would be from Monday to
Friday, there would be coffee breaks for the families and lunch would be
taken at about 1 pm resuming at 2 pm.     Early estimates tended to indicate
that this stage would be completed by the 4 May but a few days have been
set aside from the 21 May to deal with difficulties encountered in the
early hearings.


As far as scheduling the cases was concerned the Coroner proposed to give
provisional warnings.     Re-scheduling may be a major problem and so the
representatives were given notice that non-availability to attend the
hearing would need to be for an extremely persuasive reason simply because
the knock-on consequences for such a large operation may frustrate a great
deal of careful planning not only of the Coroner's arrangements but also
of the families involved.


The venue was proposed as the -Sheffield Medico-Legal Centre which would be
too small on the first day but once the initial rush of press interest has
subsided will be eminently suitable for the families. Arrangements were
in hand to ensure that the press were given as much access as was
reasonably possible in the circumstances and the question of the venue for
the first day would be considered further.


Mr Fraser asked the Coroner to curtail the activities of the national and
local press as some of their comments had caused a great deal of distress
to the bereaved.   Dr Popper said that he fully understood the problem but
the press would flout any requests he made and that it was probably the
best course of action to say nothing.


Mr Fraser queried the Coroner's view on representation stating that as far
as the solicitors of Liverpool were concerned he would represent them but
some families may want their own solicitor there on the day.     Dr Popper saw
no problem with this.


                                                       /oont'd
4
                                         -   6   -


    Mr Fraser thanked Dr Popper for the way he had proposed a sensible
    modus-vivendi and in particular the way the officers from the West
    Midlands Police had shown care and sympathy for the bereaved families.
    Dr Popper thanked him for his kind comments.


    Mr Callaghan queried whether attendance at the meeting today carried with
    it an automatic right for audience at the "mini-inquests."   Dr .Popper said
    it did.


    Mr Peter Doyle expressed thanks to the Coroner and promised the full help
    and support of the football club throughout the difficult times to come.


    Dr Popper closed the meeting by sending Superintendent Starkey to see if
    any member of the press required a briefing in the presence of all those
    who had taken part in the meeting.   After returning from the foyer
    Superintendent Starkey said that no member of the press were in attendance.


    The meeting closed at 3.05 pm.
@ 0 7 4 2 726247          MEDICO LGL CNTER



                   ACTIVITY REPORT



 TRANSMISSION OK



 TRANSACTION #            0030

 CONNECTION TEL           0213596735

 CONNECTION ID                   G3

 START TIME               03/15 15:18

 USAGE TIME                 00 '38

 PAGES                      1
To:       For the attention of Hgt. Nick Tredgold. Nechells Police Station.
From:     Joan Taylor - Coroner's Secretary.




AVAILABILITY OF PATHOLOGISTS WHO M Y BE flAT.T/STO TO INQUEST. fffTT.T.STvranTTaTh


Professor S. Jones.
Free April 19*20, 23 and 24th.
Has some appointments on other dates but could cancel i.e., 30th April,
1st May, 2nd May, 3rd May, 4th May and 7th of May.




Professor J. Underwood.
Not available Wednesday afternoon 25th April and all
Thursday 26th of April but free the rest of the time.



Professor L. Henry.
Available all the time.



Dr. J. Shortland.
Not available on the 10th of May but O.K. before that.




Dr. Siva & Dr. Denmark.
Available except that Dr. Denmark is not available on the 20th of
April.
Dr. Siva and Dr. Denmark both not available on the 25th of April.



Dr. Slater.
Back from holiday on the 20th of April.      Abroad in Ireland
for a Court Case 26th of April but O.K. for the rest of the time.




Dr. J. Clarke.
Available for most of the time, but not on the 21st of April.
                                             16th of August        89.


SLP/JT.
VJH.TP.AED.


V.J. Hobion, 7*E«CtS|
Consultant in F&edl&tric Accident and Baorgency,
Liverpool Haaltii Authority,
Hoyal Liverpool Childrens Hospital,
Alder Hey,
Baton Boad,
                      .

Sear Doctor Robson,

Thank you for your letter of the 27th of July*

 With regard to yeur second paragraph, X think strictly
speaking, this is sot quite correct. A report prepared
by one of the pathologists and submitted to the fublic
Inquiry had Z think been displayed in one of the libraries,
but as ter as Z know, this has now been withdrawn.

With regard to the pest aortea reports, I have now decided
to release these subject to certain safeguards as follows*-

      a.   They have to be treated mi provisional and
           subject to aM&dBsxit or alteration until
           such tiae as they are given or produced in
           evidence at the Inquest.

      b.   They are to be used only ffcr the purpose of
           bereavement counselling of the diceased*s
           relatives, or for proper or legitiaate purposes
           in connection with any legal proceedings in which
           solicitors say be engaged.

      0.   Subject to tiie above, they are to be kept
           confidential until they ooae in to the public
           doaain at the resuaed Inquest.

In fact, aost of the bereaved are now represented by solicitors,
aany of whoa have already requested post aortea reports and
copies have been sent to them.

To avoid unnecessary duplication, I would be grateful if
you would please let ae knows-

      1.   Whejtoer you would be prepared to accept the
           post aortea reports on the basis outlined above.

      2.   In respect of which of the deceased you still
           feel tiiat you require a copy.

With regard to j m s question regarding the position of Beter
Andrew Harrieon, X regret that I aa not in a position at the
                                                     16th of Angast




pyggon t tla a t© assist 70a on tfeis q m ttiflo *
/
1 look forward to hwGring fern j w u


Tears slnooreljr,




3»lt»fopp9Tf
I J L O m t gi
                LIVERPOOL HEALTH AUTHORITY
ROYAL LIVERPOOL CHILDRENS HOSPITAL
            ALDER HEY
                   Eaton Road, Liverpool L12 2AP
                      Telephone: 051-228 4811
             Our Ref:   WJR.TF.AED       Iftelephoning please ask for: 2261




Dr. S. L. Popper,
H.M. Coroner,
Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
SHEFFIELD,
S3 7ET.                                   27th July, 1989.



Dear Dr. Popper,

You will recall that I wrote to you in May asking for copies
of post mortem reports for those under the age of 18 years who
died in the Hillsborough disaster.

I have been told today by a parent that a summary of the post
mortem findings is now available in public libraries.   Can
you please give me any idea when vou will be able to send me
copies of the post mortem reports.

I have had a counselling session with the parents of Peter
Andrew Harrison, aged 15 years, of Finch Lane, Huyton, and
they are very keen to know where he was in the crowd.   If you
do have that information I would be grateful if you could
forward it to me.

Yours sincerely,



W. J. (e^ b s o n , F.R.C.S.
Consultant in Paediatric Accident and Emergency
PILE NOTE 2 5 . 7 . 8 9 . TELEPHONE CALL TO JOIN POTJI/TER, A3S53N & LEGAL
7M017 HE ACCOMMDMTION.____________________________________


1 b said he wasn't the right man, he was merely responsible for
ensuring that Council business could continue.         He would find
out who would be responsible for sorting out the accommodation
side and get them to ring me.      I told him that the Inquest
was planned to start on the 15th of January 1990 and might last
anything between 4 and 12 weeks.
FILE NOTE DATED 2A.7.RQ- TBKEPffQHl CONVERSATION WITH PROFESSOR S. JONES.



He had had Hr. Devonside on the phone and Hr. Spearett as well.

They had seen this and they wanted copy of p.m.reports.   I told

Professor Jones more or less what I had spoken with Hr. Devonside

about and that I asked him not to release the p.m. reports, but

that I would be dealing with this.
4.
   Sheffield Health Authority                    Royal Hallamshire Hospital
                                                 Glossop Road
                                                 Sheffield S10 2JF                        B mshire
   Department of Clinical Chemistry                                                       HOSPITAL
   Dr A. R. W. Forrest                           Telephone Sheffield 766222 (STD 0742)




   Our ref   A R W F /B B             Your ref                                  Date     ^ J u ly   1989




             Dr S Popper
             H M Coroner
             Medico-Legal Centre
             Watery Street
             SHEFFIELD
             S3

             Dear Dr Popper

             Hillsborough Disaster

             Following my recent conversation with your officer concerning the samples
             which were obtained at autopsy from those who died at Hillsborough, I write
             to say that I have absolutely no objection whatsoever to these samples being
             submitted to another laboratory for further analyses. However, interpretation
             of the results may not be straight forward. The yellow capped plastic tubes
             in which the samples were submitted to my laboratory are primarily intended
             for the collection of samples for clinical blood glucose analysis. They are
             perfectly adequate for the collection of samples for clinical blood alcohol
             analysis. However several factors in their design do mean that the blood
             alcohol concentration of samples placed within them does tend to drop rather
             more rapidly than does the concentration of alcohol in samples placed into
             the "RTA" tubes which are used when blood samples are collected in connection
             with allegations of drink driving offences. These factors include the plastic
             nature of the tube, the relatively large ratio of dead space to sample and the
             push fit cap. Although the samples have been kept sealed and refrigerated
             since their first analysis, it is likely that there would be a significant negative
             bias if they were to be now reanalysed purely because of the nature of the tube
             in which the samples were collected.

             I intend no criticism of any party in drawing this matter to your attention.
             In fact there are many good reasons for using the tubes of this type in a "mass
             casualty" situation. They are readily to hand and sample collection and manipulation
             is more easily carried out with such tubes than is the case when using "RTA" vial.

             If you wish any further information on this aspect of the investigation I would
             be very happy to help you.

             Yours sincerely




             A R W FORREST
             Consultant Chemical Pathologist




R.H.H. 173
FILE NOTE BATED 2A.7.89. TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH DICK FOSTER.



He had had a call froa the Home Office regarding this report which had

been published in Liverpool. He wanted to know what ay view was.

I said that if I had had any say in the natter, I would have preferred

it not to have been published, or at least if I had realised that they

were going to publish it, I would have tried to ensure that the

p.m. reports had gone out first.     He wanted to know whether I

could order it to be withdrawn.    I said that I really didn't think

that I had that authority, it m s after all Lord Justice Taylor's

Inquiry and it was up to him to decide whether it should be published

or not.   I suggested that he might like to have a word with Andrew

Collins and point out what was happening and find out whether there

was any possibility for it to be withdrawn.    I said that if Mr. Collins

wanted to know what ay view on the matter was, then it was that I

would prefer that it was withdrawn from public circulation at the

moment.
                                                    22nd June   89.

SLP/JT.



Mr. R. Michie,
Assistant Director of Health & Consumer Services,
Town Hall Chambers,
Barkers Pool,
Sheffield.


Dear Roger,

1 enclose a copy of a letter dated the 19th of June
which I have received from Professor J.3.P. Jones gixing
me details of the mortuary technician and Personal Secretary.

I trust you will deal with this.

Yours sincerely,



S.L.Popper,
IMyjjaaawfji,
                                                                                                             D e p t , o f Pa t h o l o g y
                    891169                            P r o f e s s o r J .s .P .J o n e s                       C it y H o s p i t a l
N o t t i n g h a m *t K S f H I   Ex t . 2 3 8 3                                             V' 1 1                  t   n u s n l f l L
                                                                                                                H ucknall Road

        . 'JSPJ/VGB                                                                                               N o ttin g h a m
 .                                                                                           NG5       1PB
             19th June 1989

             Dr S L Popper
             H M Coroner
             Medico-Legal Centre
             Watery Street
             SHEFFIELD
             S3 7ET

             Dear Stefan
             Hillsborough Disaster
                                                                            i
             Thank you for your letter of the 9th June. The mortuary technician
             who attended was:   Mr John W Mulligan
                                 Manager - Mortuary Services
                                 Department of Pathology
                                 Queens Medical Centre
                                 Nottingham     i
                                                    National Insurance No. YS 72 85 02 D
             Mg secretary is:                       Mrs Valerie Bolton
                                                    Personal Secretary to Professor JSP Jones
                                                    Department of Pathology
                                                    City Hospital, Nottingham
                                                    National Insurance               No.       ZH 81 09 97B

             Yours sincerely
SLP/JT


Mr. H* MIchie,
Health & CtonmmHwrr Services,
Town Hall Chambers,
Barkers Pool,
Sheffield.


Dear Roger,

I enolose a photocopy of Professor Underwood*s letter of the
16th of June, which give* you the information you need
in connection with these three technicians.


Yours sincerely,




S.L.Popper,
Maflmmifft
r   x    /         f i




                                                           21st June   89.
        SLP/JT,
        JCEU/BB,


        Professor J.G.E. Underwood,
        Dept of Pathology,
        IJjjraUHiversity of Sheffield Medical School,
        Beech Hill Hoad,
        s h s * P ?ffit


        Dear Professor Underwood,

        Rel HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER.

        Thank you for your letter of the 16th of June giving me
        the names, addresses and National Insurance Surabers of
        Arthur Birch, J©hn Birch and Ian Illingsworth*

        Yours sincerely,




        S.L,Popper,
        Mifiarwfff»
The University of Sheffield Medical School

Department of Pathology                                    Beech Hill Road
                                                           Sheffield S10 2RX
Joseph Hunter Professor of Pathology                       Tel: Sheffield 766222
Professor J C E Underwood, MD, FRCPath                     STD code: 0742

JCEU/BB


Dr. S. Popper,
HM Coroner,
Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
Sheffield S3 7ET                                          16 June 1989




Dear Dr. Popper,

Hillsborough Disaster

Thank you for your letter of 9th June.

The names, addresses and N.I. numbers of the three morticians
are as follows

          Arthur Birch               Nat.Ins.No.




          John Birch,                Nat.Ins.No.




          Ian Illingsworth           Nat.Ins.No.




                              Yours sincerely,




                             ^----------------
                              J.C.E. Underwood
                                 (Lv*                                                               flh>
                                          OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR
                                                                             MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                                    f>j) X / f ^
                                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE            WATERY STREET,
                                                         (W est D istrict)   SHEFFIELD                   \
                                      w                                      S3 7ET
           STEFAN L PO PPER . ItLB.I., B.MED.SCi., B.M., B.S., M R.C & ? \
<      ^
                                                            C O R O N B f'

                                                                                 l6th June
                                   Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721                           19 ,8 ?.*


    SLP/JT.
    0169G/KRS.


    Dr. J.C. Clark,
    Senior Lecturer in Forensic Medicine,
    Department of Forensic Medicine
    and Science,
    The University,
    GLASGOW G12 8Q.Q.

    Dear Dr. Clark,

    Re: GARY PHILIP JOHES (deceased) .
                                            /

    Thank you very much for your helpful letter of the 14th of June.
    I very much appreciate the trouble you have taken to clarify
    this for me.

    Yours sincerely,



    S.L.Popper,
    H.M.Coroner.
                                                     16th June     89.


SLP/JT.
0169G/KRS.


Dr. J.C. Clark,
Senior Lecturer in Forensio Medicine,
Department of Tbrensle Medicine
and Science,
The University,
GLASGOW Q12 80a.

Dear Dr. Clark,

Ml, GAjg pHILIP JOHES (deceaaedh

Thank yon very much for your helpful letter of the 14th of June,
I very much appreciate the trouble you have taken to clarify
this for me.

Yours sincerely,



S.L.Popper,
H+M.Coroner.
      D epartm ent          of       F o r e n s ic                                                  T h e U n iv e r s it y
       M   e d ic in e a n d         S c ie n c e                                                   G lasgow G 12 8Q Q


           * T e l:   041-339 8855
                               041-330 4574
  D i r e c t A c c e s s L in e :


      Reference: 0169G/KRS                                                                          14th June. 1989



      Dr. Stefan Popper.
      H.M. Coroner,
      South Yorkshire (West District).
      Medico-Legal Centre.
      Watery Street.
      Sheffield.
      S3 7 E T .



      Dear Dr. Popper.

                                                           Re: Death of Gary Philip Jones
                                                      Died at Hillsborough Stadium on 15/4/89
• »
             Thank you for your                                letter concerning this young man who died                       in
      the Hillsborough disaster.

             As you will see from my post mortem report, in addition to
      injuries received in the crush, there was clear evidence that Gary had
      also received some form of medical treatment following it. in that there
      was a "drip" in his right arm. other medical needle marks, and ECG pads
      on his chest.    The absence of any reaction or haemorrhage associated
      with these however, indicate that he was dead or dying when the treatment
      was administered and certainly did not live for any time afterwards.   It
      is thus very likely that his cousin is correct and that Gary was ir^fact
      taken into an ambulance or to at least some medical area.

             This does not however, alter the cause of death.        He showed
      definite signs of hischest having been crushed and terminally would
      appear to have inhaled vomit and died, the vomiting probably stimulated
      by the effects of the crushing.     This sequence of events would not be
      inconsistent with   him having managed to escape from the crowd and

•     staggered a few steps before dying.

                       I      hope            these       observations   can   assist   you   and    reassure           Gary's
      family.

                       Yours sincerely




                       John C. Clark.
                       M.B..Ch.B..M.R.C.Path..
                       Senior Lecturer in Forensic Medicine
                       The University of Glasgow.
                                                       15th June
SLP/JT.


Mr. D. Bruranell,
Aegistant Treasury Solicitor,
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquixy,
Town Hall,
Sheffield. SI 2HH.

Bear Mr. Brummell,

Rer Release of Post Mortem Reports.

Thank you for your lettir of the 7th of June,   I cm taking this
up with the Steering Committee,

Yours sincerely,



S.L.Popper,
*
                                                              15th June


SLP/JT.                                                  Your R efi Iffl/iR B /H illsborough.


Mr. M. Hunqphreys,
Brian Thompson & Partners,
Solicitors,
Richmond House,
Romford Place,
Xdrerpool. L3 98W.


Dear Mr. Hianphries,

I refer to your letter of the 31st of May and our telephone
conversation of the 13th of June.

You are of course quite correct that there is g o in g to be
a considerable length of tiae before I am in a position
to renne the full Inquests.

I aa very conscious of the fact that disclosure of the post
aortem reports is anxiously awaited by many of the bereaved,
and I note also that they Bay be needed in connection with
other proceedings.

It is a y noraal practice not to release post morteas reports
until the Inquest. I am however considering whether in the
particular ciroiaastanoes of these oases, I ought to depart
froa my noraal practice.

Zf I were to decide to release the post aortea reports it would
have to be on the basis that the doeuaents are being released
as provisional, subject to aaendment or alteration, up to the
tiae when they are given or produced in evidence at the Inquest.

Xt would also have to be on the understanding that they are
kept oonfidential, and only used for proper legitimate purposes,
sueh as legal negotiations and at direct counselling, bereavsaent
counselling of aeabers of the deceased families. This latter
aspeot eould probably be better done by the faaily*s G.P*s
and/or Pediatric or Oaaualty Departments.

V# have a fu rth e r problea in th a t I hava been forwarded a oopy
o f a schedule sent bgr Mrs. S teal (who X believe is w ir iia r o f
tha Steering OoMdttaa) i M A lis ts a substantial xxuaber of the
daoeeae* who apparently are r epresented by a o lio ito ra .

X have gone through th is sohedttlo , and have aarked tilth a cross
those eases of whloh we are snare. - '

Tou D ill see th a t th is is a re la tiv e ly s a s ll proportion o f people ,
and X th in k th a t beffacirX w ill be propw ad to              post ao rtea
reports to ftra s o f M U e ite ra 9 i t would be necessary fo r thea
to ooae, so to speak, on the record w ith me.

                                                                ©oat#d .
                                                                 15th June




1                             .        ■ ■ ».* ,fij         ■'
represents a v m a b m t '» £ tfc» %«w»I i m U y , tJiii-i it -iiMta aot ■ •
necessarily follow that they also 3?@pi»i*«a»t tl*»«i la e«uie®t£«a
•with tli# ln.Qti#iits 1*1 i s p recisely because o f th is that .1
                                                            the Im gm siM i,

I m i will als© aot@ fcoa the copy schedule that against Isa
                                                                         ftiiii
is In fe,ct the- fir® lixi hiwu teen la eoxxeepondense^kth ma
and it Is only fair to add that in the t i a M m i a / M i S l f S l l m m m -
M 'm s m m have sent to.mst lim Glover (feeeased) does not appease
as I30BI00I10 iAm i they represent*
                                                   your schedule with
m g im tl to fliii,              '

I *^i|)lain,ed to you that there were various- other problems which
have"still got to be resolved with regard to^the post mortem       •
reports, but-I am "very conscious of-your wishe
able to" find a way.o f 'complying with them 1- will certainly
sympathetically consider doing so,              .           .

 1 think the first thing that needs- to tie done however is to
 sort out who is representing who.

 I look forward to hearing from you and/or the individual solicitors,
 in due -course,

 Yours-sincerely,




      Popper,
 H.M. Coroner.
                           VICTIMS 04 THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                                      AT 5TH JttNE 1989


 N.B,
 Information (Re victims) Compiled originally by L i v e ^ o d i fichb and
 adjusted when a< curate information was received in by'the
 Solicitors acti; 5f for bereaved families               *



  1 John                  NDERSON

 Solicitor;  Mac : & Jones H^yton 480 7000
 Acting for: Mr.s Anderson <^ife)


  2 Colin M               3HCR0FT

^Solicitor:  Wil .iam H Lili & Co. Lymm 092575 3l70/56§8
 Acting for: Mr    Mrs Ashcraft (Parents)


   3 James                LSFIH&LL

 Solicitor:  Her :y Cross & Sons Prescot 426 5147
 Acting for: Mr Tames Aspinall (Father)


   4 Simon                SELL

 Solicitor:  W a J I & Co Crosby 928 6544
 Acting for: No Jetails       1


   5 Gerard

^Solicitor:        Naj thans Bresson
^ A c t i n g for; No Retails


   6 Barry S              BENNETT

  Solicitor:         Go dsmiths Liverpool 227 2552
  Acting for:        Pa' ricia Dove£ as next of friend of KerrJ     Bennett
  also***
  Solicitor:         Wi liams Elsby & Co. Bootle,    agents for w n S t Brooks
  Acting for:        Th family ofithe deceased

   7 David J              BENSON

  Solicitor:         Co in Watson Warrington 0925 571212
  A c t i n g for:   Mr S Mrs Benspn (Parents)                 I
                     an L the girlfriend, of the deceased on be }alf‘ of
                     th d r child
                                                                          1           S)
    8 Peter             1 XRKETT

  Solicitor:  Bel; Lamb & Johnson Runcorn      0928 716969 .
  Acting for: Mr    Mrs Birkei^t (Parents)                 !
  also ***
  Solicitor: Silv< rman Liverrjiore Liverpool 227 1871     I
  Acting for: No < etails N.B, info as "P A Barkatt,dacd*

                                                                          i
    9 Paul D             ■RADY

  Solicitor:   Ya.f e Jackson f Ostrin Liverpool 236 5555j
  Acting- for: Mr ! Brady     ;


  10 Carl                kOWN

  Solicitor;  Wid .ows    Leigh 0942 673311
  Acting for; Mr   "
                   Mrs “ Bro'm
                       T “


  11 David               H.OWN

  Solicitor:  Jam is James & katch Wrexham 0978 261026
  Acting for: Mr Javld Stanley Brown (Father)          I
                                                                          I
  12 Henry T            ptJBKE

  Solicitor;  Can er Levin &’ Berg Kirkby
  Acting for: Mr •C Burke
                                                       54 6 4562      T
  13 Paul               CARLISLE

  Solicitor:  Doc Ley & Co, Liverpool 270 2095
  Acting for: No Retails


^^ 1 4 Raymond          :h a p m a n
                              I                                               T ^ T
  Solicitor:           Thom
              Bri in Thompsorf  & Partners
  Acting for: No illetails
                   et-.s-i 1s ]


  15 Joseph             :l a r k

  Solicitor:  Ma<  & Jones             'Liverpool 236 8 98 9
  Acting for: Nofietails

  16 Paul              ICLARKE

  Solicitor:         Si   ■erman Livermore Liverpool 227       1371   T
  A c t i n g for:   M r & Mrs Clarke (Parents)
    17 G a r y       IOLLXNS

    Solicitor:  Woolwich L&ndej: & Savage Bootle 933 3335
    Acting for: No Sletails


%   18 Steven         OPOC

    Solicitor:  Sil rerman Livermore Liverpool 227 1871
    Acting for: No Retails     j


    19 James          NIAMEY

    Solicitor:  D E Roberts & Co. Bromborough L62 7HH
    Acting for: J E Delaney (J):)


    20 Christopher    JSVONSIDE

    Solicitor:  D E fillips & Co. Bootle       922 5525
    Acting for: No Retails


    21 Vincent        riTZSlMMON^

    Solicitor:    Ric o y & Co.   ^insford   0606 558825
    Acting for:   No details
    also***
    Solicitor:    Wh :tles Manchester 061 228 2061
    Acting for:   Ma: jorie Wild (common law wife)


     22 Barry         SLOVSR

     Solicitor:  Do< ley & Co. ijiverpool 270 2095
     Acting for: No details     \


     23 lan           3LOVER

     Solicitor:  Si; verman Livermore Liverpool      227 1871   U 'OX&n*<£>£>Iis*-   L^\
     Acting for: Nofdetails                                         i
                                                                l   {•____ ;______
X    24 Derrick G     GODWIN

     Solicitor:  Le ghton Davi^ Witney 0993 779977
     Acting for: Mr A Mrs Godwin (Parents)


     25 Roy           HAMILTON

     Solicitor:  Ke nan Gribbl^ Crosby 9298 8686
     Acting for MrS Wendy Hamilton (Wife)
26 P h i l i p        AMMOND

Solicitor:  Bar1 lett & Son              Old Swan   228 7730
Acting for: No etails


27 Eric                ANKIN

Solicitor:  Lee Lloyd Whitley Liverpool                  227 7730        \
Acting for: Mrs Hankin (Wire) Mr Hankin                 (Father)

Solicitor:  Max pell Entwisile & Byrne Maghull                 526 7 lfl
Acting for; No .etails


28 Peter               ARRISON

Solicitor:  Mac :rell & Thojnas Page Moss                480 3666
Acting for: Mr i Mrs Harrijson (Parents)


29 Stephen F           &ARRIS0N

Solicitor:  Sil rerman Livermore                Liverpool 227 1871
Acting for: no ietails     ■


 30 Paul               Se w i t s o n

Solicitor:  Coj les Crosby^ 931 2841
Acting for: Mr * Mrs Hewit?son (Parents)


 31 Carl               iSWITT

 Solicitor:  No details b^t a call has been received fjhrdA a Hick
        _______
 Carter Tel No. 0533 812413 on behalf of his siste t M & M v i t t O f
 109 Serverna R< ad OADBY Leicestershire who lost both % e r sons at
 Hillsborough (i ea below Nicolas) Mr Hewitt rang b a c k % o iay that
 they may conta< fc their ow4 solicitor.

                                                                     1
 32 Nicholas          PEWITT

 Solcitor;                          SEE ABOVE


 33 Sarah             HICKS
 Solicitor:  Si verman Livermore                Liverpool   227 1871*
 Acting for: Ndidetails

 34 Victoria           HICKS

 Solicitor:         Si ,verman Livermore        Liverpool   227 18711
 A c t i n g for;   No '
                       ‘details
  35 G o r d o n          ORU

  Solicitor:        Sil “erman Livermore       Liverpool     227 1871
  Acting for        No details


  3 6 Arthur              lORROCKS

  Solicitor:  Fanlhaw Porter1 & Hazelhurst               New Ferry        6|4 7990
  Acting for: MrsjS Horrocks*

                                                                              ~..L
   37 Thomas              HOWARD

   Solicitor:        Silverman Live’
                                   b more      Liverpool      227 1871 ¥
   Acting for;       No etails
   also***
   Solicitor:        Bel . Lamb & Johnson Runcorn 716969
   Acting for:       Mrs Howard (Ex; wife)

        Thomas A           IOWARD (Age' 1 4 )Masseyfield Rd Brook Va "e B!unco£n

   Solicitor:  Bel . Lamb
                     iiamc &
                           ci Johnson
                              uwviiowii Runcorn 716969
   Acting for: Mrsf Howard   (Mother)


y ( 39 EriC                IUGHES

    Solicitor;         )ie Collinjs Uppingham-
    Acting for: M r s Hughes (Wijfe)


    40 Alan                  'HNSTONE

    Solicitor;             •erman Live'rmore     Liverpool     227 1871
    Acting for; No         ietails


    ^ 1 Gary                TONES

     Solicitor:  Mo i scroft Daws'on & Garnett Liverpool                  2 3 ^ 8871
     Acting for: No ietails


     42 Richard             TONES

     Solicitor;  Da .s Wallis            ’Liverpool   236 1611
     Acting for; No iietalls

     Solicitor:  B r & n Thompson & Partners Liv®rP°°l    Ig7!*
     Acting for: No Retails N.ri. awaiting confirmation 17 .J.as

      4 3 Nicholas          JOYNES

      Solicitor:         Le<s Lloyd Whitley Liverpool        227   2460
                                                                             T
      A c t i n g for:   M r & M r s J o y n a s (parents)
     4 4. A n t h o n y        KELLY

     Solicitor:  Ri<ftiard Dawsori & Co.                    061 962 8157
     Acting for: Mr^, Simmons (Mother)


     45 Carl

     Solicitor:  Do<fl.ey & Co. Liverpool 270 2095
     Acting for; No letails      ;

     4 6 David                 M&TH2R

     Solicitor;  E.    D, Pictdn Road Liverpool                 733 3385
     Acting for: No details


     47 Brian                  dATHEWS

     Solicitor;  Doc Ley & Co. Kirkby 548 911
     Acting for: Mr.; M Mathews :(Wife)


     48 Francis                toALlSTER     no   details

     Solicitor:  Bai :lett & Son Old Swan 227 3391
     Acting for; Mr I Mrs McAlister (Parents)


     4 9 Alan                  flcGLONE

     Solicitor:  Car ;er Levin & Berg             Kirkby      546 4562
     Acting for: No details


      50 Lee                   4ICOL         Aged 14 n o details

     Solicitor;  Wa; L & Co. Crosby  928 6544
     Acting for: Mrs Pat Nicol (Mother)


      51 Stephen               y NEILL

      Solicitor:  Jot i Callaghan & Co Page Moss               480 4555
      Acting for; The O'Neill fajnily


      52 William               »EMBERTON
><
      Solicitor;  Si\ srman Livermore             Liverpool    227 1871
      Acting for: No Jet ails


      53 Carl                  M mmer

      Solicitor:
      A c t i n g for:
                          Si
                          No
                               /erman Livermore Liverpool
                               Retails
                                                               227 1871    T
     54 David         SIMMER

     Solicitor;  Briyhouse Jonds Ormskirk
     Acting for; Lir 3a Mary Rirfmer (Wife)
                 Pai. L David Rinmer (Son)
                 Kat a Elizabeth Rimmer (Daughter)


     55 Graham        ROBERTS

     Solicitor:  Pei py Hughes & Roberts              Chester    0244 3 1 0 4 6
i‘   Acting for: No details

;■   56 Stephen       ROBINSON
►
t.


“    Solicitor:   C05 :ies       Crosby    931 2841


;    57 Colin         3EFTON

     Solicitor:  Cai er Levin             Berg   Skelmersdale      0695     S468
     Acting for; No ljetails


     58 Inger         SHAH

     Solicitor; BaffLeys Shaw £ Gillett London 01 837 545
     Acting for: Mifc R Shah (Age 17) Daniel Shah (Age 13 )J


     59 Paula A       SMITH

     Solicitor:  Caj lan Goodmari & Coote Townsend Lane Off She 256 0&77
     Acting for: I 4r *l-& Mrs ff.~-l
                               Smith  4. lJ (Parents)
                                                  , -V      «



     60 Adam          3&EARRITT

     Solicitor: Si verman Livermore              Liverpool      227 1871
     Acting for; NO details


     61 Philip        STEELE

     Solicitor:  Co; ties Crosby          931 2841
     Acting for: No details


     62 David        Jh o m a s
     Solicitor: La; ton 4         Co. Liverpool 236 9475
     Acting for; Ms Jones         (Fiancee)
                 Mr s Mrs         Thomas (Parents)
                 Mr & Mrs         Knowles (Sister & Brother-in-La'




                       t n i-i
63 Patrick        1 50MFS0N

Solicitor:  S L l \ srman Liveiinore      Liverpool    227 1871    I
Acting for: No cstails         ;


64 Peter             OMPSON




65 Stuart P
                   r
                 Roberts Ncjrth Kirk Liverpool 227 418J
Acting for: No letails


                    HOMPSON
                                                      1




Solicitor;  Pau Watson & Co Southport            N.B, PHONff
Acting for: No .etails


66 Peter            'OOTLB

Solicitor;  Silferman Livermore           Liverpool    227 1971 I
Acting for: Ho Retails                                          I


67 Christopher |!RAYNOR

Solicitor:  Do<Aey & Co. Liverpool 270 2095
Acting for: No Retails


 68 Martin          CRAYNCR

 Solicitor:  Doc ley & Co. Liverpool 270 2095
 Acting for: No Retails


 69 Kevin           nrRELL

 Solicitor:  Da1 id M a t h e w s '& Co    Liverpool    236 5599
 Acting for: No details


 70 Ian             WHELAN

 Solicitor:  Co in Watson £ Co Warrington 0925 571212.:
 Acting for: No [details.


 71 Graham J         WRIGHT

 Solicitor:   He ry Cross & Sons Prescot          426 5147         j
 Acting for : Gigl'ge F Wright
                                             treasury solicitor
                                             HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
                                             TOWN HALL
                                             SHEFFIELD
                                             SI 2HH
                                             Telephone 0742-736903/736905
                                             FAX       0742-736900

                                             7th June, 1989


Miss E. M. Steel,
Hillsborough Steering Caimittee,
c/o Castle Chambers,
Cook Street,
LIVERPOOL,
L2 9SH.


Dear Miss Steel,
                         pTrr.TTA.'yff OF POST-MORTEM REPORTS

    Thank you for your faxed letter of 6th June.

    Snbiect to the views of the Coroner, I do not myself see any objection to
the post-mortem reports being released to the bereaved families on a provisional
basis in the manner that you suggest.
     I have accordingly passed your request on to the Coroner, and he will no
 doubt be in touch with you direct.
                                    Yours sincerely,




                                     D. Brummell
                                     Assistant Treasury Solicitor
'f*




                   i                                 9th June    89
                   V      '              '   '



StP/JT.



Professor J.C.E. Underwood,
Department of Pathology#
Hoyal Hallaaahir® Hospital,
Glossop Hoad,
Sheffield.

Dear Professor TInderwod,

HILLSBOROTOH EPSASTER ^

You w r y kindly let me have the naaes of the three morticians
who attended at the Medioo Legal Centre and assisted with th®
poet morterns. I h a w been asked if I oould please have th»ir
fall names and addressee, so that appropriate cheques can
be sent to them.

I think it might be helpful if you oould also ftaft
their Rational Insurance Somber. I am sorry to have to trouble
you with this, but I would be grateful if you oould please
let me have this as soon as possible.

Yours sincerely,                                 ,



S.L.Popper,
H.M. Coroner.
SLP/JT.


Professor J.S.P. Jenes,
Department of Pathology,
City Hospital,
Hucknall Road,


Dear Stephen,

Bft..KILLSBQBPPGH          '

I would be most grateful if you could please let ae have
the full naae and address of the mortioian who attended (I
think it was Hr, Williaas) as well as the naae and address of
your secretary. It would also be helpful if it were possible
to have their National Insurance numbers.

I look forward to receiving this as soon as possible.


Yours sincerely,



S.L.Popper,
M u S pxmau
SLP/JS.

Hr* J. Clark,
Department of Forensic Medieine,
University of Glasgow,
GLASGOW. G12 6Q.Q.


Boar Hr. Clark,

Rei GARY PHILIP BONES - Ho.86.

I enclose a oopy of a letter tra m Moreoroft Dawson & Garnetts,
the third paragraph of whioh is very interesting.

We have not yet established whether the identification aentioned
to that paragraph is acourate (sometimes people aake mistakes
when looking at videos) but I would be grateful if you oould
pleiee let me know whether, in the light of this and on the
assumption that it were correct, you would wish to      any
amendment to your post mortem conclusions or the short causes
of death.

Yours sinoerely,



S.L,Popper,
B.M.Coroner.
                                                                                                    p*     1




           HILLSBOROUGH                               STEERING                     COMMITTEE

                           c/o CastCe Chambers, Cook^StTect, Liverpoo(L2 9 S 0 i ' D X 14100
                                        Vet: 051 2 5 5 0 6 2 8 Jo*: 051 2 3 6 0047




**       S L Popper,
H M C o ron e r for South Y o r k s h ir e D i s t r i c t ,             M H/ARD/H illsborough
M ed ico -L eg al C en tre ,
W atery S t r e e t ,
S h e f f ie l d ,
S3 7ET.


                                                                         31st May, 1989.




D ear S ir ,

             I am a member of th e H ills b o r o u g h S te e r in g Committee set up
u n d e r th e a u s p i c e s of t h e L iv e rp o o l Law Society to d e a l w ith common
m a t t e r s a r i s i n g from t h i s t r a g e d y in r e l a t i o n to l e g a l c a s e s .

             C l e a r l y , it is g o in g to be some time b e fo re f u l l I n q u e s t s t a k e
p l a c e in t h i s m a t t e r .     In    th e m e a n tim e , my c o l l e a g u e s a n d I a r e
a n x i o u s to p ro c e ed w ith n e g o t i a t i o n s a n d if n e c e s s a r y w ith p r o c e e d i n g s
a g a in st various p a rtie s.               In o r d e r to do t h a t it w o u ld be v e r y
h e l p f u l if th e i n d i v i d u a l s o l i c i t o r s i n v o l v e d in th e s e c a s e s c o u ld h a v e
a c c e s s to th e p o st mortem r e p o r t s p r i o r to th e I n q u e s t t a k i n g p l a c e .

           I s h o u ld be g r a t e f u l if you c o u ld le t me know y o u r v ie w s on
th is m atter and              w h e t h e r or not you w ill r e q u i r e a s i g n e d c o n s e n t from
th e r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s of th e e s t a t e .

              I look f o r w a r d to h e a r i n g from you a n d I s h o u l d be g r a t e f u l               if
you w o u ld a d d r e s s a n y r e p l y to me, c a r e of B r i a n Thompson a n d
P a r t n e r s , S o li c i t o r s , Richmond House, Rumford P l a c e , L i v e r p o o l , L3
9SW.



                                            Ynnrg faithfully                /




                                 p . p . MR MICHAEL HUMPHREYS.
                                 BRIAN THOMHDN AND PARTNERS.

ARD.
                                                    31st May

 SLP/JT,

D.B. w n aai,
for The Treasury Solioitor,
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry,
Town Hall,
Sheffield. SI 2HH.

Bear Mr. Edmonds,

Thank you for your letter of the 26th of May. She question
of releasing the post mortem reports was raised lagr aw earlier
in May, and at that time it was felt that this would perhaps
not be a wise thing to do at that atage.
I note from your letter that Counsel to the Inquiry seems to
either take a different view or to have changed hia mind
on the subject at the moment.
With regard to the question of the release, 1 would not
be particularly happy if they were released in the manner
in which you have suggested.
I feel that the question of the medical cause of death falls
vary directly within the aabit of the Inquest and if any
post mortem reports are to be released, then 1 think this
should be done by me, as 1 wish to retain control of the
information which is being disseminated.
Mr understanding is that Counsel representing the bereaved
ia not la fact instructed on behalf of all the deceased
(soae of the families as far as I aa aware have not yet
instrueted solid tore).
In respect of these, I do not think it would be right that
the post aortea report should be released to Counsel.
1 should also add that I aa being approached by various
solicitors as well as others for the release of the post
Bw a w HI 3SBp63PwB#
Whilst it is not ny normal practice to release post aortea reports
until the Inquest, 1 concede that in this particular situation
such release aight be of help and benefit to the bereaved families
and I aa therefore not implacably opposed to this in principle.
Bewevar, should the doouaents be released it would have to be on
the underataading that they m a t bo treated aa provisional, and
subject to aaendaent or alteration until such time as they are
femaally introduced aa evidence at the Inquiaition.
I think It would be boat if Counsel t a t the bereaved, either
directly” or throat yourselfes or his instructing solicitors would
lot aa have a note of who ho representa and if it worn possible,
& e tunas of hia inatxuoting solioitora.      I would then consider
M s requeat aa a g f wifratloallr aa 1 oould*

Toura sincerely,


S.t*Iopper,
                                          TREASURY SOLICITOR
                                          HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
                                          TOWN HALL
                                          SHEFFIELD
                                          SI 2HH

                                          Telephone 0742-736903/736905
                                          FAX       0742-736900

                                          26th May, 1989


Dr. S. Popper,
H.M. Coroner,
Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
Sheffield,
S3 7ET.


Dear Sir,

    Counsel to the Inquiry has received a request from Counsel representing
the bereaved and injured to be provided with the post-mortem examination
reports. Counsel is minded to grant the request and seeks confirmation
that you have no objection.


                                  Yours faithfully,




                                  D. B. EDMONDS
                                  for The Treasury Solicitor
        ^   *
    %



                                                              24th May            W.



        S1S/JT.
        NHM/IES.


        Neil 1, Horten,
        Director of Btnrironaental Health,
        Rotherham Metropolitan Borough Council,
        Thorn Bank*
        58 Koorgate Bead,



^       Dear Ite, Morton,

        Thank you for y m e letter of the £th of May.

        Z have paeced a oopy of your lattov with it»e enclosure to ShofflelA
        City Council, asftdl would expeot that Z will be in a position to
        co«nmioate with j m farther directly, m* alternatively they say
        get in touoh with yon,

        May * take this opportunity of saying that I -very much    appreciated
        tha fact that your aortioian waa ao willing to give up     such a lot
        of hia tlaa to aaaiat Ur, Slater in tha perfoxaanoe of     poat aortaaa
        done on the Hillsborough dead. I am sure that it aad*      a big
        difference to tha w m bw e of peat nortews which wo were   able to
        complete.

        Yours sincerely,



        S.L.Bopper,
        H.M.Coronar.
                      ROTHERHAM METROPOLITAN BOROUGH COUNCIL

                      IMeil H. Morton, F.I.E.H., M.R.S.H., M.Inst. S.W., M.R.I.P.H.H., M.I.S.P.P.
                mjd   Director of Environmental Health

                      Thorn Bank, 3 8 Moorgate Road,
                      Rotherham, S 6 0 2BU.

                      Fax Nos. (0 7 0 9 ) 3 6 7 5 1 2 & 5 6 0 3 5 5
                      Telecom Gold - L M X 9 2 6 & TSL 0 7 8

My reference:         Your reference:      Telephone:            Extension:      Please contact:
                                           Rotherham
NHM/IES                                    373731                3100            Neil H. Morton


                                                                                                May 9, 1989


Dr. S.L. Popper,
The Coroner of South Yorkshire,
Medio-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
Sheffield,
S2 7ET

Dear Dr. Popper,

Please find enclosed an account for the services of the Morticians involved
in the Hillsborough Disaster.

It is appreciated that this sad event is unlikely to recur and whilst
charges are being made, they have been deliberately kept to an absolute
minimum.   You will note that they are on a cost only basis without the
addition of any administrative charges.

I am pleased we were able to be of service and anticipate that co-operation
of this kind will always exist between us.




Nfiil Hi Morton,
Director of Environmental Health




                  Please address letters impersonally to the Director of Environmental Health
                                                    22afl May          89.



 SLP/JT.


 Nr. B. Kiohie,
 Assistant Mreotor,
 Health & Comroaar Services,
 Town Hall Chaahers,
 Barkers Poolf



 Sear B opci



 X enclose a copy of a letter ftroa Rotherham Metropolitan Borough -
 Council together with m invoice in respect of Mr. Williams.

 In a sense, events h a m overtaken us as far ae they are ooneerned,
 tat ay feeling is that if tl» mount which we would h a m allowed
 would have been greater than this, then this should ha negotiated/
 agreed with     Metropolitan Borough of Rothexhaa.

 Yours sincerely,                                   —



 S.L.P0pper,
 E A fta a a ig .




I ,         J , o / ' S / U 1*12'7 -
l*S*t tb- V*
                    r-
           "Sow**

                               ^ c c ^ s cvn i-o

   O     VO WiC^-'b v~cX       H o S ? v'C <\ L-

       Q.O££.s\itE?   Vk ££? i C £M—   C t m ^ t -



voo^or-eo                     <g<^     to


 OKi     ‘bov<iC>CV-\ ^
                                                  12th M a y 1989

SLP/PAD


Mr. D. Purchon,
Director of Environmental Health,
Town Hall Chambers,
Barkers Pool,
Sheffield.


Dear David,

Re; HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


You will recollect that I have already spoken to you about payments
to pathologists and others arising out of the disaster at Hillsborough
on 15th April.

You will recollect that by virtue of an extraordinary effort from
everyone involved we were able to carry out seventy post mortems on
Sunday 16th April and the balance of the cases were completed on
Monday 17th April.

Without detracting in any way from the tremendous effort which was put
in by the staff of the Medico-Legal Centre it is undoubtably true that
it Would not have been possible to achieve this result without the very
willing assistance and help from pathologists, several of whom brought
their own teams in order to increase our capacity.

It is also true that if the hospitals had not agreed to take our routine
cases and deal with them it would have made things exceedingly difficult.
No charge has as yet been made and it would be difficult if not
impossible to resist it.

When I was first informed of this incident I thought that probably post
mortems should be undertaken by forensic pathologists and indeed a
large number of the cases were dealt with by these.

As you know in cases of special difficulty (which for all practical
purposes includes all forensic cases) a special post mortem fee is
paid of £130.10 as opposed to the standard fee of £46.50.

I have carefully considered what would be the appropriate rate in this
case and I feel that probably it is not justified to clasify all the
cases as forensic, on the other hand I think it would be proper to
recognise the tremendous effort as well as the stress and distress
which dealing with so many young people undoubtably was.
                                               12th M a y   1989


(2)

Mr. D. Purchon


1.   I therefore would like to recommend that in this particular case
we should remunerate the pathologists by paying the standard fee of
£46.50 plus a supplement per case so as to bring the total remuneration
in each case to £65.00.  You will see that this is in fact 50% or so
of the forensic pathological charge.

I would be grateful if you could please obtain confirmation that the
Council will in these exceptional circumstances agree this special
payment.

I have already mentioned that several of the pathologists brought
their own teams, in particular the following mortuary staff came:

Professor Stephen Jones brought his own mortician and Mr. Mullingan
was present for 12 hours on Sunday.

The Royal Hallamshire Hospital morticians attended, they were Messers
Arthur Birch, Mr. John Birch and Mr. Ian Illingsworth. They attended
for 7 hours.

Dr. Slater was accompanied by Mr. Roy Williams who was present on
Sunday and on Monday for a total of 13 hours.

2.    These mortuary staff need to be appropriately   remunerated.

There are two further matters.

Professor Stephen Jones was accompanied by his secretary who presumably
took notes directly.  Other pathologists as far as I know used dictating
machines and no doubt their secretaries had to work very hard to get the
work typed up but they weren't present on the day.

3.   You may feel that some financial recognition for the presence of
Professor Jones' secretary on 16th April 1989 should be made.

Incidently I understand from Dr. Slater that he is proposing to fund out
of his fees the expenses for the heavy secretarial duties performed for
him on this particular occasion.  I would on the whole be reluctant to
recommend that we should reimburse secretarial costs away from the Medico-
Legal Centre.

4.   Finally there is the question of the attendence of pathologists at
the Hillsborough Sportsground on the 15th April.  On that occasion
Professor Usher was called in and Professor Stephen Jones phoned me and
volunteered to come to Sheffield, an offer which I most readily accepted.
Dr. Slater also I believe came to the scene.

I should perhaps add that their help and advise was invaluable.
                                                   12th M a y   1989

   (3)

  Mr. D. Purchon


     I have been reflecting on their attendence (particularly Professor Usher
     and Professor Jones).   You will of course appreciate that no P.M.'s as
     such were undertaken but I wonder whether a way of recognising their
    presence and the help which thg.y gave on that occasion would be to
    remunerate them at the value of one special P.M. fee i.e. £130.10 (plus
^ ^ a n y mileage and so on) as a recognition of the time, effort and help
    which they provided on that sad day.

  You will notice I have not specified remuneration for the mortuary
  attendents or indeed Professor Jones' secretary.  I think you are in
  a much better position than I am to quantitate these figures.

  I will be very grateful if I could please hear from you as soon as
  possible on this matter.




  Yours sincerely,




  S. L. POPPER
  H. M. CORONER
                                                          f n



                                               11th May     89



SLP/PAD
PS/PAB



Dr. Philip Simms,
South Safton (Merseyside) Health Authority,,
Walton Hospital,
Rice Lane,
Liverpool,
L9 1AE.


Dear D r , Simms,

Thank you for your letter of 5th May 1989,,1 note what you say, it
is not quite as straight forward as at first sight might appear. I
would like a little bit more time to sort this question out.

I will try and write to you again as soon as I reasonably can.




Yours sincerely.




S. L. POPPER
H. M. CORONER
                                                                                             fh.

                        SOUTH SEFTO N (M E R S E Y S ID E ) H E A L T H A U T H O R I T Y

Tel. 051-525 3611                   When telephoning or calling please ask f o r :           WALTON HOSPITAL
                                                                                                   RICE LANE
Our Ref. PS/PAB                                                                                    LIVERPOOL
                                                                                                      L9 1AE
Your Ref.

                                                                                            5th May, 1989

            H.M. Coroner
            H.M. Coroner's Department
            Medical Legal Centre
            Watery Street
            SHEFFIELD S37 ES


            Dear Sir,

                             Hillsborough Disaster - Post mortem reports

                 I am Consultant in the Accident and Emergency Department of Walton
            Hospital, the main general hospital serving the north of Liverpool.

                 Now that most of the funerals have taken place, the relatives of a
            number of victims are wanting to know more about the actual circumstances
            of the deaths of their relatives and are asking for details of the actual
            injuries and how they died.     Requests for help in this area have been
            channelled to me, firstly through Miss Robson, Consultant      in Accident
            and Emergency at Alder Hey Children's Hospital, Liverpool, and now through
            our own Medical Social Workers.

              I would be most happy to help in this way, working in conjunction with
         our Social Workers, but clearly it would be most helpful if I could see
         copies of the post mortem reports.     I have no idea what the position is
         with regard to this as the inquests are adjourned, but if it is possible
         for these post mortem reports to be disclosed to ms then I would be in a
         much better position to aid those few relatives who require additional
         information.    If, however, it is not possible for you to do so at this
         stage, perhaps you would let ms know.

                 I enclose a list of victims from within our catchment area in both
            Liverpool and Sefton Health Authorities.

                                                Your s ^ incerely,



                                           PHILIP SDWS, F.r 'c .S.
                                             Consultant - A.E.D.




         Encl.
                           HILLSBOROUGH INCIDENT 15.4.89


Sefton deceased


 1.   Roy HAMILTON (34)

 2.   Gary CHURCH (19)

 3.   Christopher Barry DEVENSIDE (1

 4.   Stephen Joseph ROBINSON    (17)

 5.   Eric HANKIN (33)

 6.   Paul Anthony HEWITSQN (26)

 7.   Nicholas JOYNES (26)

 8.   Gary COLLINS (22)

 9.   Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS (15)

10.   Simon BELL (17)

11.   Stuart Paul William THOMPSON (

12.   Philip John STEELE (15)

13.   Paul David BRADY (21)

14.   Gary Philip JONES (18)

15.   Barry BENNETT (26)

16.   Gordon HORN (20)

17.   Lee NICHOL
                            HILLSBOROUGH INCIDENT 15.4.89


Liverpool deceased


 1.   Peter Andrew HARRISON (15)

2. Colin WAFER (19)

 3. Paula SMITH (26)

4.    Alan JOHNSTON (29)

 5.   Keith MCGRATH (17)

6.    Ian GLOVER (20)

 7.   Peter TOOTLE (19)

8.| Peter McDONNELL (21)

9.    Richard JONES (24)

10. William Roy PEMBERTON (23)

11. Steven Paul COPOE (20)

12.   Michael David KELLY (38)

13.   John Alfred ANDERSON (62)

14.   Philip HAMMOND (14)

15.   Stephen Francis HARRISON (30)

16.   Garry HARRISON (27)
                                                       fb




                                                  5th May         89


        SLP/PAD
        WJR/TF/AED


        W. J. Robson, F.R.C.S.,
        Consultant in Paediatric Accident and
                    Emergency Medicine,
        Liverpool Health Authority,
        Royal Liverpool Childrens Hospital,
        Alder Hey,
        Eaton Road,
        Liverpool,
        L12 2AP.


        Dear Miss W. J. Robson,

        Thank you for your letter of 20th April.  I am sorry I have not
        been able to reply before. Whilst I would be very anxious to assist
        you as far as I am able with your coaneAIIAggof the bereaved families
        I feel that at the moment it would not be appropriate for me to
        disclose the P.M. Reports as these have not as yet been produced
        in evidence either before me or the Judicial Inquiry.

        It is my normal practice not to disclose P.M. Reports prior to the
        inquest and for the time being I would prefer not to depart from
        that practice.



        Yours sincerely,


    #
        S. L. POPPER
        H. M. CORONER




i
         ROTHERHAM            HEALTH     AUTHORITY

                 Department of Histopathology
               Rotherham District General Hospital
                         Moorgate Road
                       ROTHERHAM S60 2UD

                              Tel: Rotherham (0709) 820000 Ext 246

Consultant Histopatholoqist
DR. D.N. SLATER

DNS/OK

Dr. S. Popper,
HM Coroner,
South Yorkshire (West District),
Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
SHEFFIELD                                            3rd May 1989


Dear Dr. Popper,


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER AUTOPSIES

It goes without saying that all Coroner's work involves       a
degree   of   personal    tragedy for involved relatives    and
indirectly a degree of remuneration for histopathologists who
undertake autopsies at HM Coroner's request.
However, as I am an adequately salaried NHS Histopathologist
with a peripheral (although substantial) interest in forensic
medicine, I have decided in this particular instance of the
Hillsborough   disaster,   that I wish to make no personal
financial gain from having undertaken the autopsies    at your
request. I felt privileged to be invited by yourself to help in
this particular instance.
I have decided that it would be appropriate for my fees to be
paid to the Hillsborough Disaster Fund.

Although I had considered approaching you to have my        fees
waived at source and paid directly into the fund, unfortunately
this will not be possible as I have expenses    to  fulfil   for
individuals who have also kindly helped me on this occasion.
Here I refer to heavy secretarial duties in typing the reports
and the standard gratuitories to Mr, Roy Williams, the Mortuary
Superintendent who provided his services throughout the Sunday
and on the Monday morning. In addition we have the possible
complicating factor that Mr. Williams' time will be assessed
accurately by the Rotherham Local Authority. Although I have
had a verbal  assurance  from the Director of Environmental
Health that Rotherham will waive any appropriate fees in this
instance (possibly with a review to reciprocal arrangements   in
the  future),  one can clearly not be assured that this will
happen at the basic administrative     level.  However  if any
unwaived  fees are   forthcoming  from Rotherham District to
Sheffield District, perhaps you would be so kind as to pass the
appropriate billed request on to myself and I will deduct this
from my own autopsy fee payments.

When I have settled my expenses from all sources, I intend to
then donate the residual monies      to the appeal fund after
deduction of the normal higher rate tax.

I appreciate that possibly more monies could be donated to the
appeal by direct payment but my accountant fears a somewhat
complicated tax situation in view of the expenses which I will
have to pay.
It would also appear perhaps appropriate to pay some monies
back to the exchequer as normal in view of the heavy local
authority outgoings which will be involved.


Kind regards,

Yours sincerely,




D.N. SLATER
Consultant Histopathologist
                                                      54,Dore Road,
                                                         Sheffield,
                                                           S17 3NB.
                                                    April 25th 1989
Dr.S.Popper,
H.M.Coroner,
Medico-legal Centre,
Watery Street,
Sheffield.

Dear Dr.Popper,

          Re    David William Mather,
                David Steven Brown,
                Kester Roger Marcus Ball,
                Colin Andrew Sefton,
                Thomas Anthony Howard,
                James Philip Delaney,
                John Alfred Anderson,
          a ll victims of the Hillsborough Disaster.

     I would be most grateful if you would make the necessary
arrangements for me to waive ray professional fee with regard to
the seven post mortem examinations on the patients listed
above, all performed in connection with the Hillsborough
Disaster, on condition that an equivalent sum be payed to the
Hillsborough Disaster Appeal.

     I shall be grateful if you could arrange for me to receive
a receipt in due course.

     I give my permission for copies of this letter to be used
for notification of the Inland Revenue.


          Yours sincerely,




          D r .J.R.Shortland
          Senior Lecturer/Consultant Pathologist,


City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Ref.No. 20 028 96615.
/         ■     &£>                                                     p } r

                                  Ic&y^ S='tt "
                      LIVERPOOL HEALT>1 AUTHORITY
     ROYAL LIVERPOOL CHILDRENS HOSPITAL
                 ALDER HEY        f ilA ib f h
                       Eaton Road, Liverpool L12 2AP
                          Telephone: 051-228 4811
                   Our Ref:   WJR.TF. AED     If telephoning please ask for:   2261




    H. M. Coroner's Department,
    Medico-legal centre,
    Watery Street,
    SHEFFIELD,
    S37 ES                                    20th April, 1989.


    Dear Sir,

    My staff and I talk to all parents of children who have died following
    road traffic accidents and other trauma. This includes discussion
    of the post mortem findings.   We have been asked to see the parents
    of those under the age of 18 years who died in the Hillsborough
    disaster.   Therefore, I would be grateful if you could forward copies
    of the post mortem reports on these young people or a summary of the
    injuries found in each one.   Although our hospital is based in
    Liverpool city we serve the population of Knowsley and Sefton districts.
    Enclosed is a list of relevant names and addresses.

    Thanking you in anticipation.

    Yours faithfully,___________



    W. J. ROBSON, F.R.C.S.
    Consultant in Paediatric Accident and Emergency Medicine
         HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


Names of young victims in relevant areas


ASPINALL, James Gary,            18


BELL. Simon.                     17


DEVENSIDE, Christopher Barry,    18


GILHOOLEY, John Paul,            10


HAMMOND, Philip,                 13


HARRISON, Peter Andrew.          15


HOWARD, Thomas Anthony.          1A


LEWIS. Carl James.               18


O'NEILL. Stephen Francis,        17


ROBINSON. Stephen Joseph.        17


ROGERS. Henry Charles,           17


SPEARRITT, Adam.                 1A


STEEL, Philip John.              15


THOMPSON, Stuart Paul William, 17


TYRELL, Kevin,                   15


WAFER. Colin.


WILLIAMS. Kevin Daniel.          16


WRIGHT. Graham Shaun.            17
                                                  fiM O   -J u *
The University of Sheffield Medical School

Department of Pathology                                       Beech Hill Road
                                                              Sheffield S10 2RX
Joseph Hunter Professor of Pathology                          Tel: Sheffield 766222
Professor J C E Underwood, M D, FRCPath                       STD code: 0742

JCEU/BB



Dr. S. Popper,
H.M. Coroner,
Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
Sheffield S3 7ET                                             18 April 1989




Dear Dr. Popper,

You asked me to let you know the names of those staff from the
Royal Hallamshire Hospital who assisted with the autopsies at
the Medico-Legal Centre on Sunday 16th April.

Assisting Professor Laurence Henry, Dr. John Shortland and
myself were our three Mortuary Technicians: Mr. Arthur Birch,
Mr. John Birch, and Mr. Ian Illingsworth.

I was also assisted by your own Mortuary Technicians at the
Medico-Legal Centre. I was extremely impressed by the way in
which they were working under such difficult circumstances.

Disasters on this scale are fortunately rare, but you can be
assured of our willingness to help whenever the occasion arises.

                               Yours sincerely,




                              \J
                               J.C.E. Underwood
                                                           it

The University of Sheffield Medical School

Department of Pathology                                         Beech Hill Road
                                                                Sheffield S10 2RX
Joseph Hunter Professor of Pathology                            Tel: Sheffield 766222
Professor J C E Underwood, M D, FRCPath                         STD code: 0742

     JCEU/BB



    Dr. S. Popper,
    H.M. Coroner,
    Medico-Legal Centre,
    Watery Street,
    Sheffield S3 7ET                                            2 May 1989




    Dear Dr. Popper,

    We are writing to request that any fees arising from autopsies
    carried out by us, at your request, on Sunday 16th April on
    bodies from the incident at Hillsborough Football Ground should
    be paid directly into the University of Sheffield Hillsborough
    Appeal, c/o Mr. J.W. Rowland, Cash Office, Finance Department,
    University of Sheffield, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN.


                                 Yours sincerely,




T   Professor J.C.E. Underwood    Prof^ssui-    utiiii'y
                                                                        j    GLOfaf

                                                            yt.l.           J O *’c



STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL                                                                 *


                                                                 t= M
                                                                 )  ^ \ o£irt<
                                                                        oCenC * *
MEETING HELD ON 31 AUGUST 1990 AT NECHELLS GREEK POT.TCK STATION TO DISCUSS THE
PROPOSED INQUESTS INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER 1989


Present:       J M Jones, Deputy Chief Constable, Cheshire Constabulary
               Detective Superintendent Beechey
               Detective Chief Inspector Tope
               Detective Inspector Perkins




In the light of the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions that there
is insufficient evidence to support a prosecution against any party involved in
the Hillsborough Disaster, the following are issues which will have to be
considered for your Inquest


                        1.   VENUE

                        Obviously Sheffield will be the site where the Inquests
                        will be held, however, it is our opinion that the Medico
                        Legal Centre is probably unsuitable for the purpose
                        because of its size. Our reasoning is that there is
                        likely to be a fairly large number of solicitors/
                        barristers representing the various parties to this
                        disaster and they will take some considerable amount of
                        room to accommodate. Secondly, there is no doubt that
                        the Inquests will generate a considerable amount of press
                        interest and again, there is insufficient room. Thirdly,
                        a number of rooms will have to be made available to
                        various parties i.e. witnesses, West Midlands Police,
                        Solicitors, Press, Jury, welfare support staff etc.

                        Consequently, we recommend to you that we search for
                        suitable premises in the Sheffield area which could
                        accommodate your Inquests. In anticipation, therefore,
                        we have already put this matter in hand.

                        The usual considerations in so far as security,
                        transcripts, relaying/recording proceedings will have to
                        be considered.

                        The costs again for the provision of this accommodation
                        will have to fall upon Sheffield City Council and we
                        assume that you are going to make them aware. Before any
                        bookings are made our findings will be fully discussed
                        with you and your agreement sought.
  2.   TIMING

  At this stage we feel it is inappropriate to fix a date,
  such as early November, as has been suggested, but rather
  that we should carry out a sizing operation which can
  only be fulfilled once we have made contact with the
  various parties to the disaster as well as considered
  what material you and we feel ought to be presented.
  Therefore, we recommend no announcement be made for the
  time being when the Inquests are going to take place.

  Another factor affecting the length of the Inquests will
  be whether we have to run through all the previous
  evidence given at the Interim Inquests into the deaths of
  the 95. If the same jury cannot be re-convened or a
  substantial proportion of them, then you will have to run
  through all the previous evidence. We are not sure how
  you will do this or what time it will take, but it is a
  consideration.

  Having said that, we are of the opinion that the sooner
  the Inquests take place the better and if we can start
  them in the late Autumn that would be most acceptable.

   A related issue is how long the Inquests will last. We
   anticipate that they are likely to last as long as Lord
   Justice Taylor’s hearing, which was 31 days, over 6
   weeks, if not longer. We also anticipate that you will
   probably, have as many witnesses as did he; 174.
   Furthermore, there will probably be a number of requests
1 for full Inquests into how their loved ones died. We
 “ believe this has already been indicated to you by Mr
   Devonside and Mr Hicks, but we cannot think that these
   will be the only ones who will want to trawl over the
   evidence. You will probably be able to identify these as
   well as ourselves.

 Taking all this into account we see that the minimum
 length of your Inquests is likely to be six weeks but
 nearer twelve.

 Another consideration of course will be whether your
 Inquests are interrupted by unusual weather on the
 Pennines, which if the experiences of the last two years
 is followed, should not present too much difficulty.
 However, we will see!
3.    CORONER* s POLICE INQUIRY TEAM

In terms of staffing we would propose the followings-


Deputy Chief Constable          One
Detective Superintendent    -   One
Detective Chief Inspector   -   One
Detective Inspector             One
Detective Sergeants         -   Four
Police Constables           -   Five
Civilians                       One
Press Officer                   One
(Rank to be decided)


The above obviously can be expanded according to need.
In addition, on a consultancy basis we have one Detective
Superintendent (Holmes Unit) and two Detective
Constables.

However, we believe if we fulfil the planning properly,
the staffing levels recommended should be sufficient.
However, if the time is compressed and you wish to start
early, obviously more people will have to be brought in.
There is a consideration here with regard to financing
the operation. As you know South Yorkshire Police are
responsible for meeting the West Midlands Police costs
which they have agreed to do. However, such is their
financial position that they are to say the least
embarrassed. Secondly, if we were to increase levels of
expenditure we could find that there could be
difficulties in South Yorkshire; we say no more!

DEPLOYMENT LOCATIONS - We would propose to carry out
most, if not all, preparation work through the Nechells
office in Birmingham. As we near the time of the
commencement of the Inquests we would then move most of
the team to Sheffield where they would be accommodated
at Furnival House, as before. We would install a Holmes
Incident Room at Furnival House linked back to Nechells.
All of the documentation that we would require for the
Inquests to be taken to Sheffield, but if more was
required it would have to be relayed to Sheffield.

LIVERPOOL - Whether we would post any officers to the
Liverpool office at Knowsley Hall will be determined
nearer the time when we know who we are calling and their
place of origin.
It is not proposed to have any other officers deployed to
any other areas in the Country at this time. However,
during the course of your Inquests, follow-up enquiries
may become necessary and we will have to have a
contingency where we can obviously search the material
that we have already have as well as deploy officers to
locations in order to see "new evidence".

ACCOMMODATION - The officers, during the preparatory
time, will occupy their normal place of residence in the
West Midlands area. However, as the Inquests approach,
perhaps the week before, we will have to take up
residence in Sheffield with most of the team.   We would
prefer a suitable hotel in Sheffield and the Moat House
seems adequate for our needs. We would probably be able
to negotiate special rates again. Of course, you would
be welcome to join us. Bearing in mind that our team
could be there for something in the region of three
months I do believe that all officers should enjoy the
privacy of single occupancy rooms.

TRANSPORT - At the present time all hired vehicles have
been returned. However, there will be a need for some
vehicles both for the preparatory work, as well as being
available in Sheffield during the course of the
Inquests. Of course, some officers will have car
allowances and a policy decision will have to be made as
to how these will be used in conjunction with hired
vehicles.

ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT - Miss Diane Henderson will
continue’to provide the Administrative support to the
Inquiry, which will include the payment of expenses,
recording of overtime, hiring of vehicles, booking of
accommodation etc.

In respect of the hours of duty - the work undoubtedly
will be intensive during the preparatory stages as well
as during the Inquests. It is likely, therefore, that we
will have to return to 12 hour working days. However,
the PNB advice still stands as regards the non-payment of
the 16 hours payment of officers accommodated away from
home. We would propose that this agreement continues.

COMMUNICATIONS -    Radio pagers and portable telephones
will have to be made available as required.
                                              4.     TECHNICAL EQUIPMENT

                                              Questions that will have to be addressed ares-

                                       y      1.   Do you intend toshow any video of the layout        of the
                                                   stadium or the match?

                                      0V      2.   Do you intend to     record the proceedings?

                                              3.   Will there be a need to relay the proceedings to
                                                   other locations (this will depend upon the location
                                                   itself).

                                             4.    Amplification of verbal evidence.
                                       V
                                       '-/   5.    Transcripts - we assume that will be the same as
                                                   before?

                                             6.    Holmes equipment will be moved under the direction
                                                   of Detective Superintendent Cobb and Detective
                                                   Inspector Perkins.

                                             7.    The colour photocopier is now deployed within
                                                   the West Midlands Police area at another location.
                                                   Obviously, we will have access to it but it will
                                                   not be located on site in Sheffield.

                                             5.      BACKGROUND    MATKRTAT.


                                             We will have available in Sheffield for your use,
                                             possibly' in court, a full set of the transcripts for the
                                             earlier Inquests and Lord Justice Taylor’s hearings.
                                             Lord Justice Taylor’s two reports and the 95 body files
                                             will be available. All the photographs in our
                                             possession, together with all of the video material will
                                             also be taken. However, we would not propose to take all

 •                                           the documentary evidence other than what we anticipate
                                             will be required. However, this can be made available at
                                             fairly short notice and delivered to Sheffield within one
                                             working day.

                .                            WHAT EVIDENCE WILL YOU HEAR AT THE INQUESTS 7

                                              ^Ur          are that you will have to restrict most
fcvt                                         carefully the amount of evidence you will hear and on
                    -     (Jot*              what subjects. However, parties to the event may have
                            /                different ideas. It is worth considering what each of
   J           • /      jLf/edctX             their motives are:-                         f't& u f _


                                    ^ c' r.^ 7                     ? —aU                           -^ v
                                                           ^       ^     r-HT       ^      I       -        ^

       J t/V                                                   /                               A                /
1. South Yorkshire Police Authority (through their
Insurers).

Will be seeking to establish as much evidence as they can
so far as the culpability of those who attended the
match. They will no doubt seek to illustrate that the
fans contributed to the outcome and that drunkenness and
disobedience to directions played a major part. They
will also be attempting to illustrate the number of
ticketless fans who were perhaps motivated to force the
situation where the gates were opened. South Yorkshire
Police Authority and Force will also be seeking to
illustrate the culpability of the Club as far as
capacity, signing, stewarding and issuing of tickets are
concerned. They will also be seeking to place
responsibility on Eastwood and Partners on barrier and
turnstile issues. They will also attempt to show the
nepotism of Sheffield City Council in the licensing
arrangements. All this will be motivated to assist their
civil case which may be heard by the time the Inquests
take place. If they have been heard then their role may
be more defensive as opposed to attacking defensive. As
far as the civil case is concerned we have already
attempted to find out what is happening but we have not
been terribly successful. You may think it appropriate
to write to the solicitors, Hammond Suddards, and
indicate your intention to start the Inquests and ask
them formally what the current position is.

2.   South Yorkshire Police Federation.

Will no doubt be attempting to gain additional
information to assist in civil claim against the Chief
Constable.

3.   South Yorkshire Police Officers as individual
represented.

As you are aware all the senior police officers who have
been interviewed have been legally represented and they
may well retain these through the Inquests. Their
motivation will be to defend themselves against any
police disciplinary proceedings and, of course, any
criminal proceedings which may follow a voluntary bill of
indictment.  (Attached to this note is a list of
Solicitors representing the parties - Appendix A.)
   Of course, we have grouped together the relatives and
   fans in general, but it may be that they are sub-divided
   when it comes to the Inquests and may be group or
   individually represented. The Football Association would
   probably be keen to be involved, which could lead to
   Football Association and Football League representatives
   being present.

         Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

   To maintain the status quo so far as Lord Justice
   Taylor’s hearings are concerned and to defend their
   liability against the South Yorkshire Police Action.

[//S.   Sheffield City Council.

  To defend themselves as per (4) above.

^6.     Eastwood & Engineers.

. As per (4) above.


  We feel that your Inquests should now concentrate on
  "how" people came to meet their deaths at Hillsborough.
  To a certain extent we have already dealt with the "why",
  "where" and “when", in the preliminary Inquests. As has
  already been said we may have to re-open those to satisfy
  certain individuals, but generally speaking we should be
  able to dismiss fairly quickly those aspects of your
  Inquests.

  As far as "how" is concerned we would suggest that you
  concentrate on the period between say 1420 hours when the
  crowd had noticeably built up, througlj^fe^Superintendent
  Greenwood running on to the pitch a t l5Q?Hnurs plus to
  stop-the match;— We'would say that tferTSnacapa, or
  perhaps a newly prepared schedule, listing the
  appropriate witnesses would be able to take you through
  this time sequence.

  The difficult bit is what additional evidence to lay.
  How far would you want to go back as far as background is
  concerned?

  You may wish to address this in a general sense giving a
  flavour of the evidence, with perhaps some expert
  evidence from a West Midlands Police officer as to how
  proportionate that is to what was taken. In respect of
  the latter we think particularly in respect of the amount
  of drunkenness and unruliness during the build up to the
  crush outside the ground at about 1420 hours onwards.
                                In addition, you may wish to take representation from the
                                various parties listed above, and any of those we have
                                missed, should you wish to pursue a particular line. You
                                will no doubt then decide whether you think it is
                                appropriate to hear that evidence.

                                     ^ave noted that you intend to ignore Lord Justice
                     IAojJk 1 I Baylor's earlier hearings and report findings. We think
                     Mr        , this is correct, albeit during the natural course of the
                             y   Inquests no doubt legal representatives will refer back,
                                 which is probably unavoidable.

                               You will also require expert evidence with regard to a
     i.                        number of technical aspects. The barrier will be a major
  Cxf>^ Id-eou*''              point of concern. You will obviously require the Health
  fui   *                      anc* Safety Executive and possibly the Forensic Science
  ^        7                    Service evidence.

                                The turnstile layouts and the pen arrangements will also
                                be of concern. Again the Health and Safety Executive may
•/V-o?        >»”*              help.

                                Also the behaviour of people in crowds and crushes is one
                                that we do not think you ought to ignore. We are already
JA                              researching the possibility of finding an expert on crowd
                                psychology and adaptive behaviour.

                                THE PROPOSED PROGRAMME

                               We feel that the next stage is for you to write to the
                               various legal representatives indicating that you have
                               heard the Director of Public Prosecutions decision and
                               that you intend, at some stage, hopefully in the not too
                               distance future, to re-convene the Inquests in
                               Sheffield. We feel that you should indicate that you
                               will decide what evidence will be heard, but before doing
                               so, we would welcome any thoughts that they have, in
                               writing, about aspects that they would like aired at your
                               Inquests. Of course, your invitation will be without
                               prejudice I

                               Once you have received the responses to those letters
                               within a certain deadline, we can then consider their
                               representations in the light of thoughts we have had in
                               the meantime as to how we progress the Inquests. The
                               product of those details will then create an agenda for
                               staff at Nechells to develop the preparatory work as well
                               as the logistical work to which we have already referred.

                               You may consider a role that we could adopt is as acting
                               as a "buffer" between yourself and the legal
                               representatives. We could usefully follow up any letter,
on an informal basis, in order to ascertain precisely
what they are expecting and what the likely requirements
are to acceding or denying their individual requests.

Another aspect we would like to direct your mind to is
what kind of questions you are likely to ask for the
information held in the HOLMES system. Much of the
information is readily accessible but can be more
difficult in some areas when we have no theme. We will
need the maximum amount of notice to be able to address
these issues in good time for your Inquests.

One final point in this section is your legal
representation. As we recall you have already consulted
with Mr Michael Powers and you may wish to engage him
again for the Inquests on your behalf. Indeed, there may
be questions that may come out of our preliminary
enquiries which will have to be addressed to him so that
you can be appropriately advised.

OTHER CONSIDERATIONS

As was the case with the earlier Inquests, we will have
to consider the role of the vgj^ietts-welfare support
services. witness warning.^fransportation^knd
 tcommodatior              ^

We also believe that there will be considerable press
activity at the beginning and during the course of
certain notable witnesses and at the end of the
Inquests. The extent to which this will become a problem
will be determined by "other news" of the day. However,
we believe that the families of the deceased will be
doing their utmost to engage the media machine to
publicise their case. Again we intend to service the
press professionally with a dedicated officer.
APPENDIX A

ACC JACKSON              Hammond Suddards
                         Empire House
                         lb Piccadilly
                         Bradford
                         BD1 3LR

                         Tel:     0274 734700

Solicitor                Charles Metcalf




CHIEF SUPT DUCKENFIELD   Hepworth & Chadwick
                         Cloth Hall Court
                         Infirmary Street
                         Leeds
                         LSI 2JB

                         Tel:    0532 430391

Solicitor                Christopher Coughlin




SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC   Davis Arnold Cooper
                         12 Bridewell Place
                         London
                         EC4V 6 AD

                         Tel:    071 353 6555

Solicitor                Patrick O ’Callaghan



SUPT GREENWOOD           Barlow Lyde & Gilbert
                         Beaufort House
                         15 St Botolph Street
                         London
                         EC3A 7NJ

                         Tel:    071 247 2277

Solicitor                Richard Hoare




EASTWOODS                Reynolds Porter Chamberlain
                         Chichester House
                         278/282 High Holborn
                         London
                         CIV 7HA

                         Tel:    021 242 2877
SUPT MARSHALL             Vincent Hale & Co
                          Nash House
                          Sheffield
                          S6 3NF

                          Tel:   0742 325842

Solicitor                  Vincent Hale




SUPT MURRAY               Walker Morris Scott Turnbull & Coles
                          St Andrews House
                          119 - 121 The Headrow
                          Leeds
                          LSI 5NP

                          Tel:   0532 469686

Solicitor                 Richard Manning



PCs SMITH & ILLINGWORTH   Russell Jones & Walker
                          9 Quebec House
                          Quebec Street
                          Leeds
                          LSI 2HA

                          Tel:   061 832 8877

Solicitor                 Nick Holroyd




SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL    Keeble Haws on
                          Old Cathedral
                          Vicarage Street
                          James Row
                          Sheffield

                          Tel:   0742 722061
FILE NOTE DATED 3.10.90. MEETING AT MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE

WITH MERVYN JONES, CAROLINE PERKINS, STAN BEECHEY AND FOR

PART OF THE TIME, SUE HARPER.________________________________

Had a very long meeting starting at about 10-o-clock and

finishing after 5.

1.   We spent a considerable amount of time looking through

     the           ,for the Inquest which I had prepared and the

     schedules of witnesses.     Mr. Jones wasn't very happy

     with the revised version in which I suggested that we

     would take the evidence of supporters first followed by

     others.     He thought that this would give an unbalanced

     impression.     We spent a considerable amount of time

     debating t h i s . When we went through the various

     schedules it became clear that in respect of some of

     them at least it would be practical to deal with

     supporters and others at one and the same time but I

     thought that it might be difficult with regard to some

     of the other aspects, particularly as in principle I

     preferred to take the evidence of people whose conduct

     was likely to be called in question towards the end.

     We in the end agreed that we would think about the set

     up again.

2.   We spent some time discussing the witnesses.      I

     explained that the names which I had put down would

     have to be pruned and thinned. This was the first cul

     so to speak.     We agreed that the officers would a.

     merge the schedule of names from the body files with




LESABB
                       -   2   -




   the other names, taking out duplicates.     We would then

   try and group witnesses and access them, so that we

   would have first rank witnesses with back-ups in case

   they were unable to come for example.      The object of

   the exercise was to try and give a rounded and balanced

   view of what people had seen or perceived both from

   supporters as well as others.    This will involve a

   considerable amount of work.     I suggested that it was

    important that we dealt with supporters and lay people

    first so that we could try and give as much notice as

   possible to them.    I explained that I had not yet

    looked at police witnesses because I had not had time.

   We then went and spent a considerable amount of time

   viewing the Don Valley Stadium complex and the Rutland

    Hotel.   Neither of them are ideal, but of the two,

    probably the Don Valley is for our purposes better,

    provided that we can use the suite downstairs and not

    the long room upstairs.    At the Rutland Hotel we were

    entertained to sandwiches and then had a look at the

    accommodation.   Whilst the syndicate bedrooms were

    satisfactory, the whole thing gave a rather run-down

    appearance with a very poor entry.    In addition the

    room suitable to be used as a court room was only

    marginally bigger than the Medico-Legal Centre and had

    no satisfactory lobby or entrance room.     One would have

    had to go into the open air to cross from one section

    to another.   Although it had attractions in the sense




LESABB
                         -   3   -




     that it was central and that there was food and

     accommodation etc., close by, I think it's

     disadvantages outweighed it's addvantages.

     Upon return to the office, we spent another hour or two

     talking about what needed to be done.       We discussed the

     background statement.       It was agreed that it would

     probably be better if this was given by several people

    rather than by one person and arrangements were put in

    hand for the appropriate officers to start preparing a

    statement.    The intention would be that they would let

    me have a version by the 15th so that we could send it

    out to solicitors as soon as possible for their

    comments, with the view to having an agreed back-ground

    statement.    We discussed whether this would be the

    opportune time to invite them to Pre-Inquest Review or

    discussion.    The problem was raised by me plus the fact

    that it would be difficult to exclude non-lawyers as

    this could be open to criticism at a later time.       We

    felt that perhaps on balance it might be better not to

    arrange a meeting.

    I pointed out that one or two of the sub-sections were

    more difficult than others,      for example pub survey.

    Also I pointed out that the requirement for sorting out

    when people came throu^gh into the Stadium had to be

    done very carefully and that whoever presented it had

    to be ready to justify his opinions. We agreed some

    re-shuffling and re-numbering of the schedule and we




LESABB
                                               -   4    -




                        also agreed at Mr. Jones's suggestion that we should

                        start with a video of 1989.         I asked whether there were

                        any other witnesses who were close to the barrier.

                        Apparently there are quite a lot.        Maybe up to 40 but

                        the evidence is even less specific and clear as that we

                        have already got.   I asked whether we had a statement

                        from Nigel Clough              have a look to see what

                        there was available.  We discussed whether Mr. Sharper
    L,       f^ i                                        / ;
^              JfO      should be called as a witness.  I^pointed out that this
      ^
   V c£r
    D r                 could create problems for him in view of his position
V O fy -                ______
                        as     __________
                           Chief           . . .Liverpool.
                                 Constable in    . ______       ______
                                                                We     _________
                                                                   would have to

    0^                  review what he actually said to see whether a. it was

                        necessary to have the evidence, and b.         whether it

                        could be obtained from another Jlcwwrse.       I said I would
                   if
               3        re-consider the matter.    We discussed one or two other

                   yA   aspects relating to turnstiles and the rt^\-         in which

               f4       people could go through.       It was felt that this would
         V
                        be better dealt with by Dr. Nicholson.         We discussed

                        the timing for warning of witnesses and we felt we

                        ought to aim to do this as early as we reasonably could

                        and that perhaps a suitable pro-forma letter should be

                        prepared and go out just as soon as we knew who we

                        were certainly going to call.         We could then schedule

                        them later.   We agreed that this work would have to be

                        done through the West Midlands Police Officers.

                        It was agreed that we would have a look to see who

                        amongst the relatives was thought to be either unable




                   LESABB
                        -   5   -




    or unwilling to give evidence or who might be

    particularlarly interested in doing so. We also noted

    that some people, particularly a P.C. Smith apparently

    were very unwell, and probably would not be fit to give

    evidence.    I said that we ought to have a doctor's

    letter to that effect.

    During the day we discussed the giving of evidence.                  I

    suggested it might be an idea if we dealt in fairly

    great detail with the evidence of some of the people

    who were perhaps at the forefront of the issue and who

    had made some of the criticisms.              Whilst ia one
                                                        a
    this was unfair as it gave undue prominence to them 3/9 y                 I
                                                                             fyi
    \ieJJL-as other people who perhaps had been more quiet
                                           <£71     olh .
   ,wou4^-JDu;
             >tr--gHtr~blHrS~~e«p4^najH ^ n , Jj*- another it was not

    only fair but very fair because it ensured that the

    points which people felt strongly about and which they

    were prepared to be vocal over had been put to the

    inquest jury.

    I explained that I was unable to summons people outside

    my jurisdiction and that if we had to issue summonses

    it would have to be done through the Crown Office.               I

    would try and find out the procedure.               Letters notify

    ing people of the dates when they were likely to be

    called had to go out this month.

    We discussed the possibility of adjournment.               I

    explained the problems i.e., Judicial Reviews,

    application by several parties, civil trial, overunning

    etc.



LESABB
Mr. Beechey brot%frt a fax machine for me to use temporarily
at home. This will eventually be required at Pumiwal House
and will of course have to be returned. I agreed that they
could have it back whenever they wanted it.
TELEPHONE    C A L L T O MR.    FRAZER.



I had found a note on my desk which said "please ring

^him".   It turned out to be an old note.              He confirmed that

he was coming on the 30th with Mr. King of Counsel and

probably an articled clerk.               He mentioned that Mr. Jackson

from the Supporters Association might be in touch.               I said

that he had already            been so.We discussed Mrs. McBrien.

He confirmed that she had told him that she didn't want

him to represent her at the Inquest though she still wanted

him to act      in other matters. She          seemed to be under the

impression      that she would be able to ask most questions.

Mr. Frazer said that he felt              Mrs. McBrien thought that the

             should not have been opened under any

circumstances and felt very strongly about that.

He said that he thought there cannot be many coroners in

this country who weren't feeling sorry for me.               I said it

was a very difficult problem and a lot of hard work.                It

was regrettable that it would not be possible to please

everybody^ i n d e e d , aja<i tj^a"t I had had another letter from

somebody who wasn't very happy with the Interim Inquests

despite the fact that he Mr. Frazer had made a special

submission on his behalf.             I said in the end I could only

do my best and that the verdict was a matter of

indifference to me in the sense that I had no axe to grind

and that it was a matter for the Jury to bring in whatever

verdict they thought.            Mr. Frazer was very sympathetic.




BACAAV
We spoke about the location.    I told him that the Inquest

Review was at the Medico Legal Centre but the Inquests were

at the Town Hall.   Mr. Frazer thought that we might well be

moving back here if interest fell off as sharply as it had

done in the Interim Inquests.   He said that he would have

to be very quiet at the Pre-Inquest Review as he had

counsel with him.




BACAAV
  FILE NOTE OF A MEETING W ITH MERVYN JONES, STAN BEECHEY.

  CAROLINE HIGHTQN AND S .L .P .14.8.90. AT THE MEDICO LEGAL

  CENTRE STARTING AT ABOUT QUARTER TO TWELVE.

  The meeting convened and it was noted that no decision from

  the D .P ,p . had yet been reached.    it was being rumoured

  that a decision might be announced within the next 2 or 3

 weeks and it was felt that we should perhaps start thinking

 about what we would do etc., on the assumption that no
 prosecution were to take place.

 We spent a little time talking about the possibility of

 prosecution including possible Health & Safety Executive

 aspects, but of course we were not able to take or reach

 any definitive decision on this.

 It was noted that the civil proceedings were apparently

 going to commence in October.     We discussed what the

 position would be with regard to those, whether the Inquest

 should be postponed in particular whether if thecivil

proceedings were completed, whether this would take any
heat out of the proceedings.

I felt that bearing in mind that South Yorkshire had in

fact underwritten their claim, the main thrust of the

proceedings as far as the participants were concerned would
be:-



         A. To try and obtain a verdict of Unlawfully Killed
            on the one hand and

         B. To redress the balances as    perceived by some of

           the other parties   with regard to the involvement
           of the fans.

BABABJ
     t
                                       2




         I did not personally think that the civil side would play
         such a major role.

         It was of course understood and acknowledged that strictly

         speaking a Coroner's Inquest should not seek to determine

         either civil or criminal liability but because of the

     possibility of a verdict of Unlawfully Killed, it was

^    necessary to carry out a fairly extensive inquiry.           We did

     discuss whether there was any way of perhaps dealing with

     the Inquests on a more limited basis, but it was felt that

     we either had to do virtually nothing, or probably a very
     extensive investigation.

     We discussed Lord Justice Taylor's report.       I   did not think

     that we would be able to use it as such and particularly as

     the Jury of course were not aware of its contents.

     We started thinking about the scope of the Inquest.          it was

    obvious that West Midlands officers were anxious to have

£   some guidance as to my thinking, particularly as some

    decisions had to be taken with regard to the size of the

    team which would be required and/or retained.         I   thought

    that once we had got things up and running, we probably

    would'nt need that many officers.      Mervyn felt that

    probably 20 might be the right number, with scope for
    increasing if necessary.

    We discussed the scope of the Inquest.    I   drew the analogy

    of a normal r.t.A. where we would not deal with post-impact




    BABABJ
    1                                                               -    3       -




         m a tte rs          and       on     th e       w h o le   I     f e l t       th a t   we    sh o u ld   draw     a   lin e

         a t    th e     d is a s te r ,         and        n o t   d e a l          w ith   w hat     happened        on   th e

         f ie ld       o r    in       th e    m o rtu a ry ,           p a r tic u la r ly           as   we    had   a lre a d y

               alt with this quite extensively at the previous hearings
        in April/May.

        On the other hand, it might be necessary to deal with some

        of the other aspects in rather more detail.                                                             We spent quite

        a bit of time discussing this.                                                 We were all well aware of

^       the criticims which had been made of the police and the

        club and no doubt this evidence would have to be dealt with

        as appropriate (though we noted that the officers

        themselves might well refuse to give evidence on the basis

        of anything they said might incriminate the m).

        On the other hand,                           I    felt that we would have to explore the

     aspects of crowd behaviour.                                             m        particular, we had to try

     and deal with the reasons if any why there was the pressure

     outside the turnstiles and the outer perimeter gates.                                                                      The

    effect if any of alcohol on this as well as the effect of

0   mass behaviour (Mervyn's point).                                                    We also felt that we

    could not avoid dealing with the broken barrier as that was

    seen to have played quite a part in the number of the

    deceased equally it was important to try and deal with what

    seemed to be the case that a lot of the people who died

    actually came in fairly late on.                                                    I    felt that it was

    essential that we should actually get this pinpointed

    accurately.                    I    also felt that it might be worth then,

    having analysing alcohol levels to see if a.                                                                what they




    BABABJ
     V
                                    4




          showed and b. whether any statistically interesting matters
         would be drawn.




         I felt that in the interests of justice and fairness, one

         had to try and weave together the behaviour mood of the

         crowd, the effect if any of alcohol in crowd behaviour on

         them and the contagion which this might have spread to

^        everybody there.   The effect if any that this might have

         had on officers, the physical nature of the stadium

         together with assigning turnstiles etc., the broken barrier

         and finally and by no means least, the organisation and

         policing efforts which had been put in place.

     We noted that in the discussions we were spending quite a

         lot of time on issues of crowd behaviour and the psychology

     etc. and it was interesting to note that if these avenues

    were going to be pursued and were going to be fruitful,

     that this aspect of the inquiry would in fact differ to a

#   certain extent from what had happened in the Public
    Inquiry.

    We discussed the timing.       I said if we were to start this

    year I would like to complete before Christmas if at all

    possible.      We felt that maybe starting at the beginning of

    November might be a possibility, provided of course a

    decision was announced fairly soon.      I also said that if

    the civil proceedings were going on, it might be very

    difficult to resist an application for an adjournment.




    BABABJ
                              -   5 -



  We discussed the possibility of agreeing a statement on

  non-contraversial matters to be presented by an appropriate

  West Midlands officer.   We also discussed briefly the

  difficulty of giving proper weighting to the preponderance

  or otherwise of evidence in one direction as opposed to

  another, but it might be possible to get information about
 this out of the computer.




BABABJ
                  i/bcd.   P          (
                                      l\^   fv I
                                               '- Ji/Ljitd-y

 Inquest                                      ft-      ~

Immediate   actions.
                                                               ft\
                                                                 J uxA   -
1 Agree subject for inclusion in
inquests:.
Who.                                                fi*. l*yM)fc>VC2
a. Identification (opening)

Where and when.
b. History from home to ground

c. factual data as to ingress into
ground eg through turnstyle/Gate C
and location in pen.

d. Visual indentification as
faras possible of deceased whether
alive or dead in the ground.

presentation : summaru and
annacappa


Confirmation by witnesses of visual
evidence above.

If possible by using precis but ?
whether at least some witnesses
should be called ? how many.

? whether possible to call senior
police officers or others even to
give non controversial evidence.
This may need to be discussed with
DPP.

How.

Pathologist evidence and alcohol
levels.

EXCLUDE FROM HEARING AT THIS STAGE.

anything that may be detrimental to
DPP inquiry. In particular exclude

Any attack or criticism of any
individual , individuals, body
corporation or group.

Dates.

Estimate time for each inquest

Number of inquests per day?


Location for inquest.
Medico Legal centre

Circulation of evidence pre hearing
in particular :
precis
any statements to be used as
documentary
NB No SYP to be called at all.
Draft letter.

Consider desirability for press
release.

People to be contacted or notified,
see letter.

Hillsborough support group in
Sheffield .

?Local clergy
? via bishop

Representatives of other religions?

? WVS re coffee etc.

Shorthand writers


Witnesses:

warning by WMP
and solicitors


Press

number of seats required at
inquest?
No cameras or recorders in court
? policy on interviews.
? special meeting with
representatives of the press
to discuss their needs and
to indicate need for sensitivity
particular in follow up of families
and in particular at or near the
court.

Need for :

loudspeaker equipment
Model from public enquiry
facility to display plan
Telephone connection or facilities
for: coroner and staff
     relatives
     legal representatives
     press
fax machine
                    Page   2
photocopier

Decision as to whether any evidence
can be called for all cases
together eg Dr Forrest.
Prof Usher
Insp. Layton

Note explain view with regard to
use and copies of photographic
evidence.


PRE INQUEST REVIEW.

Objectives:
a. to make sure that
representatives understand the
scope and limitations of the
resumptions

b. To deal with options for
further resumptions on the basis
of:
1. DPP brings manslaughter charges
against anyone. Deal with
subsection 16. 1. a and b.
and effect on inquest.

2.
? private prosecution if no action
taken by DPP.


3. If no action taken and no
private prosecution started Inquest
will have to be resumed but scope
and extent will be determined by
me.

4. Other possibility is minor
charges but not likely to influence
date of inquest.

c. to sort out any
questions of representations

d. deal with the question of Jury

e. to explain principle of order
of hearings.
This would be in order of
Pathologist subject to the
overiding requirement that members
of one family would be dealt with
on the same date
subject to this the order would
be governed by
i.overlap of witnesses to minimise
attendance
                 Page   3
ii. complexity
iii.convenience

f. format of inquest

Documentary or precis where
possible
To assist will circulate
copy of summary to deceased
representative (ie steering
committee) for them to confirm
the use of this document

sort out whether this is acceptable
 whether all parties wish to see
documents beforehand.

It will not be possible to obtain
copies of video or ? photographs

WMP officers to give evidence in
terms as to location of deceased,
this will then form part of the
trancript.

One set of the video used in the
court will have to be available for
the coroner for filing with his
records.

Ditto for any photographs produced.

g.Viva voce evidence from
pathologist.

ascertain whether this is required
by representatives.

Dr Forrest and anyone else in same
class to be taken initially so that
he does not have to be present
throughout inquest.
Explain that in some cases where
parties felt that they wanted to
hear him again he could be called
again.

 h. Proceedings to be
transcribed and copy transcripts
available at the appropiate charge.

Not intented that transcripts will
be available on next day as for
practical purposes individual
inquests at this stage.


i.Explain that it is the intention
to have available at the locus
1. refreshment facilities

2. Hillsborough support team
members

we would notify if possible a
liason officer inthe the team of
the dates when the individual
inquest take place but up to
solicitors to maintain contact
and be line of communication/

6 . Legal representatives must
consider that if they wish to see
family after their inquest they
must have other representative
available to deal with the next
inquest.

j.Family members not called as
witness will have to finance their
own journey and expenses

k. right of press to be present at
inquest.

1 . to listen to any points
representives migh wish to put
re the running of the inquest

m. obtain confirmation that the
limitations and scope of the
resumption is understood and
agreed.


21st February 1990.
reviewed for meeting on 26/2/90 on
26/2/90.
PRE/INQ/REV                       dated 6th March 1990

Notes of ground to be covered at Pre Inquest Review on 6th March
1990 at 2 pm at the Medico Legal Centre Water St. Sheffield.


1. Refer to Previous meeting on 28.02.90 with Mr. Kennedy,
 Hammond Suddards, Solicitors for SYP and Mr. Frazer of the
Hillsborough Steering Committee Mr. M. Jones ACC WMP and SLP.


2. DPP.                 a. Definitely No information as to DPP decision
                        b. in any case No decision yet taken
                        c. All papers not yet submitted and therefore not
                            possible for decision to be taken.
                        d. Present time scale would not permit DPP final
                            report to be submitted until after commencement
                            of proposed resumed limited inquests.

3.Possible Scenarios:
  a. Prosecution -                                    Sec. 16 CA 1988.
  b. No Prosecutionbut Private Pros.         -        Sec. 16 CA 1988
  c. No Prosecution -                                Inquest

4. Pre Inq Rev. has arisen as a direct result of letter from Miss
Steel outlining certain difficulties, correspondence from Hammond
Suddard, previous thinking about matter natural anxiety for
information.

5. ResumedInquest to be of limited scope. Under no circumstances will
we deal at thisstage with How and even less with Why or Whom to
blame.

In particular no attack or criticism of any individual(s) or body(s)
Nothing that may be detrimaental to DPP enquiry.

This is necessary
a. DPP has only agreed to limited inquest at this stage
b. In the interests of justice not least that of the bereaved..

6 . Scope of Inquest.

    Medical Evidence Alcholol levels will be revealed for each person
    for whom they are available.

    Evidence of movement of the deceased as far as possible.
    In particular we will try where that is possible to indicate
    where the deceased was seen in a particular pen.

    Identifications are more satisfactory for some than others
    ofcourse.

    At the end of the hearing bereaved should hopefully know where
    it has been possible to establish it the when and where of death.

7.Method of producing the evidence.

   a. Post Mortem Reports, subject to representations I think
      it may be possible to deal with many of these without
      calling the Pathologist.
                                      Page       1
     b. We will not call Dr. Forrest to each inquest to prove
        alcohol levels but will have him present at the beginning
        to deal with his findings. In any individual case where
        I think it necessary I will ofcourse call him.
     c. We will not call any SYP officers of any rank
     d. In each case a WMP officer will have prepared a summary
        of each individual file which together with the file
        will be submitted to me. The officer will present his
        summary. It will to the best of ability be factually correct
        but will be non adverserial in tone and content.
     i. I will have seen the summaries and the complete files before
        each inquest and it is my intention to have read each of the
        95 files before the inquest.
     ii. The summaries will be circulated to HSC and probably to
        Hammond Suddard before the hearing but not to others but
        not to others who will ofcourse hear it at the Inquest.
     iii. The purpose of early circulation is:
         1. to enable Sol to indicate
         whether they are content with summary or whether anything is
         not clear so that if it is possible that can be elaborated at
         the hearing.
         2. To enable solicitors to share information with families
         so as to give pre warning of the evidence and lessen if
         possible distress

     e. We will also have available Annacappa reports which are a
        different form of summary but it may not be possible to
        circulate these.

     f. I do not intend to use Video at this hearing.

     g. I will avoid using photographs or video stills whereever
        possible. Instead I intend to use either the summarising
        officer or other police officers to indicate on plans the
        positions where deceased where seen either alive or dead.

       Most families have already seen the photographs and confirmed
       the identifications.

        Relevant stills will be available if needs must.

     h. I may use other evidence from witnesses either viva voce or
        documentary if I think that it is necessary but do not expect
        to do so often as the summaries should give the information
        in adequate form.

8.   I intend on the opening day to take evidence from some witnesses
      eg Dr. Forrest, Prof Usher Insp. Layton which will help with
      understanding of the generality of the evidence and the method of
      presentation. It may also help with the length of the
      proceedings.

9. Listing. This is going to be difficult. We are starting off with
   pathologist order but we anticipate that there are many factors
   which will influence the order eg two deceased in one family.
   Listing will appear random but will in fact have had considerable
   thingking put into it. Whilst we would not wish to deliberately
   incovenience anyone the listing will be done by me/or undr my
   authority.

                                   Page    2
     We are aiming to do 8 Cases per day.
 4

               Wil1 uit: xit:u 0ne- Not much that they wil1 be able to do
       f 1-hear:L?8S        nk th a t i1: would be unwise t0 Proceed
 without them. It must be remembered that Inquest are by definition
 non adversarial and these limited hearings even more so.

 11. Location. Medico Legal Centre.

 to *b^paidfforS* m i    ^ aVailable‘ Not next day service.    Will have

 1.3. Hillsborough Support group. Aware of the involvment of social
 workers. We will endeavour to inform a liason person in the group of
 the proposed listing but would expect that detailed liason will be
 Coroner-°HSC/Sot b6c6aVe? ^ V s solicitors or HSC. ie Communication
 coroner HSC/Sol - Social workers etc and others.

I t ' , % V±1l e n i ? ™ UT t 0 8ive as much warning as possible but it may
be difficult and there may have to be last minute changes.
k® l n S     t° no?lfy solicitors who we expect will let their clients
know. We will also endeavour to warn at least one family member direct
either by post or viva voce.

if* ? i T US6 o f ,Presfure on time if some one does not turn up on time
we will proceed without them.

16. We will endeavour to have coffee and biscuit facilities on site.

i         Wl11.?? entitJfd t0 attend* but because of space constrains
press passes will probably have to be issued.

18. Comments from floor.

19. Representation of interested parties.

20 Any other business.

21. Date for resumed inquest.

22 . Starting time of resumed inquests.




                                   Page     3
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER.



Before I start with the Inquests proper so to speak there are

one or two remarks which I feel I would like to make, these

are general comments and the first one is of course to say that

in common with anybody else who has been in any way associated

with indeed not associated with this incident, I very very

much regret the tragic loss of life which has occurred and

I fully understand what a terrible, well I don’t fully understand

but I try to understand what a terrible shock and loss and pain

this must be for all the families involved and it isn’t of course

helped by the fact that in addition to losing loved ones, they

have to have the trauma such as it is of Inquests and other

investigations and inquiries and the inevitable delay which

occurs in a major disaster situation such as this.

I make no comment whatsoever about the incident itjelf or what

happened before the match or around that time because of course

those questions will be not only the subject of a judicial inquiry

which we are all familar with now, but may well also have to

be investigated within the scope of the Coroner’s Inquestion, but

I do want to say this, that after the events, I have nothing but

praise for the way the temporary mortuary was organised, the allocation

of officers to help with the identification and to deal with the

very traumatic but essential work of ensuring that one knew who

one was talking about and it is really due to the extraordinary

good work which was done that it was possible to identify people

as fast as in fact it turned out to be possible, and I want it understood,

speaking for myself as Coroner, I have had the utmost help in trying

to perform my job with fcfcese deaths from all the police officers,

from the most senior ones down to the most junior ones, and in

particular, I want to mention the junior officers because it was

they who had to be allocated to the body, it was they who had to

accompany it, it was they who had to do the identification, it was

they in fact who had to take a statement immediatelly after the body
was identified, so in a sense they were the first contact with the

grieving relative who had just found out about the death, and

that’s pretty hard, not only for the relatives but also for the

officers, and I think one must acknowledge them.

I think it is only right as well for me to say that we couldn’t

have performed the organisation method of moving the bodies

backwards from the hospitals to the temporary mortuary for

identification and then all the bodies to the Medico Legal Centre

if the ambulance service hadn’t voltmteered, not only crew

and vehicles but also organise themselves so that they dealt with

all the transportation, not a hitch, no problems, none at all,

and I am exceedingly grateful to them for their efforts in that

respect.

As you will of course appreciate, this building which is a purpose

built building, and which houses not only the Coroner’s Court

but houses Pathological   Departments but also the Mortuary, has

a substantial capacity but we are not normally expecting to deal

with numbers of such as we had on Saturday, but it’s right I

think to say, that this building was an expensive venture for

Sheffield when it was built, but in a situation such as this, I

think it has been justified, because it is exceedingly unlikely

that we would have been able to deal with the deaths in the manner

in which we were, and with the speed as which we were, because

one of our prime objectives has been to minimise the delay

to relatives, so that they can proceed with their funerals, we

cannot undo the events, but having been faced with that situation

I wanted, as far as possible, to minimise unnecessary trauma

to the family      as I have just said, if we hadn’t had the facilities

and I think the people, the City Councillors who took the decision

years ago to put this building up, they may now feel that they were

in fact justified, but of course it’s very satisfactory to have

a building, you also need the st ff to actually carry out the

post mortems, and I have to thank the teams of pathologists, and

technicians, and other members of staff who spent a great deal

of time, but who completed all the post mortem work in order to

 enable me to begin opening the -Inquests this afternoon.   I owe them
a debt of gratitude and I think I want to publiclyacknowledge that.

There is another factor to this and that is of course the people,

we deal with deaths all the time, as you can imagine, but when

you have an influx of numbers such as on Saturday our capacity was

exceeded in fact, and if it hadn't been for the fact that both

the hospitals in Sheffield willingly agreed to take what I will

describe as the normal cases, not the disaster cases, and dealt with

them from a mortuary point of view, I’m not talking about the work

which they did in casualty, where they have been dealing with the living,

which we all know about, but without their co-operation, their help,

we wouldn't have been able to do what has been done, and I think

I want again that to be understood and acknowledged, and whilst

I am on that, I think it is only right to say that it’s very easy to

overlook when we have a major disaster of this nature, we are looking

at such a lot of numbers, and we are, two things happen.   First of all

we forget that other people who lose loved ones, some of them in

tragic circumstances as well, they don't get reports because they

are ’one offs’, they don’t make an impact on the media, but they

cause exactly the same amount of pain and loss and sorrow as losing a loved

one at Hillsb»*9Ugh, and the other, the corollary to this is that it is

very easy to overlook the fact that because there are such a lot of

numbers we are so bemused by the technicalities, by the enormity of

events that we forget the individuals, and that really for each family,

we are thinking of one or two, as the case may be losses, and it’s they

who we should have in mind as well as the overall problem, and finally

as I am sure all of you know, there have been very very many individuals

and asociations who have spent an enormous amoumt of time councelling,

being with, sitting, helping the relatives in their distres.     Some of

the people spent hours and it is exceeding draining to do that, and

although in a sense they were dealing with the living, and my job as Coroner

is to deal with the dead, I do want to acknowledge the fact that people

have been, I am certain, a great support.   I am not mentioning any

names, or even organisations, I am just saying it in general terms,

and of course I would also like to think my own officers, who have put

in a tremendous amount of work in relation to this matter.
SIR HARRY LIVERMORE.



Mr. Coroner, I am grateful for your kind expressions of sympathy and

I will see that my clients and the other bereaved families are

made fully aware of your sensitive remarks.   I would also like

to add my thanks to the officers who helped in the delicate

task of the removal of the bodies and the process of identification.

All the staff who assisted in expediting the necessary process

which resulted in us being here at this moment in point of time

and I would like to thank again on behalf of all my clients and

the bereaved families, all the people and organisations of Sheffield

who have assisted thd bereaved families since this terrible tragedy

occurred.

Mr. Coroner Liverpool at the moment is a heartbroken city.    The people

are upset they are disturbed, they are sa d and they are also angry.

They are angry not only that such a tragedy has occurred, but also

because of the dreadful and untotally insensitive remarks made

yesterday by the President of U&F.A. The tragedy will never be
                    by the
forgetton or forgiven/ feople of Mersyside, nor will tije remarks

of Msr.Cj^OftG^fj      however many times he may apologise.

Thank you sir.
OPENING OF THE INQUEST OH THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER.



The position as you know, is that until the Inquest is being

completed I cannot issue a final certificate to the Registrar

and as a result it isn't possible to issue, the Registrar General

or the Registrars cannot issue a death certificate as such.     It

is my intention, in the course of the next few days, to write to

each individual family, a letter, and if you wish I can write

to you in the case of your clients, and we will be enclosing

with that letter a document which we have titled An Interim

Certificate of the Fact of Death and subject to the proviso

that the cause of death has to be formally proved at the

Inquest we will disclose on that document the cause of death

as given to us by the pathologist.    This is not entirely

satisfactory but it’s the best we can do.    The Inquest

itself of course, I haven’t yet determined when I will be

resuming, nor have I determined it’s form, nor have I finally

determined whether the Inquest should be before or after

the traditional inquiry but it is almost certain that it will

be after the judicial inquiry and that is why I said that

there will be a considerable delay because I have no

control over the judicial inquiry and to that extent I

am in Justice Taylor's hands but he does understand, he

knows the problem in concluding Inquests cause.

SIR HARRY LIVERMORE.

Mr. Coroner, what is worrying my clients, the families is that they

are anxious to bring their children, husbands home and have them

buried, now when is that going to be possible?

 In the case of your clients, now as soon as you wish.     This is the

«hole purpose of the exercise so that the bodies can be moved and

 that the burials can take place.    I have had a letter from the

 Police Authority which I requested, and they have no objection to

 the release of the bodies and I am going to admit that letter

 as documentary evidence in every case.
So that the bodies can be, they can take them away to-morrow?



Indeed.
                                                                        V




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ^ 7 ^

    S H E F F IE L D
    VERSUS
    L I V E R P O O L V NOTTS FORE

    F .A .C U P
                                                 WEDNESDAY F O O TB A L L




                                              SEMI                          F IN A _
                                                                                                                                                                            CLUB

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rtf
    1 5 / 4 / S<?
    SATURDAY
    3           - 00 -

     1 EFION KOF

        A       T        E               C   H L i 11                           G   A V E                                              G   A       T E                                                                .TE
                                         1 C T    A l _                         T   O        T           A           L                 F   R        I               :               l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -LuE.

                                                                                             ^           f.                                3       .                5                   ‘. ".


                                                                                     ~           1                                         3 -                          5 " .'
                                                                                                 A           -


                                                                                     4           1 /                                       0            -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     o .oc
                                                                                        3 5 * ; .                                          4            -               0               0
        • i O                                      0

                                                                                                                                           0 . .                        0               0                             Or 0 0
                                                                                     4 = 3 .
        A           1

                                                                                        3        0           2                                 '■■■ •
            4       2                               0

                                                                                    1 => 3 4                                                   0        .                   0            0


            *14                                     0                               1 ^ 3 * .

                                                                                    1 4           2          3                                 1J           .               0            0                             J•V ••
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -
            4       5                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,*i   ( iji'l
                                                                                    1 2 < ? 4                                                  0            *               0
            4 s v                                      0
                                                                                         r;           - cr
                                                                                                                                               o                ,           o             o                            .) m   00
            4       7                               "
                                                                                                                                                * 1 < '. •' ■
            i 5                                        0                                     '                       .■

                     r*-                               • i                                  * * . -j -ii.                                       -f              ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (•o
                                                                                                                                                   J.                                    V

                                                                                             /. * r                  a

            5 1                                         0
                                                                                                                                                   4            ,                               v
                5                                                                            _* 1i 0


                                                                                             4           2           0                             4            .                   0           0
                c V ? i                                 o


                5        4                                 o                                 2 7 1                                                  J- .                                        o
                                                                                             3 4                 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               c.•'»
                5        5                                 0

                                                                                                 J;- «i . i                                                             -                           '•
                5        6                                  0

                                                                                                                                                    4               .                   0 0
                                                                                             4 5                     1
                5 7

                c r *3                                      (**,                                                                                        4 .                             0        0               i - u V * . V '-'
                                                                                                 3 0                 1
                 _ J u- '

                                                                                                 1           5           2
                                                                                                                                                       4                „               0        0                60 3.00
                 5           t                              0
                     i                                      ^ *i
                                                                                                 2           1           4
                                                                                                                                                        •A „                             i.M.t                    656.00
                    O        1. *                            ~
                                                                                                 2           ?           7                              4               .                O          ’ .-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1 "i3 c!.«_**»
                    6 1                                        :-

                     • "•                                      V ‘l                                  r                                                                                    0         0
                    O X                                                                                          •            *’

                                                                                                 4           6            0                             4                   . 0                     0
                    5        7           '                      0
#                                                                                                                c ^
                                                                                                                 Kmi :~i                                    4               .               0        0            1 5 4 0 - -X*
                    6        4                                  O

                                                                                                  3          8            8
                                                                                                                                                            2               . 5                     0              = 7 0 .0 0
                    6        5                                  0

                                                                                                                 2           0                              2               .               5           0              iO -0!.’
                     6           6                              1-

                                                                                                  5              5        7                        . 0                          . 0                 0                   0. 00
                     6           7                              0

                                                                                                     5           2            b
                                                                                                                                                            0                   .            0          0               0 .00
                        o        o                                  -■

                                                                                                     5           ?            ^                             0                   .            0          0               0.0 0
                         6       9                              0

                                                                                                      4 ^ c i                                                   0               .             0          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ■J. oO
                         7 0                                        0

                                                                                                      4              6        0                                 0               .               0        0              o . oo
                         7 1                                        0

                                                                                                         4           =           3                                  0               . 0                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        o . oo
                         7           2                              0

                                                                                                         3 1                      :i
                                                                                                                                                                    4               .           0           0      1 2 4 4 .0 0 '
                         7           3                              0

                                                                                                         2           1            4                                 4                   j        0           0       35c - 00
                             7 4                                    0

                                                                                                         2           4           9                                  4               .           0           0      '& ?6.00
                         7           5                              0

                                                                                                         2            1           7                                     4               . 0                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8 c S . 00
                             7       6                              0



                                                                                                                                                                        1                . 5                 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                             3   30627.00
                TOTALS                                                  2            1           P           r           0        6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (V
r
         S H E F F IE L D    WEDNESDAY F G G T B A LL CLUB
         VERSUS
         !_I ■ 'E FP O O L V N 0 T T 5   FORE

         F .A .C U F        SEMI   F IN A L

         15/ 4. c-r
         £    L'PD “i Y
         ”7   -i
                                          L Hr£S'.      GATE         A VISE            '           AREA
                                          TO T A L      TOTAL        FF IC E                       VALUE

                                                     19906            1 .53        3062/.00
          1   ~ F I O r'i KOr                  2
                                                      •5110           3. 20        26008.00
         1    f-iGSTH 5TAND                    &
                                                      4740            1. 8c          8860.50
         3    V i h E-TD CGVEREID               0
                                                      -- .*;.rr "z    •>.            29-12.50
         4    '£ ’"r: ETD 'JMC                 0
                                                      7 1‘:T &        4. 00        28152.00
         5    s..EP = IN3 LANE                 1             *T
                                                      C .
                                                      w O             3.73         2 1 2 b 0 . 00
          e   •><£5'r   STAND                  -

                                                     4B=‘6B           2. 42    1   1       7   8   7   0   . 0   0




    c




    i


    i.




    c




                                                                                                                     IW
          t*


          o


          r

          r
                        4         STH STD UNC




    * •    <-
I   W                           -J .C



              ,r        TOTALS                        o



                            5           LEF’F I N B   LAKE




                                                                            4. Ov
                                  5                   0                     4. OO
               /                                                                      4 -324. O V
                                  r                   0           120c- ■
                                                                        ,   4. 00
                                                                  1245      4. GO
                                  D                   1                               3 804.00
                                                                            4. 00
               i~                 E                   0                               41 '■?i .00
                                                                  104?      4. 00
                                  F                   •-»
                                                                   583      4. 00
                                  6                       0

                U
                                                                  7033      4.00      26152.00
                                T OTALS .                 1

                   i.
                                6 WEST STANI

                                                                  BAT E     G m Te        SATE
                                 GATE            CHECK.
                   f
                                                                  TOTAL     FF.ICE        V ALUE
                                                 T OTAL

                                                                             0. 00          .i_)ij
                                                                                           it
                                    9                     o
                                                                    634
                   4
                                                                    582      0. '00        0. 00
                                    10                        *                            0. oo
                                                                    754      0. 00
                                    11                        o                            0. 00
                                    12                        0     oO^      0 •00
                    t
                                                                    784      7. 00     5^86 . 0 0
                                    13                        2                        5255 . 0 0
          i'1                        14                       0     725      7. 00
                                                                    836      7.00      5 852.00
                                     15                       1                        4655.00
                                                                    665       7. 00
                                     lo                       ^

                                                                   5 619    . 3. 76   21230.00
                                  TOTALS              .4
2       NORTH STAND

GATE             CHECK          GATE              GATE                GATE
                 TOTA L         TO T A L          P R IC E            VALUE

    1                   0       1 120              0 . GO               0 . .'0
                        0       1074               0. 00                0 . 00
    0*                  0       1038               0 . 00               0 . 00
    4                   4       1033               0. 00                0 . 00
    5                   i         962              7 .5 0         7 2 1 5 .0 0
    6                   0       1011               7 . 50         7 5 8 2 .5 0
    7                   1         7^**7            c . 50         4 6 9 3 .0 0
    s                   jL        7 67             b. 50          4 9 8 5 .5 0
    77                  0         13E              4 . 00           7 5 2 .0 0
    75                  0         195              4 . 00           7 8 0 .0 0
    *»n                 o                          0 • 00               >.'■. - C
    &0                  o                  <*',    0. 00                1j • 'O'0
    p i                 (j                 (\      t"■ t : 1i’i         0 . 00
    82                  1i                 C:       0 . 00              ' } „ ' ‘1i*
    '31—                0                  i "i      ' \ »i             »** f -'"lij;
    54                  0                  i..      0 . GO                o . oo
    S3                  o                  0        c - 50                0 - O'.1
    3c                  o                  i'j      =>.50                 0 . 0*1’
                        :*i                G         "- w                 0 - -X
    88                                     O            “•i »             ( : t ;\


T 3 T --L .: :                      i •* 1.         3.20


3 sT H           itTD   CO- .ERED

GAT £             CHECK         3 AT E             trA TE               G A 'c.
                  TGT AL        T OTAL             PRICE                VRLUE.

    n7                  0           634             0. 00              0. 00
    ^ a
    .iH                 I.'         er.ris:
                                    Ju'w            1j 1t1•            0. 00
                        *0          T- y            6.50           17i>B. 00
                                       i     j
                         0                   I      6. 50          1696.50
     26a                 0          164             0. 00              0. 00
     27                  0          505             0. 00              0 .00

     28                  (j          90             0 .0 i.1           0. 00
     28 a                o          391              7             2=32.50
     29                  0          502              0. 00             0. 00
     30                  0          463              0. 00             0 .00
     31                  0          472              0. 00             0» 0 0
     32                     o       37c              6. So         246 3.30

    TOTALS                  0    4740                 1. 86         8860.50
URGENT MESSAGE FOR MR G SQUIRES (MEMBER OF JURY)



From Mrs Squires:

The little girl Heeley's heart has started beating very fast.
She is on her way to the Childrens Hospital to see her and
she will meet you there as soon as you can get away.


Time of message:    2.25 pm.
£ HOUSE OF COMMONS                                  SESSION 1990-91




                  HOME AFFAIRS
                   COMMITTEE


                     Second Report



               POLICING
         FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM

                          Volume I

                Report together with the
              Proceedings o f the Committee




            Ordered by The House of Commons to be printed
                           1 February 1991



                     This                                              •
                     understanding that no app    contents before the tin
                                                                      time
                     organisation or person    ubUCATION, BROADCASIT
                     S rC T S S   o   S S TAPES BEFORE=12 noon on 5
                      February 1991



                              £8.70 net


   l-I
#   HOUSE OF COMMONS                                  SESSION 1990-91




                    HOME AFFAIRS
                     COMMITTEE


                       Second Report



                 POLICING
           FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM

                           Volume I

                  Report together with the
                Proceedings o f the Committee




             Ordered by The House of Commons to be printed
                            1 February 1991




                          LONDON: HMSO
                             £8.70 net


    l- I
                                             SECOND REPORT FROM




  The Home Affairs Committee is appointed under SO No 13 0 to examine the expenditure,
administration and policy of the Home Office and associated public bodies.
  The Committee consists of 11 Members. It has a quorum of three. U n l e s s the House oAerwise
orders, all Members nominated to the Committee continue to be members of it for the remainder
of the Parliament.

  The Committee has power:
   (a) to send for persons, papers and records, to sit notwithstanding any adjournment of the
       House, to adjourn from place to place, and to report from time to time;

   (b)   to appoint specialist advisers either to supply information which is not readily available
         or to elucidate matters of complexity within the Committee s order of reference,

   (c) to communicate to any other such committee its evidence and any other documents
       relating to matters of common interest; and
   (d)   to meet concurrently with any other such committee for the purposes of deliberating,
         talcing evidence, or considering draft reports.

   The Committee has power to appoint one sub-committee and to report from time to tune the
minutes of evidence taken before it. The sub-committee has power to send for persons, papers and
records, to sit notwithstanding any adjournment of the House, and to adjourn from place to place.
It has a quorum of three.

   The membership of the Committee since its appointment on 2 December 1987 is as follows:

                                              Sir John Wheeler
                                    (elected Chairman 9 December 1987)
              Mr David Ashby                                   Mr Alan Meale           inoo.
              M r Joe Ashton                                    (added 19 December 1989)
                (added 18 January 1989)                        M r Ivor Stanbrook
              Mr Gerald Bermingham                             Mr Keith Vaz
              Mr David Clelland                                Dr Mike^ Woodcock
                 (discharged 18 January 1989)                   (added 28 April 1988)
              Dame Janet Fookes                                M r T o n y Worthington
              M r Roger Gale                                    (discharged 19 December 1989)
              Mr John Greenway




  The cost of printing and publishing this Report is estimated by HMSO at £6,709.
  The cost of preparing for publication the Shorthand Minutes of Evidence taken before the Committee was £597.04.
                                     THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                                                            iii


                           TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                  Volume I

                                                                                                                       Page

Introduction: the background                         ..............................................................        v

What is the current problem?......................................................................                         vi
     1. Its e x te n t....................................................................................                 vi
     2. Its r a n g e ....................................................................................                vii
     3. The media             ............................................................................               viii

What can         the clubs d o ? ............................................................................             ix
     1.          Facilities for spectators.............................................................                   ix
     2.          Seating ....................................................................................              x
     3.          Facilities for police....................................................................                xi
     4.          Paying for improvements .....................................................                            xi
     5.          Player b e h a v io u r....................................................................             xii
     6.          Match scheduling....................................................................                    xii
     7.          Bans by clubs on spectators.....................................................                       xiii
     8.          Community Programmes .....................................................                             xiv

Police Tactics .............................................................................      .. ..                   Xv
       1. Segregation ........................                                                            ..              Xv
       2. Speedy arrests..............................................................................                    xv
       3. Intelligence and evidence g a th e rin g ........................................                              xvi
      4. National Football Intelligence U n i t ........................................                                xvii
       5. Are the police too aggressive? ...............................................                               xviii
       6. Inconsistency by the P o lice.......................................................                           xix
      7. Police/supporter and police/club dialogue................................                                        xx
       8. Police Training            ......................................................................               xx

Police Numbers and Costs .....................................................................                           xx
       1. Background ..............................................................................                      xx
      2. Policing outside the ground.......................................................                             xxi
      3. Policing inside grounds..                                                                                      xxi
                (i) Should the clubs pay more?                        .................................                 xxi
               (ii) Better administration and fewer
                    inconsistencies             ......................................................                  xxii
              (iii) What costs should be b o r n e ? ................................                                  xxiii
              (iv) An equitable method of charging .........................                                           xxiv
       4. Stewarding     ..............................................................................                 xxv

The Role of Government.............................................................................                    xxvi
     1. O ffe n c e s.....................................................................................             xxvi
     2. Penalties for Convicted Hooligans ........................................                                    xxviii
               (i) Exclusion o rd e rs .......................................................                        xxviii
              (ii) Restriction Orders                     ................................................             xxix
             (iii) Attendance Centre O rders........................................                                    xxx
             (iv) Curfews/electronic tagging........................................                                    xxx
              (v) Disposals: general                      ................................................             xxxi
     3. Alcohol .....................................................................................                  xxxi
     4■ Home Office Inspectorate of Constabulary’s r o l e .................                                          xxxii
     5. International C o-operation.......................................................                            xxxii
iv                                         SECOND REPORT FROM THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE


                                                                                                                                                                                  Page

          G.        The Football Licensing Authority..............................................................                                                                 xxxv
                         1. Background ...............................                                                                                                             xxxv
                         2. Membership of the FLA             ......................................................                                                              xxxvi
                         3. The Green Guide and the F L A ...............................................                                                                         xxxvi
                         4. Policing and the FLA: an arbitration role                       .........................                                                            xxxvii

          H.        Conclusion....................................................................................................                                               xxxviii

            I.          Summary of Recommendations                                               ..........................................................                       xxxix

P r o c e e d in g s o f t h e C o m m it t e e r e l a t in g t o t h e R e p o r t                                                ................................                xliii

L is t o f W it n e s s e s                 ..................................................................................................................................

L is t o f A p p e n d ic e s t o t h e M in u t e s o f E v id e n c e                                          .............................................................      x lv i



                                                                                        Volume II

M e m o r a n d a o f E v i d e n c e ........................................................................................................................                           1

M in u t e s o f E v i d e n c e ..................................................................................................................................

A p p e n d ic e s t o t h e M in u t e s o f E v i d e n c e .................................................................................                                      178
                                          SECOND REPORT
                                 POLICING FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM
                  The Home Affairs Committee has agreed to the following Report:


                                       A. Introduction: the background

   1.    Hooliganism has occurred in many forms and in varied contexts over many years’.1 The
Home Office reminded us at the outset of our inquiry that there is very little new under the sun
in the field of anti-social and violent behaviour. A Dutch Chief Constable drew our attention to
the deaths which occurred among spectators at sporting events in Ancient Rome. The origins of
football in this country can be traced back to boisterous and often violent clashes between groups
of partisans. Academic studies conducted by the University of Leicester have shown convincingly
that ‘the values expressed in contemporary hooligan encounters at football and elsewhere can be
shown to be deeply rooted in the British past’.2 Football hooliganism is not a new phenomenon.

   2. Several events in recent years have brought the problem into the centre of public debate.
Chief of these was the riot by Liverpool fans at Heysel stadium in May 1985 which led to 39
deaths. Determination that something should be done to exorcise the ghost of Heysel resulted in
the Football Spectators Act 1989, with its controversial proposal for a national membership
scheme. While that proposal remains on the statute book, it has not been brought into force. Just
three months after the Bill had been introduced in the House of Lords, the worst disaster in British
football history occurred at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989 when 95 Liverpool fans were crushed
to death and over 400 injured. The Hillsborough disaster was the subject of an exhaustive inquiry
by Lord Justice Taylor. His report considered what could be done to deal with the problems of
crowd control and hooliganism at sports events, and to improve safety and conditions at sports
grounds. In particular, he was doubtful about the feasibility of the national membership proposal
and concerned that the scheme, rather than ending hooliganism, might actually increase trouble
outside grounds.3

  3. Taylor drew attention to the ‘depressing and chastening fact’ that his was the ninth official
report since 1924 which had considered crowd safety and control at football grounds. Previous
reports had gone unheeded, but there was ‘no point in holding inquiries or publishing guidance
unless the recommendations are followed diligently’.4 These earlier inquiries were not exclusively
concerned with hooliganism. Taylor even believed that a ‘preoccupation with measures to control
hooliganism’ had been one of the causes of non-implementation of earlier recommendations.
However, as he recognised, and as the Home Office stressed in evidence,3 hooliganism can be a
threat to safety.

  4. In this inquiry, we have chosen to follow up much of the Committee’s recent work on the
police by looking in particular at the way football is policed and how the problei is of hooliganism
are countered. We are concerned with police costs and efficiency and with public order. As Taylor
concluded and the Home Office reminded us, ‘there is no single simple cure for the ills of football
hooliganism’,6 and we do not pretend that our inquiry has uncovered a holy grail which had
eluded those who have considered this matter before. The intention of our inquiry was not to
reheat cold cabbage by again going over all the ground considered by Taylor, but to ensure that
parliamentary scrutiny maintains the pressure to promote better and safer conditions at sports
grounds as Taylor and his predecessors intended.

  5. The Committee published a volume of Memoranda in November 1990, and subsequently
took oral evidence on three occasions. Witnesses at the first session represented the Football
Association (FA), the Football League, the Football Supporters’ Association (FSA) and the
National Federation of Football Supporters’ Clubs and, on the second occasion, the Association
of Chief Police Officers (ACPO), the Police Superintendents’ Association and the Police
Federation. At our final oral evidence session, we heard Earl Ferrers, Minister of State at the
Home Office and his officials, as well as Mr Norman Jacobs, Chairman of the Football Licensing
Authority (FLA) and his acting Chief Executive. As part of the inquiry, Members and staff of
the Committee visited the National Football Intelligence Unit (NFIU) and football grounds at

'£v. p. 2.
2The Roots o f Football Hooliganism, p. 241, Dunning, Murphy and Williams, Routledge 1989.
i The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, Final Report, Cm 962.
4Cm 962, paras. 19-23.
5E v . p. 1.
6E v . p. 6.
•   „                                                SECOND REPORT FROM



    Arsenal, Hampden Park Glasgow, Cardiff City and Millwall. We also paid a short visit to Utrecht,
    Milan and Rome. In the Netherlands, we met police officers and government officials, and visite
    Utrecht stadium. In Italy, we were privileged to meet both the Minister of the Interior, Mr Scotti,
    and the Under Secretary, Senator Ruffino, the Minister who chaired the Committee responsible
    for World Cup security. We also met a number of parliamentarians, officials and police officers,
    and visited the Olympic Stadium in Rome. We are extremely grateful to our witnesses, those
    whom we met on our visits and all others who took so much trouble to help us in our work-         e
    are also grateful to Mr Frank Gregory of Southampton University who gave us specialist advice
    during this inquiry.

                                              B. What is the current problem?

    1.      Its extent
      6.    There is a strong popular association between professional football matches and
    hooliganism. Although hooliganism is creeping into other sports. Sir James Anderton, Chief
    Constable of Greater Manchester1 speaking on behalf of ACPO, distinguished between unruly
    behaviour’ which occurs at many large gatherings and football hooliganism which is organised
    by people in a very clever and ultimately criminal fashion’.2 Certainly some of the statistics are
    alarming. In England and Wales, around 5,000 officers from 38 forces are deployed on football
    Saturdays. In addition, around 1,000 officers police football in Scotland, while British Transport
    Police employ 900 officers in football-related work.3 The cost of this police operation i‘ijSf
    determine, and is a subject to which we shall return later,4 but must approach £500,000 each
    Saturday.5 Taking into account mid-week matches, the annual cost of policing football is at least
    £25 million, and is estimated by some to approach £35 million.6 The Audit Commission has
    estimated the cost to Home Office forces in England and Wales alone as around £22 million.
        7. The NFIU computer lists over 5,000 hooligans in Great Britain. In England and Wales
     in the 1989-90 season, 5,945 arrests took place at League matches while 974 supporters were on
     9 January 1991 excluded from football matches by court order.8 The Football League asked us
     to put the figures in context: attendances have increased in recent years, while the number ot
     arrests have diminished. Only about one in 3,000 is arrested at a football match. The arrest
     figures are not broken down to distinguish between minor trouble-making and serious crime, but
     according to the FSA, only 0.006 per cent of those who attend matches are convicted of violence
      - that is, one in 17,000.'°
                                                              T able 1"

                                                                                               Arrests as a
                                                                                              percentage o f
                       Year                              Attendances             Arrests         attendance

                       1986-87                             17,383,032               5,531              0.0318
                       1987-88                             17,968,887               6,097              0.0340
                       1988-89                             18,477,565               6,185              0.0337
                       1989-90                             19,466,826               5,945              0.0307

           Lord Ferrers also drew our attention to the ‘relatively few hooligan incidents which have taken
         place this season’.12
           8    Arrests are not restricted to those inside football grounds. A large number of arrests
         connected with football hooliganism take place away from grounds. By no means all of these
         occur in the immediate vicinity. The NFIU told us that ‘much violence occurs some distance from

         ‘Then M r James Anderton.
         ^ 172.
         3£v. pp. 3, 20-1.
               H o m e Office reckoned the 1988 cost of deploying Home Office forces alone to be between £200,000 and £300,000.
         6The Times, 17 November 1990.
         7Police Paper 7, para. 40.
         8HC Deb 4 July 1990, c. 567w; other figures given to Committee by NFIU.
         9In Holland, 1 in 3,500 supporters is arrested.
         I0£v. p. 96.
          u £v. p. 82 and HC Deb 4 July 1990, c. 567 w.
          12Q. 336.
                                           THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                                   vii


football grounds, sometimes on days when no match is taking place’.1 As ACPO (Scotland)
wrote, it is sometimes difficult to define ‘football related disorder’ due to the occurrence of
incidents at some distance from the venue ...V and Sir James Anderton warned us that effective
policing of matches tended to displace the problem elsewhere.3 This is apparent from figures we
were given in respect of Strathclyde, where a tough policing policy has resulted in a rising number
of arrests outside while inside the number has generally declined.4 In Holland, too, we were told
that better policing inside the grounds had moved the problem elsewhere.
2. Its range
   9. ACPO told us3 that those who come to police attention in connection with football
hooliganism include ‘a large number of exuberant youths who display anti-social behaviour
(shouting, swearing, singing etc) while following their football teams, and perhaps gain the odd
conviction for public disorder offences, who may never come to the notice of the police in other
circumstances’ but that there were also highly organised hooligan gangs, with dedicated and
highly disciplined central control. These people
                    ‘invariably commit offences which have no apparent relationship to football, other than
                    perhaps to finance their football activities, but they also commit many other offences
                    which although directly football related are not perceived as such. These are usually
                    committed in the evening after a game in a town nearby, or somewhere in the transit
                    system many miles from the ground.’
The chilling picture of the determination and organisation of these gangs was corroborated by the
NFIU and British Transport Police in their written evidence.6 ACPO told us that the gangs had
both ringleaders and hangers-on. This general view of gradations of hooliganism is one set out
by Taylor’s predecessor, Mr Justice Popplewell in his report of January 1986 following the
Bradford disaster,7 and was endorsed by Taylor.
   10. According to Sir James Anderton, the gangs which associate themselves with football are
‘relatively few in number, but that is not to say th a t... the problem is not a serious one’.8 Our
visit to the NFIU convinced us of this. Much more graphically than the written word, the video
films of violence and robberies and the still photographs of the ghastly injuries inflicted and
malicious weapons used by the gangs demonstrated the outright wickedness of those who
perpetrate organised gang violence. These men are not football supporters but instead, as the
FSA told us, prey upon innocent football supporters.9 They move around the country ‘intent
on causing aggravation wherever they go’, as the Police Federation put it.10 Their violence is not
spontaneous11 and is orchestrated in a sick equivalence to a military strategy. In many instances,
they are responsible for a multiplicity of other non-violent crimes—like shop and car theft—and
exult in a warped heroic status. The organised gangs can exploit the fecklessness and poverty of
imagination and self-discipline of a somewhat wider body of supporters—the ones who might be
described as peripheral hooligans.
   11. Both the criminal gangs and the unruly have become leeches battening on to the
professional football event. But the problems they cause would not evaporate if there were no
football. Young men’s aggression and tribalism would be displayed in other contexts. The FA
referred to a ‘general malaise in society’ and claimed that ‘if football were not available then it
is more likely that it would attach itself to some other activity’.12 The Football League also told
us that ‘the hard-core hooligan will act in the way he does whether at a football ground or
elsewhere’. We agree with this judgement. Although the football authorities cannot be absolved
from all blame for hooliganism, they are also the indirect victims of hooliganism themselves.
  12. Lord Ferrers referred to wider societal changes which had had unfortunate effects upon
football when he discussed alcohol and what he called the ‘extraordinary upheaval or appearance

xEv. p. 33.
2E v .
     p. 53.
3Q. 170.
4£   v.   p . 21.
5E v . pp. 49-50.
6E v . pp. 33, 73.
7Cmnd 9710.
8Q. 172.
9E v . p. 95.
10Q. 174.
"Q . 255.
12£ v . p. 77.
Vlll                                    SECOND REPORT FROM



of lager louts’.1 Alcohol was also emphasised by Taylor, not so much in respect of hardened
hooligans, but as a factor which exacerbated the bad behaviour of peripheral hooligans.2 A wide
cross-section of our witnesses drew our attention to alcohol. Both the Home Office and ACPO
endorsed Taylor’s view,3 while the Scottish Office told us that:4

             ‘... the single most important factor leading to the reduction and better control of
             hooliganism associated with football in Scotland has been the ban on alcohol
             introduced in 1980 ...’

We shall return later to consider some measures which may be taken to curb the consequences of
alcohol abuse.3

3. The media

  13. To blame football unfairly for more general hooliganism was, according to the Leicester
City FC branch of the Football League Executive Staffs’ Association, a ‘disturbing trend’ fostered
by the media. The symbiotic relationship between the media and hooligans was referred to by
many of our witnesses. As the Home Office said:6

             ‘The mere presence of cameras, particularly at events like the European Championships
             and the World Cup, and the contingents of news reporters apparently unconcerned
             with the game itself, may have the effect of encouraging acts of hooligan behaviour.’

The Scottish Office also referred to the media as being ‘excited by football hooliganism’.7
Witnesses inside football were less restrained. The Scottish Football Association wrote of the
‘sensational lies of the tabloids’, the FSA spoke of ‘tensions deliberately created by the media’,
while the F A told us that ‘... prediction of likely disorder virtually tells the potential hooligan what
is expected of him and challenges him to perform’.8We are all aware of some of the absurd and
exaggerated fictions which appear in the popular press. On the other hand, we were reminded by
the Football Writers Association that ‘a past voluntary moratorium by the press of coverage of
football violence was accompanied by an escalation in hooliganism’,9 and we appreciate that the
press can behave very responsibly, as has happened in Scotland10and, as we understand, happens
in Denmark. Nevertheless the fear of crime saps the confidence of citizens as badly as crime itself.
It is not the job of the press to stoke up those fears. We believe that the press ought to exercise
much greater responsibility when reporting football hooliganism.

   14. Press coverage of the events leading up to the World Cup in Italy was the apogee of
hooliganism hype. The disinterested observer, both in Britain and Italy, had the impression that
tens of thousands of English marauders were about to descend like second Goths to uproot Italian
civilisation. Some hooligans tried to live up to this image. On one occasion, at Rimini, the Italian
police may have overreacted. We say no more about that incident because of impending legal
action. But other than at Rimini, and an earlier incident in Cagliari, which was successfully
defused by the Italian police, (and, according to the FSA, might have been prevented ‘had FSA
warnings been heeded’),11 ‘the World Cup tournament passed off comparatively peacefully’.12 No
 doubt much of this was due to the elaborate pre-planning undertaken by British and Italian
 government departments and police forces, but the low level of incidents was also due to the good
 conduct of the vast majority of the fans who travelled to Italy.

    15. The Popplewell and Taylor inquiries and the evidence which we received all emphasised
 that only a tiny minority of those who attend football matches are hooligans. As Popplewell said,
 the vast majority of spectators ‘abhor violence and wish only for an afternoon of pleasure at a
 football match’. The FSA wrote optimistically about the development of ‘a strong alternative

 'Q. 407.
        962, p. 9.
 3£ v . pp. 2, 45.
 4£ v . p. 27.
 3See paras. 104 ff.
 6E v . p. 18.
 1Ev. p. 27.
 8£ v . pp. 81, 100, 77.
 9E v . p. 105.
  10ACPO (Scotland), Ev. p. 54.
  11£v. p. 99.
  12Home Office, Ev. p. 12.
                                          THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                                ix


culture to the aggressive behavioural norms that existed at football a generation ago’.1 But so
long as criminals attach themselves to football, there will be a policing problem at football
matches. We are not as pessimistic as Sir James Anderton, who told us2 that
            ‘...we will always have a problem akin to football in and around football grounds and
            we will always have an associated problem on public transport and in areas akin to
            football grounds.’
But we are also realistic enough to accept that football policing will be a substantial commitment
for the police for the foreseeable future.

                                           C. What can the clubs do?
1. Facilities for spectators
   16. The Taylor report did not make comfortable reading for the football authorities. The
facilities at many grounds were heavily criticised and the game was accused of suffering from poor
leadership: ‘in some instances’, Taylor wrote, ‘it is legitimate to wonder whether the directors are
genuinely interested in the welfare of their grass roots supporters’.3 Mr Jacobs of the FLA used
the phrase ‘the policy of neglect’.4 There is a pervading impression that soccer stadia are nasty,
cold, wet, windswept places where crowds are herded together on concrete terraces, where the
lavatory facilities are minimal and dirty, where the catering facilities are virtually non-existent,
where, in short, people are treated like animals and consequently, not surprisingly, act like
animals. Even the words used (‘pens’, not ‘enclosures’, for example) show how badly fans are
regarded.5 We questioned our witnesses on the fairness of these accusations and, more
importantly, the steps taken to remedy them since Taylor reported.
   17. There was general consensus that the quality of facilities left much to be desired. They
were condemned by one witness from the National Federation of Football Supporters’ Clubs as
‘so barbaric, so primitive, so utterly disgusting’; a Police Federation witness called the vast
majority of facilities ‘abysmal’, and there was support from an FSA witness and from the
Chairman of the FLA for the proposition that bad facilities led, to put it mildly, to truculence by
spectators.6 The Home Office wrote of the football authorities’ ‘crucial role’ in ‘improving the
facilities for spectators and in influencing their behaviour’, while the Scottish Office neatly
demonstrated the chicken-and-egg relationship between hooliganism and facilities:
            ‘the improvement in behaviour within Scottish stadia is increasingly attracting women
            and children back to football. Clubs have reacted well to this and some have provided
            family enclosures and better toilet and catering facilities ...’7
Sir James Anderton told us8 that ‘a high proportion of football grounds in t .iis country do not
deserve to be called stadia’, but that ‘more civilised conditions will ultimately produce more
civilised behaviour’. On behalf of the English football bodies, Mr Millichip, Chairman of the FA,
and Mr Fox, President of the Football League, both believed that the Hillsborough disaster had
indeed been a stimulus for improvement by the authorities of the game.9 But there is clearly no
room for complacency.
   18. A bad physical environment at football grounds does not merely lead to discomfort and
irritation. It may be dangerous and spark off hooligan incidents. For example, at many grounds
perimeter fencing obscures the view of spectators and when the pitch is further obscured by
segregation fences, fans naturally become frustrated because they cannot see the match for which
they have paid. They crush into parts of the enclosures from which visibility is better, and refuse
to move in the interests of safety. There must be a clear view of the pitch for all. Better ground
design with the interests of fans properly considered may remedy this.10 We recommend a
determined effort by all football elute to make a much higher standard of facilities available to fans.

xEv. p. 96.
2q . 170.
3Cm 962, p. 10.
4Q. 349.
5Q. 361.
6QQ. 154, 197, 194, 362.
1Ev. p. 12, 24.
8Q. 196.
9QQ. 4-5.
 ,0We shall return later to the role of the FLA in improving grounds.
X                                                SECOND REPORT FROM



   19. Particular concern was expressed during the inquiry about the facilities offered to away
supporters. One of our Police Federation witnesses argued that clubs rather than the police were
making life uncomfortable for visiting supporters, and Mr Jacobs also told us that ‘away
supporters do come in for the hard end of it’.1 Although the Football League told us2 that a
directive had been issued to clubs that they should treat home and away fans alike, the two
supporters’ organisations called not simply for equal price tickets for home and away supporters,
but the assurance that equal facilities were bought with those tickets.3 We endorse this plea, and
recommend that the Football Licensing Authority pay particular attention to ensuring that home and
away fans receive equal treatment at every ground.
2. Seating
   20. The most important ground improvement associated with Taylor is the move to all-seater
stadia. Taylor recommended the end of terrace standing as one of the best means of tackling
hooliganism and improving crowd safety. He proposed that the grounds of first and second
division clubs in England and Wales and premier division clubs in Scotland should become
all-seater by the beginning of the 1994-95 season, and that the grounds of other league clubs
should become all-seater by the beginning of the 1999-2000 season.4 For the larger clubs, there
is another cause to introduce all-seater stadia—the international football authorities have ruled
that, from 1993 onwards, all high-risk matches between teams from different countries should be
played at all-seater stadia.3
  21. Many of our witnesses from outside football endorsed the seating proposals. The Scottish
Office wrote that
             ‘... it is difficult to commit an offence of a serious nature from a seated position and the
             act of standing up to throw a missile or to gesticulate at opposing supporters is
             immediately obvious to the police.’6
and police witnesses also warmly endorsed the all-seater proposal.7 Sir James Anderton believed
that the culture of the sport could be altered by the introduction of seating, though he
acknowledged that there was a ‘pain barrier’ through which supporters would need to go in the
move to all-seater stadia. From inside football, there was more scepticism. Mr Millichip told us
that ‘... a person can be just as big a hooligan when he is sitting down as when he is standing up’,8
while the FSA believed that Taylor’s objectives could be ‘better achieved by creating safe terracing
with strictly limited numbers in terraced areas’.9
   22. During the course of our inquiry, an incident occurred at Manchester City’s ground when
a large number of seats were smashed by Leeds United fans. This at least indicated that
considerable thought needs to be given to the design of the hooligan-proof seat, as well as to the
configuration of seats, as was readily acknowledged by police witnesses.10 It also showed that seats
can be a stimulus to hooligans and could possibly be used as weapons, as they were in the riot
at Luton when Millwall played there in March 1985. To install seating in lower division grounds
will be costly and may bring very little reward. The public safety concerns associated with the
packed terraces at major grounds do not exist to the same extent at many third and fourth division
clubs playing in front of sparsely populated terracing. We note that, in Italy, only stadia with a
capacity of more than 10,000 are required to be all-seater. If spectators themselves do not wish
it for the sake of comfort, as some evidence suggests," we see little point in foisting compulsory
seating on clubs which can ill afford the cost and which could spend money more usefully on other
ground improvements. At present no regulations on all-seater stadia have been made.12 Mr Fox
of the Football League suggested that the FLA might be able to look again at the question of
compulsory seating.13 We hope that they will do so. We recommend that the compulsory seating
proposals be re-examined in the case of die smaller clubs.

 >QQ. 228, 362.
 2Q. 45.
 3Q. 161.
 4Cm 962, p. 76.
 5Q. 25.
 6E v . p. 24.
 7Association of Scottish Police Superintendents, Ev. p. 61; Police Federation, Ev. p. 64; Scottish Police Federation, Ev. p. 67.
 8Q. 25.
 9E v . p. 99.
 10QQ. 183-191.
 "Survey of FSA members, published in Football and Football hooliganism in Liverpool, Sir Norman Chester Centre for Football
 Research, 1987.
  12Q. 356.
                                                THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                          xi



3. Facilities for police

   23. An important aspect of the facilities of grounds is not appreciated by spectators. These
are the facilities offered to the police. The Association of Metropolitan Authorities (AMA) told
us that ‘poor grounds with inadequate facilities make the police operation more difficult.' Sir
James Anderton also called for clubs to make ‘proper facilities’ available to the police as well as
other agencies, such as St John Ambulance.2 We were told of counting equipment (which should
allow the police accurately to monitor the numbers in the ground) being out of date or
inaccurate,3 and are aware of grossly inadequate control rooms, barely acceptable rooms for
completing arrest formalities or holding prisoners and no facilities to alloW officers to have
refreshment or to use a separate lavatory. Some clubs, as we saw at Arsenal, do provide excellent
facilities for the police and other organisations. Other clubs do not. We believe that it should be
a priority of clubs to provide the police and other organisations such as St John Ambulance with the
facilities which they need to discharge their duties efficiently.

4. Paying for improvements

   24. Any football spectator who visits clubs throughout the League realises that there is an
enormous variation in facilities between the rich and successful clubs and some of those struggling
in the lower divisions.4 But even the best is not outstanding. According to the FA, none of the
English stadia, except Wembley, is of the standard necessary for a World Cup competition.5 The
Olympic stadium in Rome is quite unlike anything this country has to offer. The FA estimated
the cost for the full implementation of the Taylor proposals at between £600 and £700 million,
with the most rudimentary improvements costing £300 million.6 Even if the compulsory seating
proposals are modified for the smaller clubs, the bill will still be enormous. Paradoxically,
Taylor’s recommendations would reduce the capacity of stadia, and thus cut clubs’ revenue.

    25. In the 1990 Budget, the then Chancellor of the Exchequer announced a cut in Pool Betting
Duty from 42$ per cent to 40 per cent for an initial period of 5 years, provided that the revenue
forgone by the Government was given to the Football Trust to use on improvements
recommended by Taylor. This was intended to channel about £100 million into football over the
five year period, after which the position would be reviewed. The Football League estimated the
new revenue to amount to about £18.5 million per annum.7 The Chancellor also instructed the
I n la n d Revenue to approach football clubs to clarify their eligibility for tax relief for ground
improvements. Despite this government help, clubs ‘are going to have to put in at least £3 for every
£1 that comes from government’ if the minimal improvements proposed by Taylor are to be
introduced.8 Football is a private industry, and should not be dependent on public financing.
Nevertheless, its contribution to our national life should not be underestimated and means that
 it deserves some support from Government, just as opera and horseracing do. We recommend that
the Government keep under review the rate of Pool Betting Duty, and, if necessary, decrease the rate
 to main1 more money available for ground improvements.

    26. It is not our responsibility to suggest other methods by which ground improvements can
 be financed. This area was covered in detail by Taylor.9 It is clearly right for clubs themselves
 to pay the lion’s share. We were pleased to hear that the Football League is considering diverting
 money from transfer fees to ground improvements.10 We were also interested to hear the
 Chairman of the National Federation of Football Supporters’ Clubs agree that it would be
 feasible for football clubs to share grounds in cities like ‘Liverpool, Manchester, Sheffield, Bristol,
 Nottingham’.11 However, we have no illusions about the conservatism of supporters in such
 matters. In Utrecht, we saw the way in which the redevelopment of an old stadium had been
 funded by the use of some of the space for commercial purposes. Like Taylor, we believe this sort
  of opportunity could be embraced by British clubs. Something rather similar has happened at St

  ■Ev. p. 106.
  2Q. 199.
  3Police Superintendents’ Association,   Ev.   p. 57.
  4ACPO(S), E v . p. 52.
  SQ. 13.
XU                                      SECOND REPORT FROM



Johnstone in Scotland. We add our voice to all those who have called for an imaginative and vigorous
campaign by the football authorities to ensure that the money is raised and the facilities at all grounds
improved to the level of the best

5. Player behaviour

   27. There are a number of other areas in addition to physical facilities where the clubs can
help abate the hooliganism problem. Taylor criticised the behaviour of a few players, which was
‘calculated to hype up the fans into hysteria’.1 The Police Superintendents’ Association’s evidence
referred to ‘a minority of professional footballers [who] regularly use obscene and abusive
language and inflammatory conduct which can incite disorder on the terraces’,2 and Sir James
Anderton called for ‘very strong discipline’ to deal with all those who misbehaved, including
players and officials.3 The evidence we received from the Professional Footballers’ Association
(PFA) set out the very sensible agreement reached between the football authorities and the police
about police intervention on the field of play.4 We have no wish to see the police heavy-handedly
trying to prevent bad behaviour by players, but players and officials must be aware that they are
not exempt from the provisions of the criminal law. In normal circumstances* we would expect
the FA to exercise discipline, and we applaud the recent trend to impose tough penalties upon
players, officials and teams who misbehave.s There has clearly been an attempt to meet the
criticisms Taylor made in this area.

6. Match scheduling

   28. A further problem can arise if matches are scheduled so that they occur at the wrong place
on the wrong day. A grievous blunder, not a hiccup, as the FA disingenuously described it,6 was
made last season when Leeds played Bournemouth away on the Saturday of the May Bank
Holiday weekend. The police advised against the match taking place on that day (so sure were
they of trouble, that the NFIU dispatched a camera team to film the disturbances they thought
likely), but police advice was not heeded, and serious disorder resulted.7 The then Home
Secretary was clearly angered by what occurred and the Home Office told us8 that he ‘sought and
obtained an agreement from the Football League that they would in future heed the advice of the
police with regard to fixtures with a strong potential for disorder’. However, in England and
Wales, the Football League and ACPO both assured us that in the future the police would take
the lead so far as scheduling was concerned.9 We are glad that these arrangements are now in
place, but regret that they result from an event which should never have occurred. Clubs will
continue to wish to schedule matches in a way which will bring them the most income. There is
a commercial pressure to schedule matches at times which suit broadcasting companies, and we
were told that in Scotland policing considerations came second to these commercial factors.10
Preservation of law and order is more important than club revenues. We recommend that the
football authorities and the police consult one another on match scheduling and heed one another’s
 professional expertise.

  29. The Police Federation called for matches to be brought within the ambit of Part II of the
Public Order Act 1986 so that the police might apply to the local authority for a match to be
banned. We believe that this is unnecessary, especially as most safety certificates will only permit
a match to take place if it is adequately policed. As Assistant Chief Constable Malcolm George
neatly put it, ‘we cannot ban a match; we can only say we will not police it’.11 We do not see any
need for any further powers to prevent matches taking place.

  30. Although we regard the police powers with regard to scheduling as important, we hope
that the police will use them sensibly. The FA told us12 that ‘on occasions it has been felt that
requests for switches have been based on convenience rather than necessity’, while the National

 'Cm 962 p. 10.
2E v .   p. 56.
 3Q. 198.
 *Ev. pp. 92-3.
  SQ. 7.
  6E v . p. 76.
  1Ev. p. 37.
  8£ v . p. 9.
  9QQ. 85, 244.
   10ACPO(S), Ev. p. 52.
   “ Q. 246.
   12£ v . p. 76.
                                            THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                             xiii

  ederation of Football Supporters’ Clubs alleged that ‘clubs seem powerless to resist suggested
changes, and the Football League, invited to adjudicate, always sides with the police to protect
u ia r own b a c k s T h e r e are, for example, allegations of matches being scheduled at police
insistence at inconvenient times for away supporters or in a way which maximises police overtime
payments—-or example, an early kick-off on Boxing Day. These suggestions were strongly
repudiated by police witnesses.2 We will refer later to a certain degree of overcaution by the police
as a result of Taylor. We recommend that the police remain alive to the fact that football matches
are.n tended as entertainment for the enjoyment of the maximum number of law -ah id in p fa n s There
must be a good reason for altering the day, venue or time of a g»m»
7. Bans by clubs on spectators

   31. A further step a club can take to curb hooliganism is by banning likely troublemakers
 rom its ground. The courts have a power upon conviction to impose exclusion orders, a matter
to which we shall return later, but the Home Office reminded us of ‘a club’s own entitlement to
choose whom to admit, or refuse to admit, to their property’.3 During our visit to Glasgow, we
were told that any season-ticket holder at Ibrox who is found guilty of a football related offence
is banned from the ground for life,4 although Scottish police evidence was somewhat ambivalent
on how effective club sanctions against hooligans were.5 The Football League assured us that,
in England and Wales, clubs have been banning people from their grounds for the last four or
nve years at a considerable rate of knots’.6 Clearly the banning of supporters is most practical
u matches are all-ticket and if membership cards are required before tickets can be purchased. It
would also help clubs if they were able to have access to the information held by the NFIU
computer on potential hooligans. We recommend that all names and descriptions of hooligans
against whom high grade intelligence is possessed are passed to clubs concerned by the NFIU via the
local police force’s football liaison officer.

   32. A more drastic use of clubs’ power to exclude is found at Luton where all away fans are
banned. The Police Superintendents’ Association’s evidence reflected the view of their
Bedfordshire members that this was ‘... the only truly successful measure against football
hooliganism yet to have been implemented’, and the Police Federation was also enthusiastic.7
The two supporters’ organisations were emphatic that the Luton experiment should not be copied
elsewhere.8 The President of the Football League was also quite opposed to an away supporter
ban.9 We believe that it is neither feasible nor desirable to implement a blanket ban on away
supporters. To do so would amount to little short of an infringement of personal liberty, and
certainly an infringement of the pleasure of tens of thousands of law-abiding fans.

   33. Nevertheless, as the Football Writers’ Association argued, ‘the more English fans can be
discouraged from travelling, the better, the cheaper and the less dangerous for our police
personnel’.10 Many supporters believe that the police try to achieve this end by making it very
difficult, inconvenient, expensive, uncomfortable and miserable for the away supporters. All too
often supporters arrive late and miss the kick-off because of delays caused by the police." This
provokes aggression as well as leaving supporters hungry and wet. They suspect that the police’s
long-term aim is to discourage them from attending. The FLA Chairman agreed that ‘away
supporters do come in for the hard end of it’, but ACPO denied that the police would countenance
discriminatory treatment of away supporters and Lord Ferrers said that he would be ‘surprised’
and ‘shocked’ if the police employed such tactics.12 We believe it would be quite wrong for the police
to use tactics against away supporters which had the intention of extending the Luton experiment by
the back door.

  34. There are much more positive ways to cut down the number of fans who travel away.
Chief Superintendent Clarkson, the ground commander at Leeds, told us that he was encouraging
'£v. p. 102.
2QQ. 273-276.
3 £ v . p. 5.
4see also Ev. p. 24.
sACPO(S), Ev. p. 54; Scottish Police Federation, Ev. p. 66.
6Q. 30.
7E v . pp. 55 & 64.
*Q. 159.
9Q. 62.
"'Ey. p. 104.
n £v. p. 96.
12QQ. 362, 232, 398.
xiv                                           SECOND REPORT FROM



Chelsea to relay the potentially troublesome match with Leeds at their own ground on Boxing Day
and ‘only send up those supporters who are really keen to come’.1 But supporters get great
enjoyment from travelling around the country with their team. For fans who do wish to follow
their team away, clubs can offer good value travel facilities and take on more responsibility for
their supporters when travelling away.2
  35. It is particularly crucial for clubs to provide comprehensive travel arrangements for fans
wishing to follow their team abroad. The inadequacies of official arrangements have in the past
encouraged many supporters to roam across Europe independently, often without tickets.3 The
case for the proper stewarding of away fans was espoused by the European Convention on
Spectator Violence4 (which we shall discuss later) and endorsed by the National Federation of
Football Supporters’ Clubs, who argued in their evidence that ‘the best protection against future
problems abroad is for spectators to travel only in properly supervised self-stewarded groups.
The adoption of a more positive and responsible attitude to away travel by the clubs would, we
believe, go some way towards expunging the memory of drunken Englishmen wreaking violent
havoc on cities across Europe, an image that has so tarnished England s reputation.
Encouragingly, this new approach was evident in the preparations for Aston Villas and
Manchester United’s away matches in Europe this season. We hope that this example will be
followed in future and be rewarded by similar success. We recommend that clubs whose teams are
engaged in European competitions organise attractive, good value and well-stewarded package deals
for travelling supporters, and that match tickets are available only through these arrangements.
8. Community Programmes
   36. The development of community programmes has been a recent ambitious attempt by
some clubs, supported by the Professional Footballers Association, to tackle the problem of
hooliganism at it roots.6 Similar programmes have been promoted in the Netherlands. By
forging closer links between the club and its local community, the aim is to build up mutual
respect, to encourage locals to take pride in their club and ultimately to instill a greater sense of
responsibility and an improvement in behaviour. The Scottish Police Liaison Unit noted that
some degree of self policing had already been achieved in the case of the supporters following the
Scottish national team: ‘Scottish supporters themselves were delighted that fellow supporters were
behaving well and there was a keen spirit to prove themselves, as they believed ‘the best behaved
fans at the World Cup.’7 We recognise that it is unrealistic to expect this attitude to permeate
the country in the short term, but the community schemes represent worthwhile initiatives. The
FSA told us ‘the success to date is difficult to measure but statistics seem to show that those clubs
with community schemes have a lower arrest rate than those without.’8 The police at Millwall,
a club that has enjoyed energetic support from the local authority in pioneering the community
 scheme, shared the view that its benefits had been significant, though incalculable. After an
 initially circumspect reaction to the concept of community programmes, clubs have gradually
 begun to appreciate the value of these schemes and the majority of clubs now have some sort of
 programme in place. However, there are still a significant number of clubs that have not been so
 positive. We recommend that all League clubs establish community programmes.
    37 New links with the community could be complemented by a more participatory role for
 the supporters in the affairs of their club. The current ‘them and us’ mentality means that fans
 resent the way they are treated by clubs, and have little cause, for example, to respect club
 property. The tubs of geraniums all around the Olympic stadium in Rome would be unthinkable
 in England. As long as the fans are not represented in any formal way at a decision-making level,
 the pressure for improved facilities and conditions at grounds is missing an important element.
 The FSA argued, perhaps not surprisingly, that supporter representation at all decision-making
 levels within the game was the way to achieve better value for money for the spectator.9 However,
 when questioned on the exact form that this representation should take, no consensus emerged
  from the supporters’ organisations, and there was some scepticism as to the willingness of clubs
  to give supporters a foot in the door.10 The precise nature of representation is clearly a matter

  'Q. 277.
  2See ACPCKS), Ev. p. 54.
  3See Hooligans Abroad, John Williams et al, Routledge 1989.                                       ^                   .
  4European Convention on Spectator Violence and Misbehaviour at Sports Events and in particular at Football Matches, p.4.
  $Ev. p. 102, para.5.
  6E v . p. 91.
  1Ev. p. 7.
  8 £ v . p. 98.
  9QQ. 141-142.
   I0QQ. 143-151.
                                             THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                                                      XV



 for the supporters themselves to negotiate with the clubs, but we agree with Mr Garrett of the FSA
 that where decisions are being made which directly affect supporter’s interests, then they should
 at least be consulted.’1 We shall take this point further when we come to consider the matter of
 supporter representation on the FLA. However, we recommend that the football authorities and
 individual clubs should establish regular liaison and dialogue with the supporters’ organisations.

                                                    D. Police Tactics
 1. Segregation

   38. The principal police tactic for preventing trouble at and around football matches is
known as ‘policing by containment’.2 This was described by the Home Office3 as ‘escorting
segregated supporters to and from the ground, maintaining the strict segregation of rival fans at
the ground and using fencing within the ground to control the movement of supporters’. Strict
segregation is normal in both Italy and the Netherlands. The advantages of segregation are
obvious: rival gangs can be kept apart and law-abiding supporters feel the security of knowing
that they cannot easily be set upon. Sir James Anderton was quite clear that ‘were we to abandon
all forms of segregation, then certainly we see no prospect of the police being able to contain the
disorder’.4

  39. The disadvantages of segregation are also plain. These were stated by the NFIU. First
of all, segregation

                   ‘creates an arena for tribalistic posturing, chanting and threatening, the participants
                   safe in the knowledge that no matter how provocatively they behave towards their
                   opponents they are in no personal danger as the police lines and stadium fixtures will
                   protect them’.

This effect, of accentuating rivalry and fuelling aggression were recognised by Taylor and in the
Home Office evidence to us. ACPO, too, spoke of a ‘warlike’ atmosphere.3 According to the
NFIU, a second problem with segregation is that it is ‘extremely costly in police time and finance’.
Thirdly, it has ‘displaced rather than removed the problem’.6 A fourth argument was adduced
by supporters organisations—that the corralling of fans was an affront to their dignity.7
   40.    The FSA told us that their organisation had voted overwhelmingly to press for
non-segregated areas at matches, and they and the National Federation of Football Supporters’
Clubs both favoured a gradualist approach to desegregation, perhaps b e g in n in g with f a m ily areas
at grounds.8 There are imaginative schemes such as that at Stoke City where young supporters
of Stoke and their opponents may spend all weekend together. This promotion of contact between
younger fans of different clubs was also enthusiastically endorsed by the police and clubs in the
Netherlands. It would be naive to suppose that gang cultures can be immediately broken down
by this sort of initiative, but we see some cause for optimism in the evidence we received from the
supporters that the tribalism of soccer can be undermined: after all, rugby league and rugby union,
where passions and club loyalties run equally high, have never been segregated.9 The Football
League was cautious. They told us that there did not appear to be any opportunity for relaxing
segregation at present, but that ‘this must be the long-term aim of all concerned’.10 We recognise
that a majority of spectators may wish to watch a match with other supporters of the same side,
but this should be a matter of choice rather than necessity. We recommend that gradual but steady
progress towards desegregation should be the aim of police and rljihs-
2. Speedy arrests

  41. It is important for police manpower to be deployed as cost-effectively as possible. There
are a number of ways in which this can be done. Taylor referred to the tendency in England (in
‘Q. 143.
increasingly this tactic should become more refined in its application as greater use can be made of pre-match information and
intelligence from the NFIU.
3£   v.   p . 8.
4Q. 249.
5£ v . pp. 33, 8, 46.
6 £ v . pp. 33 and 39.
1Ev. p. 97.
8£ v . p. 99; QQ. 136-139.
9Q. 249.
XVI                                              SECOND REPORT FROM



contrast to Scotland) not to arrest offenders but to eject them from grounds. Partly, he believed,
this was due to a non-confrontational approach, but partly because of the length of the arrest
procedures. He concluded that ‘it cannot be a good ground for declining to make an arrest that
one cannot spare an officer to do it’, and he recommended streamlined arrest procedures.1 The
Committee was most impressed by the quick and efficient arrest procedures in Glasgow. In
England and Wales, the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) no doubt limits the police
freedom to manoeuvre. But we are certain that Taylor would have been well aware of the
restrictions of PACE. We note that ACPO is awaiting feedback on a discussion paper on
‘practical ways to reduce police officers’ ‘committed’ time during arrest’.2 There was general
agreement among supporters that, when crimes are committed, it was the job of the police to
arrest those responsible.3 As we shall argue later, we believe that the police role inside football
grounds should increasingly become policing, not stewarding. When offences are committed
which warrant arrest, the offender ought to be arrested, although ejection remains useful for the
punishment of more trivial offences, particularly amongst younger, impressionable fans whom it
may be counter-productive to prosecute. We urge ACPO to come forward speedily with the new
arrest procedures which Taylor recommended a year ago.
3. Intelligence and evidence gathering
  42. Taylor also commended Closed Circuit Television (CCTV). This has been a great success
story. All 92 club grounds now have CCTV cameras inside the ground, and most have them in
the vicinity also. Costs of installing and uprating equipment have been met by the Football
Trust.4CCTV is helpful in allowing the police to monitor safety, but the police believe it also acts
as a deterrent against hooliganism.5 According to the Football League6
              ‘it has made a remarkable difference to the behaviour and control inside grounds. It
              is probably the one single thing that has created a good environment inside grounds and
              a safe environment’.
The Home Office told us7 that ‘analysis of film by intelligence officers after matches can reveal
association between hooligan groups, breaches of exclusion orders, and criminal offences
unrecognised at the time. Video evidence can be crucial in securing convictions’. What we have
seen at matches and at the NFIU strongly corroborates this view. Developments must not be
allowed to rest where they now are. Video equipment needs constant updating and maintenance.
We heard some complaints from officers at grounds that the funds were not available for this. We
recommend that the Home Office should continue to monitor developments in video technology, and
the Football Trust continue to make money available for state-of-the-art equipment to be installed.
   43. CCTV is one of the primary means of gathering intelligence. Intelligence is vital in the
fight against hooliganism. The police have for some time had a network of football liaison officers
whose basic task is to provide information to other forces on the number of travelling supporters,
their routes and means of travel. ACPO referred to the ‘vital link’ between different forces’
football liaison officers.8 The NFIU made a distinction between this information exchange and
intelligence gathering9 which is more concerned with ‘identities of individuals and known
associates, to strategies and plans of those involved, and to weapons and means of concealment’.
In addition to the use of CCTV, surveillance, undercover operations and the use of away ‘spotters’
are means of gathering this intelligence. This work can best be co-ordinated at the local level by
a dedicated intelligence officer. The Committee is convinced that the intensive gathering and sifting
of intelligence is the most effective means of dealing with the menace of gang hooliganism and
 recommends that each force appoints a full-time football intelligence officer for each League club in
its area.
   44. Spotters are officers who know who the potential hooligans are among their teams’
 supporters. As well as working at home matches, they travel to away games and assist the local

 ‘Cm 962, para. 261.
 2Ev. pp. 50, 7.
 3£ v .  p. 100; QQ. 164, 165.
 4The Football Trust was set up in the mid 1970s in order to improve facilities at all levels of the game. Its principal functions
 are to allocate grants to clubs for anti-hooligan measures such as closed circuit television and for ground improvements. It has
 provided finance for the Sir Norman Chester Institute for Football Research at Leicester University and assists many clubs with
 the cost of policing. The Trust is funded largely by the pools companies but also receives grants from the Football Association.
 5ACPO(S), Ev. p. 55.
 6Q. 21.
 1Ev. p. 9.
 8 £ v . p. 46.
 9Ev. pp. 34f.
                                         THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                               x v ii



police force. Sometimes they make their presence very obvious—perhaps by appearing in uniform
at the game. Trouble makers from, for example, Cardiff are unsettled in Hartlepool if they see
South Wales officers they know at the ground. We are sure that the spotter system deserves the
support of all police forces. Some forces may not have a hooliganism problem among their own
supporters, and do not wish to send spotters away with their team. However, we believe that any
force should be prepared to welcome the presence of officers who travel from forces which believe
that their hooliganism problem warrants the use of spotters.

   45. We are also sure of the value of covert operations in which ‘officers infiltrate hooligan
groups and collect evidence over a long period before mounting major operations simultaneously
to arrest those against whom evidence has been collected’.1 There have been some aborted cases
which have received considerable publicity, but we understand that these debacles resulted from
the use of poorly prepared officers. As ACPO told us, ‘such operations require high calibre,
experienced staff, and are complex and costly to mount. Rules of evidence must be adhered to
and close supervision maintained’.2 They also stressed the vital importance of close liaison with
the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) in these operations.3 We ourselves emphasised the
importance of police/CPS liaison in our inquiry into the CPS last session,4 and we are delighted
to see this sort of contact between prosecutors and police from the very beginning of an
investigation. The CPS will be able to ensure that the police case is one which should stand up
in court and secure the conviction of those against whom these very difficult covert operations are
mounted.

4. National Football Intelligence Unit

  46. The NFIU was created in October 1989, and became operational in March 1990 to give
the ‘national system of intelligence gathering essential coherence’.5 The main aims of the unit
were set out in its evidence to us. In essence, they are:

       (i) to provide a central point for the collation, analysis and dissemination of intelligence,
           and for the better co-ordination of police operations, in relation to serious and
           persistent football hooligans/gangs, especially those who travel throughout the United
           Kingdom or abroad;

      (ii) to promote effective collation of intelligence by local forces and ensure compatibility
           between systems used at local and national level. (Members of the Unit may visit
           forces, on request, to assist in establishing intelligence operations and to advise on best
           practice);

     (iii) to provide a channel for communication with foreign police forces for such intelligence
           and for traffic information;

     (iv) to assess the extent and nature of football hooliganism and its criminal associations
          nationally;

      (v) to provide technical and some operational support regarding the use of optical evidence
          gathering equipment, the analysis of video tapes and the preparation and presentation
          of optical evidence before the courts.
  47. The typical way in which the Unit operates was described by ACPO:6 details (including
photographs) of targets who are persistent hooligans are collected by local football intelligence
officers and forwarded to the NFIU. The NFIU checks the veracity of the information and
reliability of the source. The data are entered on the computer, and checked regularly for
relevance and currency. The NFIU then forwards information both about particular games, or
more generally about a recently identified trend—for example, types of weapon or new means of
transport—to the appropriate police force. The Unit has excellent computer technology and can
produce high definition images of its targets on VDU’s or as photographs. The Police
Superintendents’ Association praised N FIU’s “resolve, commitment and efficiency’.7 Its work is

'Home Office, Ev. p. 9.
2Ev. p. 47.
3Q. 252.
*The Crown Prosecution Service, Fourth Report, Session 1989-90, HC 118, para 109.
5NFIU, E v. p. 34.
6 £ v . p. 51.
x v iii                                     SECOND REPORT FROM



very highly regarded by the operational officers we met in different parts of the country, and we
were most impressed by the quality both of the staff and the equipment when we visited the Unit.
We believe that the NFIU is a fine example of police work sensibly co-ordinated on a national basis.
   48. There are, however, a number of areas in which the N FIU ’s work needs further support.
First of all, we were able to see that not all police forces are diligent about furnishing the Unit
with the data, such as post-match reports, which it needs. Sir James Anderton was rather
circumspect in answering a question on this matter, pleading that these were still early days for
the Unit, and that intelligence would only be passed by police officers when they were happy with
its destination.1The NFIU is dependent upon the raw information it receives, and it is especially
important for its work that a full-time football intelligence officer is appointed for every League
club. We recommend that ACPO, ACPO (Scotland), the Home Office and Scottish Office monitor
the performance of all police forces in their dealings with NFIU and ensure that, where there are
lapses, they are vigorously brought to the attention of the Chief Constable concerned, since this
effective relationship bears directly upon the proper use of police resources.
  49. A second problem is the level of resourcing of the Unit. When their written evidence was
submitted, the NFIU argued that their budget was ‘wholly inadequate’ and this point was
repeated by Sir James Anderton.2 Lord Ferrers told us ‘we have gone out of our way to make
sure that they have sufficient funds’,3 and when we visited the Unit in early December, we were
told that sufficient funds had indeed by then been provided. We were told that the Unit needed
one further police officer and one further civilian. We trust that the Home Office will regard
sympathetically the need for adequate staff and resources for the Unit: it would be a false economy
to do otherwise. We recommend that the Government meet all reasonable demands made by the
NFIU for resources.
  50. Both ACPO (Scotland) and the Scottish Association of Police Superintendents argued
that it might be of value to have a Scottish officer attached to the Unit (which at present is headed
by a Superintendent from the Greater Manchester Police and is staffed by officers from the
Metropolitan Police, a variety of English provincial forces and the British Transport Police).4 Sir
James Anderton was sympathetic to this proposition,5 and we recommend that consideration
should be given to the appointment of a Scottish officer to the Unit.
5. Are the police too aggressive?
  51. It is only too easy to be sympathetic to the police’s position at football matches. As the
FA said:
                ‘after years of being insulted, spat upon, and even assaulted as well as having their leave
                cancelled and personal arrangements upset, there is not unnaturally an increasing
                antagonism [by the police] towards football supporters as a whole and visiting fans in
                particular’.6
However, as the Crewe Alexandra branch of the Football League Executive Staffs’ Association
wrote, ‘police attitude can make a tremendous difference to the way things go at a game as
sometimes they can actually trigger situations’.7 We were impressed by the moderate tone of the
evidence of the FSA on this matter. They recognised that ‘many officers do an exceptional job
in often stressful circumstances’ but they told us that ‘fans often feel as if they are treated with
far less respect and with far less dignity than they would expect in other walks of life’. They had
conducted a survey of their membership which showed that
                ‘generally speaking, supporters believe that the police are unsympathetic to supporters’
                complaints, poor at isolating hooligans from ordinary fans, do not do all they can to
                counter racist and obscene chanting, police away fans worse than home fans, can be
                over-aggressive and inconsistent’.8
   52. Sir James Anderton readily conceded that incidents occurred when individual police
officers were ‘less than sensible’ in their handling of events,9 and Assistant Chief Constable

'Q. 283.
2E v .  p. 34; Q. 286.
3Q. 399.
4 £ v , pp. 54, 60.
5Q. 284.
6E v. p . 75.
1Ev. p. 90.
8 E v . pp. 97-99.
9Q. 222.
                                           THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                              x ix



Malcolm George assured the Committee1that ‘if away fans are treated in a less courteous way,
for whatever reason, then my Association or the police service in general certainly would not
countenance that under any circumstances’. We welcome this, and we have ourselves seen police
officers behaving with absolute propriety, and indeed friendliness to visiting fans. As one of our
witnesses from the National Federation of Football Supporters’ Clubs commented ‘at some
grounds, the police are absolutely fantastic, they really are’.2 This Committee has a high regard
for the professionalism of the police, and for the senior and junior officers we have met who are
concerned with the policing of football. Videos we have seen of incidents at matches leave us in
no doubt that the police have good cause to feel threatened by some of those who go to football
matches. But it is important for police officers as for the general public to appreciate that the
overwhelming majority of fans, home and away, are law-abiding and have a right to be treated with
respect and dignity by the police.
6. Inconsistency by the Police
  53. A particular complaint made to us often was that the different police forces and, within
police forces, the different police ground commanders were inconsistent. A variety of witnesses
complained of these inconsistencies. The FSA told us that ‘acceptable behaviour at one ground
could be an arrestable offence at another’; the National Federation of Football Supporters’ Clubs
thought that, if anything, the Taylor Report had exacerbated differences; the Association of
Football League Referees and Linesmen called for a ‘greater consensus’ in police practice, and the
Aston Villa branch of the Football League Executive Staffs’ Association told us that
               ‘it is very obvious that different police forces adopt different attitudes and this can
               create problems both for the travelling or occasional supporter and for individual
               clubs’.
Examples of variation within forces were given graphically by Mrs Hartland of the National
Federation of Football Supporters’ Clubs, and another witness from the Federation, who had
done duty as a Special Constable at Wembley, also told us that different ground commanders had
different approaches to policing the same ground. This point was confirmed by Bolton
Wanderers’ staff when they wrote that ‘new match Commanders are running the matches. Each
one appears to have his own method of policing’.3
  54. Unsurprisingly, an alternative view was presented by the police. Sir James Anderton
expressed himself strongly in favour of flexibility; he thought that if ‘one particular force or
ground commander adopts a slightly more heavy-handed approach’ then this was ‘usually based
on very hard experience’, and he told us: ‘we do have to be flexible and we cannot create ground
rules which would be automatically applicable to every situation’.4 The police call for flexibility
was endorsed by Lord Ferrers, who set his face against any attempt to impose uniformity.5
   55. In another context, the Chairman of the FLA told us that ‘every ground is a different
place, and every ground has its own ethos, its own supporters, its own history’.6 The tough
approach of the police in Glasgow would not be appropriate in Torquay, and, as one of the FSA
witnesses, who was a serving Merseyside officer, told us ‘what might be considered profane and
obscene in rural Sussex, is part of the every day vocabulary in down town Liverpool’.7 Policing
Wimbledon may not be the same as policing Chelsea, just as the streets of Brixton are policed in
the same manner but with a different sensibility from the streets of Hampstead. Individual ground
commanders should know their supporters and their grounds and police them accordingly. There
is, of course, always room for individual commanders to learn from others, and the conferences
of commanders and national training courses will help spread best practice. Nevertheless
individual fans should know as far as possible what to expect when they attend a match. Fans
should be aware of the sorts of activity which are unacceptable, and of the way in which they can
expect to be treated by the police. For this reason, we recommend that ACPO and ACPO(S)
initiate discussions between the police, supporters’ organisations and the Football Licensing
Authority with the aim of preparing a national statement of good practice for police to follow when
dealing with supporters. We further recommend that individual Chief Officers should ensure that
individual grounds are policed on different occasions so far as possible in the same way.

‘Q. 232.
2Q. 117.
         96, 102, 178; QQ. 106-7, Ev. p. 90.
3E v . p p .
4QQ. 220-6.
5QQ. 338, 395.
6Q. 380.
7Q. 99.
XX                                             SECOND REPORT FROM



7. Police/supporter and police/club dialogue
   56. The police also have a duty to promote dialogue with the football authorities and football
spectators. A great deal has already been achieved. The Football League told us that liaison and
co-operation’ between clubs and police had ‘increased dramatically and NFIU wrote of a good
relationship between them and the FA and League.2 The AMA told us that co-operation was
generally good with the wealthy clubs.3 However the Police Superintendents Association pointed
out that there was a conflict of interest between clubs and police, and much yet remains to be
attended to’.4 We endorse the need for continued constructive dialogue between ACPO and the
NFIU and the national football authorities, and between each individual club and the local ground
commander.
   57. It is rather more difficult for the police to be sure that they are hearing the opinions of
all spectators. The FSA was critical of the ‘lack of football supporters in senior management in
the police’.5 We suspect that this is unfair. Nevertheless, the police can do a great deal to improve
liaison with fans by establishing close contact with the two national supporters organisations, the
FSA and the National Federation of Football Supporters’ Clubs. The Home Office and ACPO
told us of regular liaison between the organisations and the police at a national level,6 and the
British Transport Police have organised bi-monthly meetings.7 Liaison at the local level has not
been so successful, and there was particular criticism of some Midlands police forces for
unwillingness to co-operate with supporters’ organisations or ever to meet them.8 We took this
matter up with Sir James Anderton, who assured us9 that ACPO was ‘in the process of advising
all chief constables and all ground commanders and force football liaison officers of the local
points of contact with the representatives of the Football Supporters’ Associations’. We welcome
 this move, and recommend that all chief officers ensure that there is a regular system of liaison
between supporters’ organisations and local ground commanders.
8. Police Training
   58. If best practice so far as supporter liaison is concerned were spread throughout the
country, there would be little cause for complaint. This is true of very many areas of policing.
For this reason, we have always endorsed the need for a first-rate system of national police
training.10 We were pleased to hear of the work at the four national centres for the regular training
of ground commanders, and of other initiatives in this area, including the work of the N FIU in
helping this training process.11 We expect this momentum to continue in the future.

                                           E. Police Numbers and Costs
 1. Background
    59. The criticisms of the police which the Taylor report contained have caused a major
 re-assessment of the police role at matches. No police commander wishes to be condemned at a
 future inquest or inquiry for not having implemented the Taylor recommendations. A natural
 reaction by police commanders has been to increase the numbers of police officers at grounds. The
 Football League referred12to ‘... a more inflexible attitude being adopted by some senior officers
 resulting in the use of more officers than might hitherto have been the case, and the Leicester
 Football Club branch of the Football League Executive Staffs’ Association13told us that ‘the only
 danger now is the natural one of over-policing’. We are aware of apparently ludicrous levels of
 policing: one of our Members, for example, witnessed nine police guarding two Torquay
  supporters at Halifax.
   60. The police presence costs a great deal of money, as we mentioned earlier.14 The obvious
 question arises of who should pay: is the policing of football part of the police s public

 {Ev. p. 83.
 2Ev. p. 37.
 3£ v .   p. 106.
 *Ev. p. 55.
  5Q. 116.
  6 £ v . pp. 9, 51.
  1Ev. p. 71.
  t Ev. p. 98; QQ. 112-5.
  9Q. 222.
   10Higher Police Training and the Police Staff College, HC 110, Third Report, Session 1988-89.
   “ QQ. 305-6; Ev. p. 39; QQ. 393-4.
   l2Ev. p. 85.
   13E v . p. 87.
   14see para 6.
                                         th e   HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                             xxi



responsibility for the preservation of law and order and therefore a proper c arge upon e
taxpayer and community charge payer, or should the cost of policing fall upon t ose P^va e
individuals and bodies which benefit from the game, that is the clubs and the fans.    oo    is
to pay for its policing, what contribution should it make, what can be done to cut down e cos ,
and what power should football have to regulate the cost?
2. Policing outside the ground
   61.      It was accepted by our witnesses that the costs of policing outside grounds was a general
charge upon the public.1 It is perhaps most obvious in the case of the British Transport m ice,
where we were told that ‘football duties have serious resource implications and account tor an
appreciable part of the Force’s overall budget’, but that it was ‘unlikely’ that British Rail made
any profit from its football-related business. The cost of policing football trains is thus a charge
upon British Rail and ultimately upon ordinary railway passengers.2 In the case ot Home umce
police forces, the cost of escorting fans from city centres to matches, dealing with match-related
traffic, sending spotter officers to away matches, preventing crime and disorder in city centres atter
games and a host of other activities which are football-related are met from the forces own
budgets. As Sir James Anderton told us:3 ‘if you look at the total cost of the police in the
community at most of our games, the average game, we only ever recover about 30 per cent ot
 the total cost of policing from that particular club’. It would not be feasible to apportion these
 charges to clubs, and we recommend no change in current arrangements for paying or
 football-related policing outside and away from football grounds.
3. Policing inside grounds
 (i) Should the clubs pay more?
   62. The costs of policing inside grounds have, however, become a matter of much greater
 controversy Section 15 of the Police Act 1964 allows for the provision at a chief constable s
 discretion of what are called ‘special police services’ within his force area at private premises
 subject to the payment of a charge determined by the Police Authority. S m ikrprovisionsappy
 in London and in Scotland. This is the basis under which the police charge for their presence
 at a variety of events, from private dances to airports. It is also under this section that soccer
 clubs are charged for the policing inside their grounds.
   63. Taylor discovered that there was wide variation in the way in which section 15 ch^rges
 were assessed.4 He thought that a ‘more consistent and businesslike approach should be
 adopted, and recommended that ‘police authorities should review the charges they make to clubs
 for the costs of policing inside grounds so as to ensure that realistic charges are made. TheHo
 Office should take steps to ensure consistency of practice, subject to local discretion and the nee
 to have regard to local circumstances’. In July 1990, the Home Office issued a draft circular which
 advised police authorities to recover as far as practicable the full costs of providing police officers
 inside grounds.5 As Lord Ferrers told us,6 ‘it is our view at the Home Office that P °^ in g °f
 football matches within the football stadium should be paid for and should be paid for at the full
  cost’.
    64.           The view of central government was expressed in the circular in the following terms.
              ‘It has been the view of successive Governments since 1968 that the costs of special
              services should be paid in full by those using the service and that no part of these costs
              should be allowed to add to the general level of police expenditure and thus to the burdens
              of taxpayers or ratepayers. Charges should be reviewed and adjusted as necessary at
               least annually. The aim in principle should be to recover the full cost of those police
               officers who are deployed at football matches solely within the ground.
   and the draft circular made the following recommendations:
           (a) The aim in principle should be to recover the full costs of all police officers deployed
               to duties solely within the ground at football matches.

   ‘Football League, Q. 55; Lord Ferrers, Q. 337.
   2Ev. pp. 69, 74.
   3Q. 261.
   4Cm 962, para 210.
   5E v. p . 7.
    Q. 337.
x x ii                                            SECOND REPORT FROM



          (b) Charging policies should be reviewed to ensure that there is a direct link between
              deployment and charges.
           (c) In cases where it would clearly be unrealistic to require a club to meet the full costs of
               policing inside the ground, local discretion may be exercised to reduce the scale ot
               charges.
           (d) It should, however, be made clear in such cases that the club will be expected to take
               active steps (eg the provision of more effective stewarding arrangements) to reduce e
                levels of policing needed inside the ground.
Comments which have been received on the draft are currently under consideration in the Home
Office.1
   65.     While the Home Office draft circular was out for consultation, the Audit Commission
published in November the seventh of its occasional Police Papers, entitled Taking Care of the
Coppers: Income Generation by Provincial Police Forces.2 The paper argued that provincial police
forces were ‘overlooking potentially significant sources of income’ by undercharging private
bodies for police work, by confused charging policies and by poor administration of the charging
process. The Commission called for greater consistency and central guidance. Special attention
was drawn to the costs of policing football matches, and it was estimated that provincial police
forces subsidised football ‘by well over £2 million a year’. Hourly rates for officers varied between
forces from £18 to £26 and the number of spectators per officer ranged from 20 to 320. In one
case 101 officers were deployed and 7 paid for. The combination of these cases meant that charges
per spectator in the 1988-89 season varied by a factor of 9 between clubs. In December 1990,
the Football Trust published new figures for the costs of policing league football matches in the
 1989-90 season. Charges per spectator ranged from 80p at Millwall to lOp at Preston North End.
The charge at Sheffield Wednesday (which was then in the First Division) was 16p. Working on
 the premise that ‘it is a matter of good practice to charge the full cost for resources , the Audit
 Commission argued that ‘it is important ... that clubs are charged the proper price . ine
 Commission did, however, acknowledge that there ‘were some major issues of principle about the
 boundaries of private and public service’. It is clear that one aim of the Paper was to stimulate
 a debate as to what the core public role of police forces should be.
    66. There has thus been pressure from a number of directions which would result in football
  paying more for its policing. That it should do so was endorsed by a number of our police
  witnesses. The Police Superintendents’ Association told us that
                         ‘police will argue that they are forced to commit resources to support the private
                         industry of football to a level which would be seen as quite inappropriate were it to be
                         envisaged in connection with any other branch of the leisure or entertainment business.

   and the Police Federation called for full re-imbursement of the costs of officers drafted into
   grounds.3 Some witnesses from inside the game also acknowledged the case for paying more. For
   example, the Football League Executive Staffs’ Association at Leicester City Football Club told
   us that ‘... we have been getting policing on the cheap in the p a s t...

    (ii) Better administration and fewer inconsistencies
       67. There are a number of threads in the argument which need to be distinguished. First of
    all, the Committee entirely supports the Audit Commission’s pressure upon the police to
    introduce sensible financial management procedures and to look carefully at the administrative
    arrangem ents for the charges they collect from football clubs and others. It is in no-one s interest
    for money to be wasted by sloppy administrative processes.
      68. The Committee also supports Taylor, the Home Office and the Audit Commission in their
    call for greater consistency between forces in the methods of charging. This was also an aim of
    a number of witnesses from within the game. The Football League Executive Staffs’ Association5

     >HC Deb 10 December 1990, col. 247.
     2published by HMSO.
     3£V. pp. 55 and 62; Q. 270.
     4E   v.   p . 88.
     5/;v. p. 87.
                                                                                                         XX1U
                                         THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE



told us that their members ‘believe that policing charges
which would apply to all League clubs’, and the Association’s Sheffield Wednesday branch argued
that standardization was the only equitable way of ensuring that all clu s w   q              .
Support for greater consistency also came from the Professional Footballers' Assoc.at.on and the
Football League.2 We endorse the proposal for a consistent national charging poll y.

  69. However, as the Football League have argued in a letter to the 1then       Secrettary of
7 November, which was copied to us,3 the Police Act 1964 a P P e a ^ ; e. f ^   ^
Authority to determine the level of charges. Without amending the Act it will not be possiDie
              a mandatory system of changing. The Home Office’s ^ Ungne*
exceptions to the principle of full economic charging also opens the way for continuing
inconsistencies.

(iii) What costs should be borne?
   70.        The best way to avoid these inconsistencies will be by the adoption of a
meets the approval of all those involved. It was clear from our evidence from the clubs and
spectators that an agreed formula cannot involve full economic costing- The
charges which would have to be met are qurte staggering we we e to l dt h at ,n .t a c u e tf U tt
Rotherham vs Wigan fixture the police account was £ 1 0 2 5 in 1 9 8 8 / 9 , £ 1 5 3 7 i n                 6 .
and S i rise to £ 6 4 3 4 (in present day terms) in 1 9 9 4 .= According to the Football Trust n
 1 9 8 9 / 9 0 charges rose by 4 2 . 5 per cent compared with the 1 9 8 8 / 8 9 season             P.          7
the case of the First Division. Increases of this magnitude are rightly described                     g g
t t e ^ t S S i o n ’s arguments would appear to lead to the
 afford to pay for policing, that is bad luck and they should go to the                 T t a isJtaargum ent
 o f acco u n ta n ts We do not think that it is practical politics: a town cannot be deprived        ......
 dub because the bill for policing bankrupts it. It would hardly be conducive to gCKKi police/community
 relations for this to happen since the police would be blamed for the closure.




 pPISllIIiif
  close season.
     7?      Secondly clubs have no say in the number of police who attend a ground. U nderthe
  Safety o f Sports                                                              dub? are a ^ e v e d that
  discretion
  dEcretion as to the
                    me number
                       —      ot
                              - om
                                 ™                     fce havc this w klative lone-stop.
                                                                     legislative            Private sector
                                                                                 lo„g-stop. Pri
                                                                                              : believe that


   This does not mean that we suppo a c a g       should be prepared to justify the numbers
   Act. The Football League* p r o p . A e pohce should be                               ^ ^
   which they consider are requir .               i d threat an(j that so long as the police
   numbers who attend matches on the basi; of the                         th a f‘... if there is
   decide on numbers, they are performi g p           reason police have a responsibility to

    between pub lij and private responsibilities is not as clear as some nught wrsh.

    'Ev. p. 90.
    2£V. p. 91; Q. 53.
    3not printed.
    4eg QQ. 53, 169.
     5Q. 51.
     6 Press Release, 13 December 1990.
     ’Football League letter to the Home Secretary.
     8 £ v . p. 84.
     9Q. 367.
XXIV                                   SECOND REPORT FROM



   73. Furthermore, it is at least questionable whether Taylor intended there to be a move
towards full economic costing. Certainly we think it is hard to believe that he intended his policing
recommendations to be a financial incubus on the game. The Football League argued the
distinction between Taylor’s proposals and those of the government,1and the Chairman of the
FLA said of Taylor that ‘the word he used was ‘realistic’. Now, he is no mean lawyer and he
chooses his words well. If he had meant an economic charge he would have said so. He chose
to use the word ‘realistic’ and that is certainly not synonymous with the way that others have
interpreted it’.2
  74. Finally, we note that the future of one source of funds for clubs for policing inside their
grounds is uncertain. The Football Trust has since 1985 had the policy of helping with policing
charges: grand aid of 50 per cent is paid for the first £50,000,40 per cent for the next £25,000 and
30 per cent for the final £25,000. No grant is paid on charges over £100,000. Ominously, in view
of the rise in charges, the Trust announced in December 1990 that it intended to ‘review its policy
on providing support for police charges’.3 We consider that it would be inappropriate to charge
dubs the full cost of policing when that cost can ultimately be determined by one party to the bargain
alone. We therefore recommend that the costs of policing a football match should be assessed on the
marginal costs of doing so.
(iv) An equitable method o f charging
  75. We should like to see a charging formula which reflects clubs’ ability to pay and their
record in taking measures against hooliganism. At the same time, clubs themselves should take
on greater responsibility for stewarding inside grounds and leave the police with responsibility for
law and order functions only. We shall return to this second point later. On the first point, we
favour a simple system of paying the police a percentage of gate receipts.
   76. We found some support for this idea among our witnesses. The Police Superintendents’
Association argued for something similar in proposing ‘a customer safety levy’ which ‘could be
increased or decreased according to the problems caused by a particular club’. They thought that
a levy would give an incentive to all to reduce hooliganism.4 Mr Sandford of the Football League
said that ‘a charge based upon expense per spectator’ would be ‘realistic, consistent and
business-like’, and was prepared to endorse the principle of paying a percentage of gate receipts.5
Some doubts were expressed. The FSA was hostile to the idea of supporters paying extra charges
for policing,6 but appear to have disregarded the fact that policing costs, if paid by the club, will
always ultimately come out of the supporters’ pockets. A Police Federation witness was
concerned that a flat percentage charge would be unfair, especially as a similar system would need
to apply to other sports,7 and Lord Ferrers told us that ‘if you pay a percentage of the takings,
 that is convenient to the club because it knows where it stands, but, of course, almost certainly
 that will not provide sufficient funds’.8
   77. The consistent national formula we have in mind for charging for the police presence at
grounds would have two elements. A percentage of the takings would be paid to the police. The
minimum percentage could be set so that the total raised would be perhaps 20 per cent higher than
the total national bill for policing at present. Wealthy clubs with large gates would in consequence
generally pay rather more for policing and smaller, poorer clubs might pay no more than they do
at present. However, the percentage of takings would also vary within fixed parameters to reflect
the club’s record in taking measures against hooliganism. Because we want to see football putting
its own house in order, we do not wish to see the badly run clubs being let off the hook. A club
with a history of arrests, with a number of its fans subject to exclusion orders and which has done
little to curb hooliganism or police itself could be charged more, and other clubs less. Percentages
could vary season by season and be set by the Police Authority in consultation with the FLA. We
recommend that the Home Office withdraw its current draft drcular, and produce new proposals for
r h a r g in g sports clubs for policing on the basis of varying percentages of the gate takings.

    78. We appreciate that a formula for police charges for football could not be drawn up in
 isolation from the policing of other private events. There is clearly a case for the organisers of

 'Q. 53.
 2Q. 349.
 3Press Release, 13 December 1990.
 4 £ v . p. 55.
 *QQ. 53, 57, 59.
 6Q. 169.
 7Q. 269.
 *Q. 341.
                                            THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                                   XXV



some events (for example, a dance) to pay the full costs of any police who attend under section
15 provisions. We note that the costs of some other private events, such as party political
conferences, are met entirely from public funds. A recent parliamentary reply disclosed that the
additional costs of policing the two main parties’ conferences between 1987 and 1990 was almost
£5.5 million, but that none of this cost had been met by the parties concerned.1 Sports events seem
to us to fall neither into the category of public nor private events, and it is for this reason that
we favour the percentage of the gate formula. Different percentages from those at soccer would
clearly need to be applied to assess the costs of policing the two rugby codes or cricket or motor
racing where the problems are much less. Since we have endorsed the principle of consistency in
the case of football, while doubting whether clubs can or should pay the full cost, we believe that
section 15 of the Police Act 1964 may now need review. We recommend that the Home Office
consider whether section 15 should be amended to reflect more clearly the desirability of charging
differential costs for policing private events depending on the value to the public of the event.

4. Stewarding

   79. Irrespective of the method of charging for police inside grounds, it is desirable for clubs
to shift responsibility for stewarding tasks from the police to private stewards employed by the
club. The economic case is clear. Stewarding will reduce the police costs under the formulae
proposed by us or by the Government. There is also an issue of principle: the police should be
present at football matches as police officers, protecting public safety, preventing crime and
arresting those guilty of criminal offences. The existing ambivalence of their position, agents of
the club or public officials, disturbs them as it disturbs us.2 To take an obvious example, the
searching of spectators inside grounds should be undertaken by stewards, as airline passengers are
searched by private security firms. But if a drink container is discovered or an offensive weapon,
the law has been broken, and it is the job of the police to deal with the offender. There are a
number of ground regulations, the contravention of which is not a criminal offence, for example,
using radios, climbing pylons, entering members’ enclosures without being a member and so on.3
It should be the job of stewards, not the police to enforce these regulations. It should certainly
be the stewards’ responsibilities to man gates, direct spectators to places, keep gangways clear and
to perform other tasks which assist public safety. As the Scottish Police Federation4 argued,
‘higher profile stewarding supported by low profile policing is the way forward’.

  80. Taylor favoured a shift towards stewarding rather than policing, and made the important
recommendation (which the Committee fully endorse) that there should be a written statement of
intent between club and police outlining their respective functions for club control and safety.5
But he also drew attention to the limited capacity and reliability of many of the stewards at present
employed. Our witnesses were without exception in favour of better stewarding. Similar points
were made to us in Holland. Sir James Anderton called for ‘properly appointed and trained
stewards’, and the Police Superintendents’ Association and Police Federation also referred to the
need for ‘competent and effective’ and ‘well-trained and effective’ stewards.6 Lord Ferrers
referred to the use of competent stewards as ‘far more economic and far more satisfactory’,7and
the Scottish Police Federation told us that

                     ‘stewards now require to be younger, better trained and of sufficient numbers to be fully
                     effective. They require to be well disciplined, well briefed and capable of working in
                     close liaison with the police.’8

    81. Some clubs already employ efficient stewards. The Scottish Police Federation went on
 to tell us that they ‘were most impressed by the approach of Glasgow Rangers FC’,9 and in our
 visit to Glasgow we also saw an effective division of responsibility between the Strathclyde police,
 a private security firm with experience of a wide range of public order situations and club stewards.
 The Professional Footballers Association also referred to the fact that ‘bad language ... has been

 'HC Deb 11 December 1990, c. 354.
 2E v .
      p. 62.
 3£V. p. 86.
 4Ev. p. 66.
 5Cm 962, pp. 36-8.
 6Q. 260; Ev. pp. 57 and 62.
 7Q. 369.
 8£   v.   p. 66.
 9E\       p . 66.
xxvi                                   SECOND REPORT FROM



dealt with most efficiently by private stewarding at Manchester United FC’,1and the FA drew
our attention to moves to employ efficient and professional stewards at Port Vale, Stoke City and
Leicester City.2
   82. Other clubs need to bring their standards up to those of the best. The Football League
is well aware of this. As its secretary told us3
            ‘most events now are privately stewarded and stewarded very effectively and we in the
            football industry realise that and realise the way forward is to get people used to the
            idea of being stewarded rather than controlled
   We welcome the commitment by ACPO to assist the football authorities in designing a proper
training package.4 However, Sir James Anderton pointed out that it is the clubs’ responsibility
to appoint stewards, not that of the police.5 It will not do for the present casual ‘Dad’s army
of often elderly, mostly untrained and woefully under%paid stewards to take responsibility for
high profile stewarding. The new edition of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the Green
Guide)6 sets exacting standards for stewards. We recommend that the FLA monitor carefully the
way in which the stewarding provisions of the Green Guide are followed, and not hesitate to use their
powers against a club which does not meet the requisite standard.

                                    F. The Role of Government
1. Offences
   83. One of the duties of the government is to ensure that a framework of legislation supports
the police and clubs in their efforts to curb hooliganism. Our Scottish witnesses emphasised the
flexibility of the common law in Scotland. The Scottish Office told us, for example, that ‘the
common law provisions of breach of the peace can catch a wide range of factors ; that by virtue
of common law powers, a police officer has power to arrest on suspicion’ and that ‘the maximum
penalty for common law offences is not defined by statute and is limited only by the maximum
sentencing powers of the court’.7 By contrast, the offence of breach of the peace in England and
Wales ‘has got to be immediate and not distanced from the offence itself8 and can lead only to
a bind-over.
  84. Popplewell considered the Scottish common law powers in his Report9 following the
Bradford disaster. He concluded:
             ‘Quite clearly a new offence in England and Wales of disorderly conduct or breach of
             the peace on the lines of the Scottish common law offence, would be of substantial
             assistance in dealing with hooliganism. It would avoid the problem of trying to define
             all the different types of behaviour which give rise to disorder at football matches and
             would undoubtedly enable the police to take action much earlier than they can under
             the present law. This offence should be confined to sports grounds where the disorderly
             conduct is likely to have such a devastating effect on crowd safety. Disorderly conduct
             would clearly include throwing a missile, running onto the pitch, seeking to climb over
              or to pull down a perimeter fence, shining a mirror towards a batsman, throwing bottles
              or cans onto the field of play, or interfering with a greyhound or horse race. I suggest
              that it should be triable summarily and there should be a power of arrest. I recommend,
              therefore, that consideration should be given to creating an offence of disorderly
              conduct at a sports ground.’
   85. The Government did not adopt Popplewell’s recommendation. They argued to Taylor
 that it was wrong in principle to treat sports grounds as a special case and that section 5 of the
 Public Order Act 1986 in any case covered the mischief. Taylor was not satisfied on either of these
 points,10 but he did not agree with Popplewell’s proposal for a catch-all offence. He instead
 recom m en ded three new specific offences at designated sports grounds of

 ]Ev. p. 91.
 2Q. 16.
 3Q. 23.
 4Ev. p. 50; QQ. 18, 297.
 SQ. 297.
 6HMSO 1990.
 1Ev. pp. 24 & 26.
 8Q. 203.
 9Cmnd 9710, para. 4.74.
  l0Cm 962, pp. 50-51.
•   -



            (i) throwing a missile
                                                THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                           x x v ii




           (ii) chanting obscene or racialist abuse
          (iii) going on to a pitch without reasonable excuse.
    He also recommended the creation of a further offence of selling tickets for and on the day of a
    football match without authority from the home club to do so. According to Lord Ferrers,1
    Taylor preferred specific offences because ‘it would act as more of a deterrent if people knew
    exactly what was outlawed’. The then Home Secretary announced in the debate on the Queen’s
    Speech that the government accepted Taylor’s recommendations and proposed to ‘bring
    proposals before the House as soon as parliamentary time allows’.2
       86.    Our witnesses were largely supportive of the Taylor recommendations, the main
    dissenting voice coming from the Football Writers Association3 who warned that specific,
    football-related offences might be counter-productive. There was widespread police support for
    anti-ticket tout legislation,4 while the National Federation of Football Supporters’ Clubs
    expressed themselves strongly in favour of making pitch invasion illegal. The Football League
    believed that the proposed offences within grounds would have ‘a significant deterrent effect on
    would-be offenders’, while they pointed to the ‘potential for disorder’ which ticket-touting
    represented.5 The FA was in favour of all four Taylor offences, and Sir James Anderton regretted
    that they had not been included in the current Criminal Justice Bill.6 The Aston Villa branch of
    the Football League Executive Staffs’ Association also drew our attention to the speed with which
    some clubs had pulled down perimeter fencing, while ‘we have had no corresponding support from
    the law which makes infringement of the pitch an offence’.7
       87.     Although most of our evidence referred to the Taylor offences, the Police
    Superintendents’ Association and the AMA both commended Popplewell’s catch-all offence as
    well.8 It is clear that Popplewell intended all the mischiefs dealt with under the breach of the peace
    legislation in Scotland to be capable of being arrestable offences in England and Wales. Under
    Taylor’s proposals, climbing flood-light pylons or climbing over perimeter fences would not be
    criminal offences. We recommend that the Government reconsider the need for the catch-all offence
    of disorderly conduct at sports grounds.
       88. This Committee is not anxious to create unnecessary new crimes or to clog up the courts
    any further. It does not wish to stymie young men’s futures with criminal records, and certainly
    has no desire to increase the prison population. Nevertheless, we cannot ignore the evidence from
    Scotland that the policy of arrest rather than ejection has improved the behaviour of Scottish fans,
    and the widespread view that there is an important deterrence factor through the existence of
    criminal offences. We support the introduction of the four Taylor offences. We pay particular
    regard to the advice of Assistant Chief Constable Malcolm George that ‘if we have specific
    criminal law under which the police could operate at the turnstile, on the concourse and on the
    terraces, that would be of great value to the policeman operating in the execution of his duty’.9
    The creation of new criminal offences will also help emphasise the difference in role between
    stewards and the police. It would not be practical for the police to attempt to arrest all those who
    committed every minor offence, and, if pitch invasion were an offence, very few of those who went
    on to a pitch could possibly be arrested. Often, too, we would expect police officers to warn
    offenders about their conduct or, if they arrest them and discover that they have no criminal
    record, consider dealing with them by means of a caution. We believe that there should be no delay
    in bringing the Taylor offences on to the statute book.
       89. We took up with Lord Ferrers Sir James Anderton’s disappointment that the Criminal
    Justice Bill did not include the Taylor offences. He told us that the Bill ‘is to deal with criminal
    justice and the way in which it operates and does not include the making or creation of new
    offences’.10 We understand that it would indeed be outside the scope of the Bill to propose the

    ‘Q. 310.
    2HC Deb 12 November, c. 355.
    i Ev. p. 104.
    4eg Scottish Association of Police Superintendents, Ev. p. 58; Police Federation, Ev. p. 63.
    sEv. p. 83.
    6QQ. 64, 200.
    1Ev. p. 88.
    8£V. pp. 56 and 105.
    9Q. 214.
     10Q. 307.
x x v iii                                         SECOND REPORT FROM



creation of new offences. Lord Ferrers instead suggested on three occasions1 that a Private
Member’s Bill might be a suitable vehicle for giving the Taylor proposals legislative effect. Since
there is no immediate possibility of government legislation, we believe that we should be letting
down the witnesses who gave evidence to us if we did not ourselves bring forward a Bill. Members
of the Committee will therefore seek to present the Football (Offences) Bill on the day of
publication of this Report. We are confident that the Bill will be uncontroversial and that it will
receive government support. We recommend that the House pass the Bill without delay.

2. Penalties for Convicted Hooligans

(i) Exclusion orders
   90. Under Part IV of the Public Order Act 1986, orders which have the effect of excluding
offenders from professional football matches may be made by courts against persons who commit
football-related offences. The orders may be for an indefinite period, but not less than three
months. Breach of an exclusion order is punishable by a fine or imprisonment.2 On 9 January
1991, just under 1,000 exclusion orders were current. The Committee believes that exclusion
orders are a very important method which is available to the courts when dealing with football
hooligans. There are, however, a number of measures which need to be taken to render them more
effective.
   91. First of all, those excluded must fear detection if they contravene the order. The Home
Office told us that ‘the rigorous enforcement of exclusion orders is not easy to achieve’,3 but we
are confident that the use of football intelligence officers, the spotter system, CCTV and, most of
all, the NFIU can make the system work. Secondly, there must be an adequate remedy against
breach of an exclusion order. Sir James Anderton told us that courts had extended the length of
exclusion orders against those who re-offended. He approved this practice in principle, but
believed that courts were acting ultra vires in doing so.4 We were assured by a number of police
officers whom we met who had experience of policing football that a longer exclusion order was
more feared than any other penalty. We recommend that the law be amended so that breach of an
exclusion order may be punished by the imposition of a consecutive exchision order.

        92.           In August 1988, the Home Office issued a circular to justices, police forces and the CPS
 reminding them of the existence of exclusion orders and how they were quite ineffective if
 substantial periods of exclusion fell within the summer close season. Nevertheless, we heard
 complaints from a number of sources about the way in which the courts only sporadically imposed
 exclusion orders, and how some quite ludicrous exclusion orders had been passed. On some
 occasions, contrary to the provisions of the Act, magistrates purported to pass orders banning
 offenders from one club only, and there were even instances of offenders being excluded from an
 away ground for three months though they were unlikely to travel there again for another year.
 The general view was perhaps best expressed by the National Federation of Football Supporters
 Clubs, who told us that the current position ‘makes a mockery of both the legislation and the
 judiciary’.5 Criticism was also voiced by the NFIU, the Police               Federation, Police
 Superintendents’ Association and ACPO, as well as the Football League.6

    93. Lord Ferrers also believed that it was important that exclusion orders ‘should be used
  by the courts whenever appropriate’, but he seemed unwilling to offer an article to the journal of
  the Magistrates’ Association on the advantages of exclusion orders.7 We believe that every means
  should be used to make magistrates, their clerks and the CPS aware of what exclusion orders are
  and how they should best be used. Football clubs should invite them to their grounds, and police
  commanders who have not done so should brief their local bench on the work of football
  intelligence officers and the NFIU. We are well aware that many magistrates do implement the
  law in a sensible way, but it is unacceptable for the most effective remedy against hooligans to be
  ignored or misused by other benches. We pursued by correspondence with the Magistrates’
  Association the criticisms of them which we had received. They argued that ‘magistrates are
  aware that orders made must be enforceable. It is questionable whether a ban covering all grounds

   'QQ. 307, 309, 313.
  2E v .
       pp. 4-5.
   3£   v.   p . 6.
  “Q. 175.
  5£ v . p. 103.
  6£ v . p p . 38, 63, 57, 47, 84.
  7QQ. 319-320.
                                        THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                                x x ix



would be enforceable’.1 We believe that the magistrates should trust the police’s professional
endorsement of exclusion orders. We recommend that the Home Office again issue a circular to
magistrates and clerks to justices drawing attention to the availability, efficacy and appropriate use
of the exclusion order.

   94. There is one problem with exclusion orders which we think is less susceptible to easy
solution. The NFIU told us that ‘persons who are excluded often attend the vicinity of the ground
and engage in pre- and post-match disorder’.2 Legislation to ban those subject to exclusion order
from the vicinity of grounds is not really practicable; it would not be possible to police, say, a mile
‘exclusion zone’. What can be done away from the grounds was illustrated by the evidence of the
British Transport Police: if they are aware that persons subject to exclusion orders intend to travel
on a football train, they warn them that they will not be able to enter the ground, and pass on
to the force concerned the fact that such people are travelling.3
(ii) Restriction Orders

   95. Under Part II of the Football Spectators Act 1989, which came into force on 24 April
1990, restriction orders can be made against those convicted of football-related offences.
Restriction orders have the effect of preventing people from attending key matches outside
England and Wales by requiring them to report to a police station at the time the match is being
played. The period of restriction is for two years, or five years if the person is given a sentence
of immediate imprisonment. Under the Act, it is possible by agreement for offenders found guilty
outside England and Wales of ‘corresponding offences’ to be made subject to restriction orders.
Agreements have so far been reached with Italy and Scotland, and one is being negotiated with
Sweden.4 Very few restriction orders have been made. 14 were imposed by Chesterfield
Magistrates’ Court in connection with the Chesterfield vs Grimsby match on 5 May, and when
the Home Office evidence was submitted on 28 September only 1 other order had been made. By
the time NFIU submitted its evidence, 19 orders were in existence. This figure had not increased
by the date we took oral evidence from Lord Ferrers (28 November).5 At the latest date for which
we have figures (9 January 1991), there were still only 19 orders. Both Lord Ferrers and the NFIU
told us that the system was too young to have been tested.6

   96. Although we are prepared to give the legislation the benefit of the doubt, we believe that
some improvements are clearly necessary if the system is to be effective. Since restriction orders
are intended primarily to deal with those who travel abroad, it is first of all vital for magistrates
in this country to know when sentencing an offender for a football-related offence whether or not
that offender is likely to travel. Someone has to make the magistrates aware of this. It will not
be apparent from the offender’s criminal record if he has travelled outside England and Wales to
football matches. It is only likely to be known to his home police force or to the NFIU whether
he is a potential troublemaker either in Scotland or abroad. We recommend that in the case of
serious football-related oifences, the police ensure that the Crown Prosecution Service are aware of
the accused’s likelihood to travel to football matches outside England and Wales, and that where
there are grounds for imposing a restriction order, the CPS draw the court’s attention to its powers
to do so.

  97. If a person has committed a football-related offence outside England and Wales, that is
the best justification of all for ensuring that he does not travel again to football abroad. This is
why it is most important that the ‘corresponding offences’ provisions of the Act should work well.
There is no evidence that they do work. When the Committee was in Italy, there was very little
evidence of knowledge of the provisions of the British legislation. Dutch officials had only just
been approached about the possibility of operating the corresponding offences provision in
respect of the Netherlands. The Home Office assured us7 that considerable efforts were made to
draw the attention of the Italian authorities to the new provisions. We are in no position to
adjudicate, but we note that none of the 36 Britons known to the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office as having been convicted during the 1990 World Cup has yet had his conviction confirmed
to the British authorities.

lEv. p. 179.
2Ev. p. 38.
     p. 72.
3£ v .
     p. 5; HC Deb 7 December 1990, cc 229-230 & 242.
4£ v .
5Q. 336.
6Ev. p. 38; Q. 329.
7Footnote to Q. 331.
XXX                                    SECOND REPORT FROM



   98. One problem with the corresponding offences provisions is not easily soluble. We learnt
from the police in Italy that the speedy deportation of offenders was seen as a preferable response
to disorder than embarking on the lengthy and expensive process of securing convictions. This
approach was evident after the violent disturbances at Rimini when 238 Britons were taken into
custody before being expelled, but none was charged. It was obvious from our discussions with
Italian politicians that the different characteristics of the Italian criminal justice system do not
allow the speedy justice which is possible in the English courts. Despite this, as the Home Office
argued, ‘the extent to which the ‘corresponding offences’ provisions can be brought to bite will
depend in large part on the readiness of foreign jurisdictions to prosecute and convict British
hooligans’.1 We recommend that British Ministers and officials continue to apply pressure in
TREVI to encourage countries with different criminal justice systems to see the value for themselves
and other countries of securing convictions of British football hooligans.

(iii) Attendance Centre Orders

   99. Taylor recommended that attendance centre orders should be made available to the
courts for offenders aged over 21, and that their maximum length be increased from 36 to 72
hours. The Government rejected this recommendation, arguing that older offenders would be
disruptive, and that the number of centres would need to be greatly increased.2 The Magistrates’
Association3 called for senior attendance centres throughout the country, and complained that
the courts in some areas did not have the attendance centre option. The Chairman of the FA
endorsed attendance centre orders, but accused the magistrates of not using the existing facility.
Similar points were made by the Football League and others within football.4 Sir James
Anderton told us that ‘whilst in principle some kind of use of an enlarged attendance centre system
could be beneficial from the police point of view’, he saw a number of practical problems,
principally the need for attendance centres to open each Saturday and for them to be manned by
people other than police officers.5

   100. We are aware that the Police Federation has long opposed the idea that the police should
be ‘the rubbish bin to which all ‘awkward’ tasks should be allotted’,6 and we were attracted by
the view of the Scottish Association of Police Superintendents who argued that:7

             ‘Police are already committed [on Saturdays] on operational policing of football
             matches. Reporting centres independent from police control have merits and there may
             be an opportunity to link a reporting order with an obligation to undertake community
             work’.

The White Paper Crime Justice and Protecting the Public* and the Criminal Justice Bill both set
great store by community penalties. We believe that the attendance centre order is the most
appropriate community penalty in the case of football for the simple reason that the centres open
on Saturday afternoons when most matches are played. We agree with the Scottish
Superintendents that there is no need for the police to supervise attendance centres: retired services
personnel, for example, would be excellent at providing the disciplined environment necessary.
We recommend that the government reconsider the Taylor recommendations to extend the scope of
attendance centre orders; that more of these facilities be made available in areas of the country which
do not at present have them, and that alternative methods of staffing them be explored.

(iv) Curfews/electronic tagging

   101. Controversial proposals to deal with offenders by curfew orders, possibly reinforced by
electronic tagging are contained in the Criminal Justice Bill. These follow the endorsement by
Taylor of tagging as a means of dealing with football hooligans.9 Lord Ferrers, while arguing
that the experiment with electronic tagging had shown that the technology worked, told us that
the use of this penalty was only possible ‘where the necessary monitoring arrangements are

xEv. p. 6.
2Ev. p. 8; Q. 318.
3£ v . p. 107.
4QQ. 33, 66, 74, 77; Ev. pp. 84, 89.
5Q. 279.
6Ev. p. 63.
1Ev. p. 59.
8Cm 965.
9Cir. 962, recommendation 73.
                                          THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                                 xxxi



available in the area where the curfew is to apply’.1 It is unlikely that curfews enforced by
electronic tagging are going to play an important part in dealing with football hooligans in the
immediate future.
(v) Disposals: general
  102. The Football League argued that ‘magistrates are generally reluctant to make full use
of the powers available to them’,2 while the British Transport Police from their nation-wide
perspective noted that ‘sentencing practices vary from court to court and differ around the
country’.3 But generally we found little complaint about the way in which the courts dealt with
football hooligans, other than in the area of exclusion orders. While distancing itself from extreme
penalties like corporal punishment (‘flogging’ was recently proposed by one Member of
Parliament as a means of dealing with hooligans),4 the Police Federation called for higher fines
and ‘swingeing penalties’ for those who assaulted the police.5 By contrast, the Police
Superintendents’ Association drew our attention to sentencing over-reaction ‘on the odd
occasion’, and told us that ‘they did not receive the impression there is a general and wide problem
with the sentencing’.6 We do, however, endorse the Police Federation’s proposal that judges and
magistrates should make it their business to attend football matches, as we know that many
have.7
3. Alcohol
   103. There is universal agreement that alcohol, as it can elsewhere, often exacerbates bad
behaviour at football matches. As the Home Office told us ‘consumption of alcohol serves to
make less committed hooligans more inclined towards violent behaviour’.8 The various measures
taken over the years to control alcohol at sports grounds were described in Home Office and
Scottish Office evidence.9 The principal difference between Scotland and England and Wales is
that alcohol is totally banned from football grounds north of the border, while licensing justices
in England and Wales can permit alcohol sales within grounds, though it may not be consumed
or sold within view of the pitch. Taylor10considered anti-alcohol measures, and concluded that
the current law on sales at matches should remain; but bars in the vicinity of a match might be
closed if practical, and that early kick-offs and Sunday matches should also be considered.
   104. There is no sure-fire way of preventing fans who are worse for drink from arriving at
a match. In cities it is impractical to shut all pubs, and in any case off-licences and supermarkets
sell alcohol. Alcohol is banned on football trains, but more and more fans travel in their own cars
and vans. The Committee does, however, believe that there are one or two modest measures which
could be taken to curb drunkenness. First, paradoxically, alcohol sales at grounds themselves may
encourage fans not to turn up late, which is a public safety problem, and not to consume as much
alcohol as possible before they arrive at the ground. At present differing opinions are held on the
arguments for and against bars at grounds,11 but no objective evidence is available. We
recommend that research be undertaken to assess any differences in the level of drunkenness at
grounds where (i) alcohol is not available (ii) low-strength beer is available (ill) ordinary beer is sold.
   105.   Drinking in the streets can be a menace on occasions other than football, and
experimental bye-laws have been tried at a number of towns making it illegal to continue drinking
in designated areas after being warned by a police officer not to do so. One of the participating
towns, Scarborough, designated the streets leading to its football ground as areas to which the
bye-laws applied.12 The FA told us that, if the bye-laws were to become universal, they would
provide a back-up to other restrictions; a similar point of view was expressed by the Police
Superintendents’ Association, and Lord Ferrers described the bye-laws as ‘very su ccessfu l’.13 The
Government announced in October14 that the experimental bye-law is to be made more widely

 'Q . 311.
 2Ev. p. 84.
 3£V. p. 73.
 4HC Deb 13 December c. 1100.
 5 £ v . p. 63.
 6£V. p. 56; Q. 179.
 7Q. 179.
 8£   v.   p . 2.
 9Ev. pp. 4, 21-2.
 l0Cm 962, pp. 43-45.
 “ QQ. 405 ff.
 i2£V. p. 4.
 13£V. pp. 77, 57, Q. 404.
  l press Release, Home Office, 10 October 1990.
x x x ii                                       SECOND REPORT FROM



available. We recommend that local authorities, in consultation with local police commanders, make
full use of this new power where appropriate to cut down on public drinking in the streets near football
matches.
   106. The Bus and Coach Council drew our attention to the successful operation of the
Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 so far as public service vehicles are concerned,
but pointed out that the Act did not apply to private minibuses.1 We understand that current
European Community proposals will widen the definition of public service vehicles so that
privately hired vehicles are covered. We recommend that the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol
Etc) Act 1985 be amended so that all public service vehicles as defined in European law are covered
by the Act.

4. Home Office Inspectorate of Constabulary’s role
   107. The Inspectorate has been charged with examining and improving the efficiency and
standards of the Police Service in England and Wales. The Home Secretary ‘attaches great
importance to the constructive role of the Inspectorate in ... encouraging the sharing of ideas, best
practice and the prompt utilisation of new equipment and techniques’.2 HMIC publish a
‘Directory of Good Practice’ described as a ‘catalogue of ideas, covering a wide field of police
activity and administration’. The directory is a compendium of good practices followed by
various forces, which are thought by HMIC to be worthy of emulation by other forces. We are
concerned that the HMIC Directory contained no section dedicated to the dissemination of good
practice in the policing of football. Indeed the entire section on public order covers only one half
of one page. It is clear from what we were told by the office of HMIC that much is done by
Inspectors to spread best practice during force inspections. However, if no ideas on best practice
relating to the policing of football appear in the published Directory, it is unclear exactly what
is disseminated by Inspectors.
   108. It seems to us desirable for the Inspectorate to have a more pro-active role in the
establishment and promulgation of what is ‘best practice’, not only in policing football but in all
other aspects of police work. A recent report by the Audit Commission3 has criticised the
understaffing and underfunding of the Inspectorate in relation to its exclusive role in the external
scrutiny of forces. The equivalent of only about one twentieth of a percentage point of the
national police budget goes to fund HMIC, and the ratio of Inspectorate staff to manpower is over
three times higher in the Inspectorate of Schools, for example, as it is in HMIC.4 We agree with
the view of the Audit Commission report that HMIC is under-resourced for the role assigned to
it by the Home Office. We hope to look later in the session at the work of the Inspectorate.

 5. International Co-operation
    109. The Home Office told us that the Government regarded ‘its responsibilities as extending
 to international co-operation for the prevention of misbehaviour by our citizens abroad’.5 It was
 apparent from the evidence we received that a great deal of commendable work has taken place
 to co-operate in the policing of international football matches. Initial progress towards an
 integrated European approach was achieved through the European Convention on Spectator
 Violence, signed in 1985. Signatories to the Convention, which include all the major European
 countries with the exception of Germany, undertake to ‘ensure the formulation and
 implementation of measures designed to prevent and control violence and misbehaviour by
 spectators’. In particular, the Convention refers to close co-operation and exchange of
 information between police forces, co-ordination of travel arrangements for away supporters and
 maintenance of stadia which facilitate effective segregation. The Convention also commits
 Parties, whilst respecting existing legal procedures, to ensure that ‘spectators committing acts of
 violence are identified and prosecuted in accordance with the due process of law’. At a rather more
 practical level, the TREVI organisation of law enforcement ministers and officials from EC
 Member states set up in 1987 a network of permanent correspondents to exchange information
 on football policing.6 The permanent correspondent was initially a senior officer of British
 Transport Police, but is currently the head of the NFIU.

  'Ev. p. 177.
  2The role o f HM Inspectorate of Constabulary England and Wales, Home Office 1990.
  3Audit Commission Police Paper No. 8, Effective Policing-emrule Performance Reviews in Police Forces.
  4Audit Commission Report, para. 91.
                                        THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                                      x x x iii



   110. ' The Committee dealt at length with the TREVI organisation in a recent report. We
concluded that TREVI has great value in matters which specifically concern EC states in its
political dimension and in the area of terrorism’ and we recommended that its activities be
restricted to these areas’.2 From our present inquiry, it is clear that bilateral contacts through
the TREVI football correspondent network are useful, and that very valuable Guidelines to
Co-operation in the Policing of International Football Matches’, which are set out in full in the
Minutes of Evidence,3 have been drawn up. However we note two points from our evidence.
First, NFIU drew a distinction between the vital, but somewhat mechanistic, role of exchangi g
travel information, which they described as the TREVI role a n d the other role of exchan^ng
intelligence about international football which was distinct from TREVI. ^ o n d ly , Assista
Chief Constable Malcolm George reminded us of the principal limitation of TREVI. that it
confined to EC Member States, while international football even in Europe has no such narro
restriction.5
   111. The 1985 European Convention was drawn up under the auspices of the Council of
Europe. The Council already contains 24 Member states, and is likely shortly to be joined by
other Eastern European countries. Moreover the Convention is not restricted to Member states
of the Council, and has been signed already by Yugoslavia. There seems to us no reason w y
football correspondent network of TREVI should not be extended to all the Member States ot
the Council of Europe, and why provisions which already exist m the Convention for meetings
of groups of experts should not be used for regular police to police dialogue on the practicalities
of co-operation against travelling hooligans. We understand that British police officers have neve
been present at any meeting which has taken place under the provisions ° f the Convention.^ T
may in part be explained by the fact that the Department of Education a n d Science (until very
recently, the Department of the Environment) and not the Home Office takes the lead in the
 United Kingdom on Convention matters. Police to police meetings w o u ld widen the sco p e for
co-operation, and ensure a network of personal police contacts that would facihtate exchange o
 information and, ultimately when trust is established, intelligence. We are a lso sure that Inteqp
 would be able to play a part in this process, though Interpol is strictly concerned Q a iy w ith c n
 rather than public order matters. We recommend that the networkof football
 extended to all European states which wish to participate. We farther recommend
 responsibility for the Convention should pass from the Department of Education and Science to the
 Home Office.
    112      There are two further practical measures which the signatory status of the European
 Convention could take. We have seen in the United Kingdom how g o o d intelligence at the NFIU
 is vital in fighting hooliganism. We believe that a European register of hooligans should now be
 considered. Intelligence on internationally travelling hooligans could be ex ch an ged through this
 register. We also believe that Member states should try to devise an agreed system of
 collaboration and reciprocal action which will prevent hooligans leaving one country ^
 their activities in another. We have already described how the restriction order in the Umted
  Kingdom has not been effective, and a number of police witnesses p o in ted out that, in any case,
  a restriction order did not prevent a hooligan from leaving England and Wales but merely made
  Wm guilty of an offence if he was absent at the time he should have reported.6 We recommend
  that the United Kingdom government should propose at the next meeting of the Standing Committ
  established under the European Convention (a) the establishment of a European register of footba
  hooligans and (b) an effective means of preventing hooligans from travelling abroad.
    113   Whether an individual match or a series of matches like the World CuP »r 2 g
  Championship is concerned, the most important contacts are those established on a bilateral basis.
  Lord Ferrers emphasised this to us.7 From the Government’s viewpoint,
                    ‘the World Cup in Italy in 1990 showed that co-ordination and advance Pla““ “g ^
                    the governments and the police forces concerned can go a long way to reduce the
                    opportunities for football hooliganism ._____ ________________ ____ __________

   1Practical Police Co-operation in the European Community, Seventh Report, Session 1989-90, HC 363.
   2para. 65.
   ^Ev. pp. 40-44.
   4 £ v . pp. 36-37.

   5Q. 291.
   6 £ v . p p . 38, 63.

    7Q. 331.
x x x iv                                SECOND REPORT FROM



Certainly there was elaborate and careful planning of the World Cup. This is described in the
Memoranda we received.1 Trenchant criticisms were made of Italian policing methods by the
FSA,2 and even ACPO acknowledged that the policing tactics were far heavier than would have
been the case in England.3 English fans were voluble in their complaints of ‘injustice’ and conduct
by Italian police which was a ‘disgrace’.4 It is not, however, our intention to mount a
post-mortem on the policing of the World Cup, except in one regard: the differing tactics
employed by the English and Scottish police.

   114. During the World Cup, there were comparatively fewer incidents involving English fans
than had been anticipated, although 238 were deported after disturbances in Rimini, while 36
supporters were convicted, 8 released pending trial and 23 others detained but later released.5 By
contrast, the Italian police appear to have acted in a much softer manner towards Scottish fans
(who, we understand, were lively and hardly abstemious). Not one of the 20,000 Scots present
in Italy was either deported or arrested.6 We believe that the outgoing role played by the Scottish
police who were present in Italy may have helped to bring this about.

   115.     The English police priority was to provide travel information, intelligence and
photographs of identified hooligans and tactical information.7 The FA reported that ‘the Italian
police were delighted with the quality of information obtained by the covert officers which was
instrumental in preventing serious incidents’.8 However, ACPO told us that ‘there was no role in
the English police operation for liaison officers to deal publicly and openly with English
supporters’, though they conceded that ‘there were occasions... when an overt presence of British
police officers may well have helped the Italian police in helping to calm situations’.9 By contrast,
ACPO(S) told us that the three principal objectives of the Scottish police unit in Italy were:
       (1) ‘to continually portray the Scottish support in a positive image;

       (2) to ensure that all press/media information was validated and factual,

       (3) to establish a high profile overt relationship with the Scottish support’.10

According to the Scottish Office, Scots police adopted what amounted to a community policing
role, while the Scottish FA told us the Scots police ‘requested a softer line than usual from the
Italian police in dealing with boisterous but not disorderly Scottish supporters’.11

   116. Similar tactics to those of the Scots were adopted by Dutch police. When the Committee
was in Utrecht, the Chief Commissioner told us that his police adopt a policy of ‘to know and to
be known’ when policing football hooliganism. They aim to impress upon potential trouble
makers that their faces are known and that they are being watched carefully. Before the World
Cup, the police actually met with known hooligans in order to inform them of the steps that were
being taken in tandem with the Italian police to prevent trouble and to w xm them what to expect
from the Italian police in the event of widespread violence. There were no Dutch supporters
arrested during the World Cup. Dutch practice during the World Cup was complimented by the
FSA,12 and though ACPO was slightly condescending about Dutch police activity in Italy, the
Police Superintendents’ Association commended overt Dutch policing methods which they had
experienced when Wales met Holland in the qualifying rounds of the World Cup.13

  117. The Committee would not wish to second-guess operational decisions by the police.
However, the overt and friendly tactics of Scottish and Dutch police did, in their professional

'£v. pp. 10-12; 24; 48-49.
2£v. p. 99.
3Q. 296.
4 £ v . p. 99.

5HC Deb 7 December 1990 c. 242.
6 £ v . p . 24.

7ACPO £ v . p. 49.
®£v. p. 76.
9 £ v . p. 49.

I0£v. p. 53.
"£v. pp. 25, 80.
I2 £ v . p. 1 0 0 .

i3Q. 294; Ev. p. 56.
                                       THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                               XXXV



judgement, contribute to the good behaviour of their fans. Good intelligence work is clearly
important, and was not neglected by the Scots or the Dutch. But there is clearly also room for
 a friendlier style of policing as well. We recommend that ACPO carefully consider in future whether
intelligence co-operation with foreign forces should be complemented by visible and friendly policing.

                                  G. The Football Licensing Authority

1. Background
   118. The Football Licensing Authority (FLA) was created under the Football Spectators Act
1989, and came into operation on 1 June 1990. The FLA is responsible for the granting or re usa
of a licence to admit spectators to any premises to watch any designated football match there. It
has power to impose conditions on the licence, to make inspections and inquiries and to vary a
licence or suspend or revoke it. The FLA has two other functions. It may include in a licence,
if the Home Secretary directs, a condition as to seating. Secondly, under section 13 ot the Act,
the Authority has the job of keeping under review the discharge by local authorities ot their
functions under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 relating to football. Section 13 gives the
FLA power to insist on amendments to safety certificates and gives FLA inspectors the right to
enter grounds. The section has not been brought into force.1
   119. The FLA is financed out of public funds. In the current financial year, provision has
been made of £670,000, although the FLA is unlikely to spend more than £270,000. Provision for
1991-2 is £898,000.2 The Chairman and Members of the Authority are appointed by the Home
Secretary, and the FLA may appoint its own staff. Its temporary Chief Executive is a Home Office
official on secondment. We took evidence from the Home Office and FLA at the same time, but
both parties emphasised to us that they were separate from one another, though they had an
amicable relationship. The infant FLA was at great pains to sever the ‘umbilical cord which
joined it to its parent.3 We note that the Football Spectators Act 19894 specifically provides that
‘the licensing authority shall not be regarded as the servant or agent of the Crown . Nevertheless,
the FLA is clearly an Associated Public Body of the Home Office within the terms of Standing
Order No. 130, and we intend to monitor its work closely.5
    120    Mr Jacobs, the FLA Chairman, emphasised how early it was in the Authority s life.
 Because of this, the FLA had not been willing to submit written evidence, and Mr Jacobs on
 several occasions very fairly stressed that the opinions he gave in oral evidence were his own and
 that the Authority had not had the opportunity to discuss the matters about which he was being
 questioned.6 He told us in particular that ‘it is a little too early to say whether or not we are
 adequately resourced’.7 The Committee accepts that these are early days, and that views on the
 FLA must remain tentative. Moreover, we have not examined the issue of safety at football
 grounds in this inquiry in detail. We are, however, convinced that the FLA can play a key role
 fn the future of football, and we shall outline the direction in which we believe the Authority
  should be moving.
     121 It is vital that the FLA should be given the resources it needs to do its job properly, and
  that all the sections of the Football Spectators Act 1989 relating to the Authority (except those
  dealing with the aborted national membership scheme) should be brought into force as soon as
  possible. In this context, section 13 of the Act is of particular importance. Section 13 will in
  effect give the FLA teeth with the local authorities. Mr Jacobs told us that at the m om ent...
  w eha w not got the resources to police or deal with that section’.8 A fortnight later, the Mimster
  of State told the House9 that ‘neither we nor the Football Li ce nsin g Authority have any reaso
   to believe that the funding provision already made for the Football Licensing Authority wi
   inadequate to enable it properly to discharge all its statutory functions, including those under

   ‘QQ. 353-4.
   2HC Deb 11 December 1990, c. 353.
   3QQ- 307, 343.
   4Sch. 2.1.(2).
   5Q. 409.
   6Q. 348.
   7Q. 408.
   *Q. 354.
    9HC Deb 11 December 1990 c. 353.
xxx vi                                          SECOND REPORT FROM



section 13 of the Football Spectators Act 1989, when that section of the Act is brought into force’.
We welcome this apparent change. We recommend that the Home Office set a swift timetable for
bringing into force all the sections of the Football Spectators Act which relate to the Football
Licensing Authority (except those dealing with the national membership scheme), and that the
financial and manpower resources necessary for the job are provided to the FLA.
2. Membership of the FLA
   122. The members of the FLA represent a wide variety of disciplines; they include a former
Chief Constable, the Chairwoman of the Society of Fire Safety Engineers, a former professional
footballer now turned commentator. There is one extraordinary lacuna: no representative of
football supporters is included among the Authority members. While he gave no absolute
undertaking, the then Minister for Sport was sympathetic during the progress of the Football
Spectators Bill to the proposition that the Authority should contain supporter representation.1
Lord Ferrers told us that, while the Government would be perfectly prepared to consider suitably
qualified supporters as members of the FLA, members were not intended to be representative of
interest groups and that a regulatory body such as the FLA was not necessarily improved by
having a spectator member.2
    123. Lord Ferrers acknowledged that ‘the reason why the Football Licensing Authority has
... been set up is in order to make life better for football supporters’.3 Both the FSA and the
National Federation of Football Supporters’ Clubs have sought representation on the FLA,4 and
their case for ‘consumer’ representation was one which impressed the Committee. Mr Jacobs told
us that the FLA intended to meet supporters organisations and that one of the Authority’s
members, the journalist Mr Simon Inglis, was also by chance an FSA member.5 There are,
however, two remaining vacancies on the Authority, and Mr Jacobs, while expressing
understandable caution about the need for Authority members to be objective, agreed that a
supporter who met the normal criteria for membership of the Authority would be a strong
candidate for one of the vacancies.6 We recommend that the FLA and Home Office endeavour to
fill one of the remaining vacancies on the Authority with a person acknowledged by the supporters’
organisations to understand the needs of ordinary football spectators.
3. The Green Guide and the FLA
   124. A new edition of the Green Guide, the guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, was published
on 30 November 1990. The Guide does not apply only to soccer grounds, and is primarily
concerned, as its title suggests, with safety. The new edition, for example, deals with facilities for
the disabled, guidance on first aid and test procedures for crush barriers. The Guide’s advice is
not obligatory, but can be made mandatory by inclusion in safety certificates. When section 13
of the Football Spectators Act is brought into force, the FLA will have a clear responsibility for
monitoring the issue of safety certificates, and thus compliance with the Green Guide.
   125. The Football League argued forcefully that the Green Guide should be mandatory, and
interpreted consistently across the country. The FLA should ensure this.7 Mr Jacobs told us that
the Green Guide was not a manual but a guide and that it should not be followed slavishly: ‘every
ground is a different place and every ground has its own ethos, its own supporters, its own history,
and in every other way so too with the Green Guide. Different interpretations may be necessary’.8
His views were supported by Lord Ferrers.9 Mr Jacobs intended, however, to promote
‘co-operation and harmonisation’ in his dealings with local authorities about the Guide.
    126. Taylor recommended that all local authorities with football grounds in their area should
establish Advisory Groups to discuss safety. The Groups should consist of their own staff, police,
fire, ambulance and building authorities and should regularly consult with supporters.10 Home

'Official Report, Standing Committee A, 11 July 1989, col. 262-3.
2QQ. 371, 364, 374.
3Q. 365.
“Q. 134.
5QQ. 363-4.
6QQ- 371-6.
7QQ- 26, 43, 47.
8QQ. 379-81.
9Q. 385.
l0Cm 962 rec. 31.
                                         THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                                 XXXVli


•                                                       :
                                                        --------------- ;—                “ .. ;
    Office witnesses suggested that these Advisory Groups would ensure that different authorities did
    not countermand one another so far as an individual ground was concerned.1 There must,
    however, be room for dissemination of best safety practice throughout the country, and w e v ?
    much greater opportunity for common standards in this field than there is in the area oi noiicv-
    methods. We note the view of the FLA that the Football Stadia Advisory Design C o unal tv '
    be concerned with the production of a good design m anual.7 We rccoinmcnd that, when k><m
    13 of the Football Spectators Act is brought into forcc, the FLA promote consistency awl h'-'-
    standards of safety at grounds.

    4. Policing and the FLA: an arbitration role
       127. Before issuing a licence to a football ground, the FLA is obliged to have regard ‘among
    the other relevant considerations’ to two matters:
          (a)    ‘whether the equipment provided, procedures used and other arrangements in force at
                 the premises are such as are reasonably required to prevent the commission or minimise
                 the effects of offences at designated football matches; and

t         (b)    such other considerations as the Secretary of State determines from time to time and
"                notifies to the licensing authority.’
    The FLA is thus obliged to consider anti-hooliganism measures and policing while the
    Government has (which, we understand, has not so far made any notifications) carte blanche to
    require the FLA to take into account other matters before granting a licence.
       128. Many of our witnesses believed that football needed an independent arbitrator, not just
    on the safety matters which we have just mentioned, but in policing and other areas as well. 1 he
    Police Superintendents’ Association thought the Authority might arbitrate when there were
    disputes between police and football authorities about scheduling.3 Chief Superintendent
    Clarkson, the ground commander at Leeds, told us4 that he looked to the FLA ‘as a help to me
    as the match commander because I see they can be an arbiter in many decisions , while Sir James
    Anderton was willing to heed the advice which the FLA might give him.5 Support also came from
    the Football League and the Football League Executive Staffs’ Association for an arbitration role
    by the FLA.6 Mr Jacobs told us7 that the Authority had its work cut out ‘to deal with our
    statutory obligations and not become involved in matters o f ... management between the polirc
    and other advisory groups’. He regarded anything beyond the FLA’s statutory obligations as ‘a
    matter of persuasion and literally how far our resources go’, but went on very cautiously to say
    that
I                 ‘in due course somewhere along the line when we are up and running if we achieve the
                  sort of weight and authority and clout that by persuasion and by the sheer objectivity
                  of the way we are seen to go about things, we are called in to assist because two entities
                  who are at loggerheads, let us say, think we can help them, if we have the resources,
                  I am sure it is something we would wish to do’.
        129.      The Committee would not wish to put pressure upon the FLA to run before it can walk.
     It must build up its staff, its expertise and its credibility. But the FLA is already responsible tor
     revoking or issuing licences, and ought to be increasingly involved to arbitrate and oiler advice
     about such matters as the circumstances in which matches should be all-ticket or when normal
     scheduling should be altered so that kick-off occurs early or on a Sunday. We also sec a m o s t
     important role for the FLA in helping police authorities to determine the percentage ot tr.e e >-
     an individual club should pay for the policing of its ground. The abandonment of :hc
     Membership Scheme has removed one of the main functions which the FLA v.-as ■■■-’
     discharge. But there is an important role for it to fulfil. One of our principal conv*- ; >n‘
     inquiry is that football badly needs an honest broker between the competing mur; • ‘ '

      'Q . 391.
      2Q. 379.
      i Ev. p. 56.
      4Q. 278.
      5Q. 242.
      6Q. 93, Ev. p. 90.
       7QQ- 357-379.
x x x v iii                            SECOND REPORT FROM



local authorities and Government. We are confident that the FLA, under its present Chairman, and
with adequate financial backing from the Government can play this role. We recommend that the
Government realise the inherent potential in the FLA to improve the future of the game.

                                          H. Conclusion

   130. Hooliganism associated with football is neither a new problem nor a British problem.
It may have become more vicious in recent years as a small group of malevolent individuals have
exploited soccer for anti-social, violent and criminal purposes. These individuals are adulated and
copied by a few other football supporters, but loathed by the overwhelming majority. Their
activities have caused enormous expenditure of police time and manpower, and they have warped
the image of football among many who do not follow the game. They have distorted the
perception of this country abroad. There is a clear recognition that these people must be targeted
by the police through good intelligence, have watertight cases prepared against them, be brought
before the courts and be sentenced in a way which prevents them from engaging in their activities
in the future. We have made a number of recommendations which will help this process.

   131. But football and hooliganism are not synonymous. Soccer is the most popular sport in
England and Scotland. Hundreds of thousands play the game or watch it regularly. Even more
identify with a team or their national side. The national football authorities owe it to these people
to ensure that they oan regard themselves as partners in the game, not as fodder for exploitation
by those who cream off soccer’s rich pickings. The safety, welfare and comfort of all supporters
should all be priorities. Increased leisure time, greater affluence and higher expectations mean that
those who follow football rightly expect more for their money than they did in previous
generations. The ‘them’ and ‘us’ attitudes of the past must be buried. Supporters also expect more
from the police: to be treated with dignity whether they are at home or away, in Aberdeen or
Arsenal, and not criminalised simply by their association with the game. We believe that both the
police and football authorities realise that old attitudes must change, and that much is being done.
Our recommendations will help this process.

   132. Because football is such an important national activity, Government also has a role to
perform. The most positive step taken by Government has been the establishment of the Football
Licensing Authority. An interventionist, properly supported Authority is, in our view, the key to
a bright future for football. The legislation for dealing with hooligans must also be put in place
by government. The finances of the game must be properly considered. The tax regime has rightly
been used to help soccer financially. It would be quite wrong for the concessions which the
Treasury has made in the past to be clawed back by a hike in charges for policing. Although the
clubs should do more to police themselves by employing competent stewards, the residual task for
the police at football grounds is more a public than a private responsibility. We have made
proposals for meeting the costs which we regard as a sensible compromise. We are confident that
the Government will fulfil its duties to the game and its followers.

  133. Our conclusion from this inquiry is that football authorities, clubs, police, supporters
and government all have further steps which they can take to promote what is good in football,
and tackle what is wrong. They are certainly all united in their determination to eradicate
hooliganism. The more that they co-operate, the sooner that objective will be achieved.
                                  THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                                   x x x ix



                                I Summary of Recommendations

  134.     We believe that the press ought to exercise much greater responsibility when reporting
football hooliganism.                                                                * ara
  We recommend a determined effort by all football clubs to make a much higher standard of
facilities available to fans.                                                       r
  We recommend that the Football Licensing Authority pay particular attention to ensuring that
home and away fans receive equal treatment at everyground.                         v ara
  We recommend that the compulsory seating proposals be re-examined in the case of the smaller
clubs.                                                                             (         }
  We believe that it should be a priority of clubs to provide the police and other organisations
such as St John Ambulance with the facilities which they need to discharge their duties efficiently.


  We recommend that the Government keep under review the rate of Pool Betting Duty, and if
necessary, decrease the rate to make more money available for ground improvements. (Fara is )

  We add our voice to all those who have called for an imaginative and vigorous campaign by
the football authorities to ensure that the money is raised and the facilities at all grounds miproved
to the level of the best.                                                                    (Fara Zb)
   We recommend that the football authorities and the police consult one another on match ^
 scheduling and heed one another’s professional expertise.
   We do not see any need for any further powers to prevent matches taking place. (Para 29)

   We recommend that the police remain alive to the fact that football matches are intended as
 entertainment for the enjoyment of the maximum number of law-abiding fans. There must be      /
 good reason for altering the day, venue or time of a game.                                J >
    We recommend that all names and descriptions of hooligans against whom high grade
 intelligence is possessed are passed to clubs concerned by the National Football Intelligent Unit
 via the local police force’s football liaison officer.                                  1       '
    We believe it would be quite wrong for the police to use tactics against a w a y supporters which
  had the intention of extending the Luton experiment [of banning away supporters] by th eb a
  door.
     We recommend that clubs whose teams are engaged in European competitions organise
  attractive, good value and well-stewarded package deals for travelling supporters, and that mate
  tickets are available only through these arrangements.                                           >
    We recommend that all League clubs establish community programmes.                      (Para 36)
     We recommend that the football authorities and individual clubs should establish regular
  liaison and dialogue with the supporters’ organisations.                        I
     We recommend that gradual but steady progress towards desegregation should be them m of
  police and clubs.
     We urge ACPO to eome forward speedily wi.h the new arrest proeedures " ^ T a y l o r
   recommended a year ago.
     We recommend that the Home Office should continue to m ontor                              in «deo
   technology, and the Football Trust continue to make money avatlable lor                    ^     ^
   equipment to be installed.

      The Committee is convinced that the intensive g        . ^     f < |" ^ m “ n * t o t ' ^ h
   effective means of dealing with                                     club in its area.     (Para 43)
   appoints a full-time football intelligence officer for each League                        v
xl                                      SECOND REPORT FROM



  We believe that the National Football Intelligence Unit is a fine example of police work sensibly
co-ordinated on a national basis.                                                       (Para 47)

   We recommend that ACPO, ACPO (Scotland), the Home Office and Scottish Office monitor
the performance of all police forces in their dealings with NFIU and ensure that, where there are
lapses, they are vigorously brought to the attention of the Chief Constable concerned, since this
effective relationship bears directly upon the proper use of police resources.        (Para 48)

  We recommend that the Government meet all reasonable demands made by the NFIU for
resources.                                                                 (Para 49)

  We recommend that consideration should be given to the appointment of a Scottish officer to
the NFIU.                                                                         (Para 50)

  It is important for police officers as for the general public to appreciate that the overwhelming
majority of fans, home and away, are law-abiding and have a right to be treated with respect and
dignity by the police.                                                                     (Para 52)

   We recommend that ACPO and ACPO (Scotland) initiate discussions between the police,
supporters’ organisations and the Football Licensing Authority with the aim of preparing a
national statement of good practice for police to follow when dealing with supporters. We further
recommend that individual chief officers should ensure that individualgrounds are policed on
different occasions so far as possible in the same way.                                (Para 55)

  We endorse the need for continued constructive dialogue betweenACPO and the NFIU and
the national football authorities, and between each individual club and the local ground
commander.                                                                     (Para 56)

  We recommend that all chief officers ensure that there is a regular system of liaison between
supporters’ organisations and local ground commanders.                                (Para 57)

     We expect this momentum [to develop police training] to continue in the future. (Para 58)

  We recommend no change in current arrangements for paying for football-related policing
outside and away from football grounds.                                        (Para 61)

     We endorse the proposal for a consistent national charging policy [for policing inside grounds].
                                                                                           (Para 68)

  A town cannot be deprived of its soccer club because the bill for policing bankrupts it. It would
hardly be conducive to good police/community relations for this to happen since the police would
be blamed for the closure.                                                               (Para 70)

  We consider that it would be inappropriate to charge clubs the full cost of policing when that
cost can ultimately be determined by one party to the bargain alone. We therefore recommend
that the costs of policing a football match should be assessed on the marginal costs of doing so.
                                                                                       (Para 74)

  We recommend that the Home Office withdraw its current draft circular, and produce new
proposals for charging sports clubs for policing on the basis of varying percentages of the gate
takings.                                                                              (Para 77)

  We recommend that the Home Office consider whether section 15 of the Police Act 1964 should
be amended to reflect more clearly the desirability of charging differential costs for policing private
events depending on the value to the public of the event.                                    (Para 78)

     Higher profile stewarding supported by low profile policing is the way forward.        (Para 79)

   We recommend that the Football Licensing Authority monitor carefully the way in which the
stewarding provisions of the Green Guide are followed, and not hesitate to use their powers
against a club which does not meet the requisite standard.                        (Para 82)

  We recommend that the Government reconsider the need for the catch-all offence of disorderly
conduct at sports grounds.                                                          (Para 87)
                                    THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                                     x li



   We believe that there should be no delay in bringing the Taylor offences [throwing a missilp
 chanting obscene or recialist abuse, going on to a pitch without reasonable cause and ticket
 touting] on to the statute book.                                                    (Para ggy

   We recommend that the House pass the Football (Offences) Bill without delay.            (Para 89)
  We recommend that the law be amended so that breach of an exclusion order may be punished
by the imposition of a consecutive exclusion order.                              (Para 91)

  We recommend that the Home Office again issue a circular to magistrates and clerks to justices
drawing attention to the availability, efficacy and appropriate use of the exclusion order. (Para 93)

  We recommend that in the case of serious football-related offences, the police ensure that the
Crown Prosecution Service are aware of the accused’s likelihood to travel to football matches
               an<^ ^ a^es’ an4 that where there are grounds for imposing a restriction order,
the CPS draw the court’s attention to its powers to do so.                           (Para 96)
  We recommend that British Ministers and officials continue to apply pressure in TREVI to
encourage countries with different criminal justice systems to see the value for themselves and
other countries of securing convictions of British football hooligans.               (Para 98)
  We recommend that the Government reconsider the Taylor recommendations to extend the
scope of attendance centre orders; that more of these facilities be made available in areas of the
country which do not at present have them, and that alternative methods of staffing them be
explored.                                                                            (Para 1 0 0 )

   We recommend that research be undertaken to assess any differences in the level of drunkenness
at grounds where (i) alcohol is not available (ii) low-strength beer is available (iii) ordinary beer
lssold-                                                                                  (Para 104)
  We recommend that local authorities, in consultation with local police commanders, make full
use of new power [under by-laws] where appropriate to cut down on public drinking in the streets
near football matches.                                                             (Para 105)

   We recommend that the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol Etc) Act 1985 be amended so that
all public service vehicles as defined in European law are covered by the Act.   (Para 106)
   We recommend that the network of football correspondents [under the TREVI organisation]
be extended to all European states which wish to participate. We further recommend that primary
responsibility for the European Convention on Spectator Violence and Misbehaviour should pass
from the Department of Education and Science to the Home Office.                    (Para 111)
   We recommend that the United Kingdom government should propose at the next meeting of
the Standing Committee established under the European Convention on Spectator Violence and
Misbehaviour (a) the establishment of a European register of footballhooligans and (b) an
effective means of preventing hooligans from travelling abroad.                (Para 112)

  We recommend that ACPO carefully consider in future whether intelligence co-operation with
foreign forces should be complemented by visible and friendly policing [of English fans abroad],
                                                                                      (Para 117)
  We recommend that the Home Office set a swift timetable for bringing into force all the sections
of the Football Spectators Act which relate to the Football Licensing Authority (except those
dealing with the national membership scheme), and that the financial and manpower resources
necessary for the job are provided to the FLA.                                       (Para 121)
  We recommend that the FLA and Home Office endeavour to fill one of the remaining vacancies
on the Authority with a person acknowledged by the supporters’ organisations to understand the
needs of ordinary football spectators.                                             (Para 123)
 We recommend that, when section 13 of the Football Spectators Act is brought into force, the
FLA promote consistency and high standards of safety at grounds.                 (Para 126)
  One of our principal conclusions from this inquiry is that football badly needs an honest broker
between the competing interests of clubs, police, local authorities and Government. We are
x lii                              SECOND REPORT FROM



confident that the FLA, under its present Chairman, and with adequate financial backing from
the Government can play this role. We recommend that the Government realise the inherent
potential in the FLA to improve the future of the game.                           (Para 129)
                                THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE                            x liii



               PROCEEDINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
                  RELATING TO THE REPORT
                             WEDNESDAY 16 JANUARY 1991

                                     Members present:
                               Sir John Wheeler, in the Chair
                     Mr David Ashby               Mr John Greenway
                     Mr Joe Ashton                Mr Alan Meale
                     Mr Gerry Bermingham          Mr Ivor Stanbrook
                     Dame Janet Fookes            Mr Keith Vaz
                     Mr Roger Gale                Dr Mike Woodcock



  Draft Report on Policing Football Hooliganism, proposed by the Chairman, brought up and
read.

  Ordered, That the draft Report be read a second time, paragraph by paragraph.

  Paragraphs 1 to 12 read and agreed to.

  Paragraphs 13 and 14 read, amended, and agreed to.

  Paragraphs 15 to 17 read and agreed to.

  Paragraph 18 read, amended, and agreed to.

  Paragraphs 19 to 21 read and agreed to.

  Paragraphs 22 and 23 read, amended, and agreed to.

  Paragraphs 24 to 27 read and agreed to.

  Paragraph 28 read, amended, and agreed to.

  Paragraphs 29 and 30 read and agreed to.

  Paragraph 31 read, amended, and agreed to.

  Paragraphs 32 to 34 read and agreed to.

  Paragraph 35 read, amended, and agreed to.

  Paragraphs 36 to 48 read and agreed to.

  Paragraph 49 read, amended, and agreed to.

  Paragraphs 50 to 54 read and agreed to.

  Paragraph 55 read, amended, and agreed to.

  Paragraphs 56 and 57 read and agreed to.

  Paragraph 58 read, amended, and agreed to.

  Paragraphs 59 to 70 read and agreed to.

  Paragraphs 71 and 72 read, amended, and agreed to.

  Paragraph 73 read and agreed to.

  Paragraph 74 read, amended, and agreed to.
x liv                                       SECOND REPORT FROM



   Paragraphs 75 to 92 read and agreed to.

   Paragraph 93 read, amended, and agreed to.

   Paragraphs 94 to 97 read and agreed to.

   Paragraph 98 read, amended, and agreed to.

   Paragraph 99 read as follows:
        Section 22(4) of the Football Spectators Act provides that courts may make restriction
        orders in respect of offences committed outside England and Wales “unless it appears that
        the conviction is the subject of proceedings in a court of law in that country questioning
        the conviction'’. This means that the process of appeal can be exploited to prevent a
        restriction order being imposed. This seems to us to be totally anomalous. Lord Ferrers
        argued that it would be “an infringement of liberty” not to allow the restriction order to
        be imposed after first conviction. We disagree. Offenders are not able to defer driving bans
        by registering appeals or to stay out of prison because they appeal against their sentence.
        We recommend that the Football Spectators Act 1989 be amended so that the corresponding
        offences provision may be activated on first conviction in Scotland or abroad.

  Paragraph disagreed to.

  Paragraph 100 (now paragraph 99) read and agreed to.

  Paragraph 101 (now paragraph 100) read, amended, and agreed to.

  Paragraphs 102 to 106 (now paragraphs 101 to 105) read and agreed to.

  Paragraph 107 (now paragraph 106) read, amended, and agreed to.

  Paragraphs 108 to 126 (now paragraphs 107 to 125) read and agreed to.

  Paragraph 127 (now paragraph 126) read, amended, and agreed to.

  Paragraphs 128 to 134 (now paragraphs 127 to 133) read and agreed to.

  Pauigraph 135 (now paragraph 134) read, amended, and agreed to.

   R e so lve d .   That the Report, as amended, be the Second Report of the Committee to the House.

  Ordered, That the Chairman do make the Report to the House on Friday 1 February.

   Ordered, That the provisions of Standing Order No 116 (Select Committee (reports)) be applied
to the Report.

  Several papers were ordered to be appended to the Minutes of Evidence.

  Ordered, That the Appendices to the Minutes of Evidence taken before the Committee be
reported to the House.— (The Chairman.)

  Several Memoranda were ordered to be reported to the House.

                                       [Adjourned till Wednesday 23 January at half past Ten o’clock
                                               THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE



                                            LIST OF WITNESSES
                                                 Monday 12 November 1990

                                                    F o o t b a l l A s s o c ia t io n
Mr   F A      Millichip, M r R H G Kelly and Mr K Evans                                     .......................................

                                                       F o o tba ll L eague
Mr W Fox, Mr A Sandford and Mr J Crawford......................................................

                                         F o o t b a l l S u p p o r t e r s ’ A s s o c ia t io n
Mr   C     Brewin, Mr    S   Beauchampe and Mr                 S   G a r r e tt..............................................

                          N a t io n a l F e d e r a t io n o f F o o t b a l l S u p p o r t e r s ’ C l u b s
C ll r A   M Kershaw, Mrs M Hartland and Mr                             I   Todd..............................................


                                              Wednesday 14 November 1990

                                      A s s o c ia t io n o f C h ie f P o l ic e O f f ic e r s
Mr   C     J Anderton, CBE, QPM and Mr G M G eorge..............................................

                                       P o l ic e S u p e r in t e n d e n t s ’ A s s o c ia t io n
Mr D Clarkson, QPM and Mr P G Wall                                 ...............................        ........................

                                                      P o l ic e F e d e r a t io n
M r R B Coyles and Mr P V O’Brien                         ..       ..        ..     ..............................................


                                              Wednesday 28 November 1990

                                                           H o m e O f f ic e
Rt Hon the Earl Ferrers, M r S Boys Smith, Mr J Goddard and Mr P Bolton

                                           F o o t b a l l L ic e n s in g A u t h o r it y
Mr N Jacobs and Mr G D u n k le y .............................................................................
xlvi                                              SECOND REPORT FROM



                             LIST OF APPENDICES TO
                           THE MINUTES OF EVIDENCE
No

 1 Extract from a letter to the Clerk of the Committee from Mr Philip Don,
   Secretary, Association of Football League Referees and L in e sm e n ...............

 2 Memorandum by the Bus and Coach Council                                   .............................................

 3 Extract from a letter to the Clerk of the Committee from Mr T R P Rudin,
   Secretary, Magistrates’ Association....................................................................




                                        Printed in the United Kingdom by HM SO at H ansard Press
                                         D d 0507570     1/91    C8    PS 1902560     PC 44083
HMSO publications are available from:
HMSO Publications Centre
(M ail and telephone orders only)
PO Box 276, London SW8 5DT
Telephone orders 071-873 9090
General enquiries 071-873 0011
(queuing system in operation for both numbers)
HMSO Bookshops
49 High H olbom , London, WC1V 6HB 071-873 0011 (counter service only)
258 Broad Street, Birmingham, B1 2HE 021-643 3740
Southey House, 33 Wine Street, Bristol, BS1 2BQ (0272) 24306
9-21 Princess Street, Manchester, M60 8AS 061-834 7201
80 Chichester Street, Belfast, BT1 4JY (0232) 238451
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh, EH3 9AZ 031-228 4181
HMSO’s Accredited Agents
(see Yellow Pages)

and through good booksellers




 © P arliam entary copyright H ouse o f C om m ons 1991
 A pplications fo r reproduction should be m ade to H M S O


 ISBN 0 10 272991 3
TELEPHONE   CONVE R S A T I O N W I T H F I O N A GRAHAM.   734578

She worked with somebody called Ray Boyd who had phoned

ealier to say that they were having a look to see what

alternative accommodation was available.

I discussed the matter with her.               I explained that we were

looking at our own Court but it might be that other

accommodation might        be more convenient or indeed necessary.

She told me that Sue Harper was coming up on Monday and

that they were actively looking at alternatives.                     She could

see the necessity in a major Inquest of this sort to have

sufficient space and not to allow the accommodation to be

so cramped as to create problems

I explained to her that from a personal point of view I
              u
preferred to say at the Medico-Legal Centre, but one had                    to

be realistic and it might be too small.

She seemed to have a very good appreciation of the

problems and the needs for ensuring that these Inquests are

conducted in a proper and satisfactory manner.




LESAAO
EILE NOTE . NORMAN THOMPSON WAS OH THE PHOHE TO RADIO SHEEffTTCT.T).


They informed him that   the Chief Constable had resigned, that
he had referred to the Coroner's Inquest as dealing with the
matter in greater detail and the radio station wanted to know
whether a date had yet been fixed.   I told Norman that a
date had not been fixed nor was I in a position to do so.
»   /




               The Hillsborough Disaster: A Personal Account




                               Robert Forrest




        Published in Quakers in Criminal Justice Newsletter No 19
        June 1989, pages 1 2 - 1 5



                                      Page: 1
It's about 3,30 pm on a very pleasant Saturday afternoon in
mid April. I am chairing the afternoon session of a training
workshop on investigating a drug abuse death which is being
held in a lecture theatre high up in the tower block of the
Royal Hallamshire Hospital in Sheffield. Brenda Whittaker, a
solicitor, has just started her talk on the legal aspects of
the investigation to the very mixed audience of 50 or so
solicitors,  forensic scientists,   pathologists and police
officers. I am feeling quite pleased with myself. The nine
months of work it has taken to organise the meeting are
paying off; it's going well, the question sessions have been
stimulating, lunch was good and people from the different
professions are talking to each other, which was part of the
object of the exercise. Suddenly my bleep goes off. “It's his
wife" is the witless comment from one of the pathologists in
the audience. Gritting my teeth, I go to a telephone and
answer the call. In fact, it is the "On Call" technician in
the laboratory. He tells me that something very unpleasant is
happening at Hillsborough Stadium, where Nottingham Forest
are playing Liverpool in the semi-final of the F. A. Cup.
There is crowd trouble, about 30 people are dead and the
hospital switchboard has declared a "majax" (Major Accident).
I go back in, as pale a sheet by         a colleague's later
account, and stop the speaker, tell the audience what is
happening, hand over the chair to a senior colleague and,
together with the members of the laboratory staff at the
meeting, go down to the laboratory. The police officers in
the audience vanish like snow off the proverbial dyke as they
follow their own emergency procedures.

Down in the laboratory we start to sort ourselves out. The
portable television we have makes it quite clear that there
is indeed a major disaster brewing.        Vague memories of
accounts of the Ibrox Stadium disaster make me think that
there may not actually be that much work for us, for the main
task may turn out to be one of counting the dead. However,
the two junior doctors come with me down to the casualty
department.  It isn't busy     (yet) although there is much
purposeful activity. I leave them there, awaiting the rush
that never quite materialises. Back in the laboratory we
discuss the possible scenarios that might develop and plan
how we will meet the peak demand which is likely, if there do
turn out to be a lot of      living casualties, to be in the
early evening as patients go to theatre and on Sunday
morning. As it turns out we do less work that afternoon than
we would on a normal Saturday.    About this time, I receive a
call from the Director of South Yorkshire Red Cross, in which
I am a medical officer. I am not needed at Hillsborough where
it has indeed become a matter of counting the dead, but it is
clear that there are already a large number of relatives and
friends who will need to be helped. I go and find the
hospital's duty administrator to remind her that the Red
Cross has members with a variety of skills that are at her
disposal, and check that she has the Headquarters unlisted
telephone number to hand.

I go back to the lecture theatre and help to draw the meeting
to a close. As might be expected, in such a group there is

                               P a g e 2
quite a lot of expertise relevant to "disaster medicine", and
a colleague from Nottingham makes the useful comment that
after the Ml air crash one unexpected problem that had to be
coped with was the influx of relatives from all over the UK.
After seeing the delegates on their way home, I go down to
the outpatient department and find that there is already a
problem with many people arriving to look for relatives.
After some discussion with an administrator and nursing
staff, I walk the 400 metres or so to South Yorkshire Red
Cross HQ and help to arrange the setting up of a limited
catering facility   in the outpatient department and the
provision of Red Cross Welfare workers there. Fortunately,
the "mashing tackle" for tea making has already loaded onto
suitable transport for another, routine job, and there is a
reasonable supply of food available. (Later that evening, as
relatives start arriving hungry after their journey, one of
the local pizza houses donates a good supply of pizzas which
are greatly welcomed by staff and relatives alike).

Eventually, I get home at about 10 pm and start thinking
about the next day's tasks. It is a long time since I did
anything that might be remotely described as grief counseling
and I have to turn to the books. Kubler - Ross, I don't find
particularly helpful. I do find a few articles on talking to
people with cancer that have some useful hints in them, but
the most useful paper is a very personal account       in the
British Medical Journal by a psychiatrist, whose home is in
Lockerbie, of his own reaction to the Pan-Am Jumbo crash and
the techniques he used for helping others to cope with their
experiences. Also helpful is an old paperback describing the
experiences of US Army medical and nursing staff, including
psychiatrists, who served in Vietnam.     Sleep doesn't come
easily that night.

Sunday morning dawns, and I am just getting out of the
shower, when the telephone goes. I am needed at Red Cross HQ
urgently. I struggle into my Red Cross uniform, grab my
stethoscope, torch and ophthalmoscope, and am looking for my
uniform cap when the door bell rings. I bid goodbye to the
family and am treated to a terrifying high speed ride to Red
Cross Headquarters. There, the immediate problem is a very
upset member, who was one of the first helpers to get to
Hillsborough as the disaster was still evolving. I help her
talk through her distressing experiences over the next hour
or so, feeling somewhat incompetent as I do so. Next, I am
assigned to go to one of the reception centres that Social
Services have set up for relatives of victims coming to
Sheffield. I go to pick up the "doctor box", that should
contain   drugs for use when we provide medical cover for big
events and utter a curse, regretfully unmuffled, when I find
it empty. Later, I learn that most of the drugs that were in
it had been approaching their expiry dates and that it was in
the process of being restocked. Making a remark to the effect
that a doctor's most useful therapeutic tool is his own
personality, and feeling the inadequacy of my own personality
and training for the task ahead, I get into the ambulance
that is going the reception centre. Thankfully the trip, this
time, is a little more sedate. At the reception centre there

                              Page: 3
are an awful lot of carers from various disciplines milling
around and getting themselves organised, but, as yet no
relatives. I report to the police inspector in charge and set
about   finding other doctors.      Four of us,     from various
organisations get together and discuss what has happened and
the medical problems we are likely to have to cope with. I am
the only one wearing a uniform and I reflect a little on the
pro's and con's of that. At least it has a lot of useful
pockets.   One   of  us,  a   general    practitioner,   has  had
considerable post-graduate training in psychiatry and he goes
off to the Medico-Legal Centre where relatives are being
taken to identify bodies. We decide that one problem is that
people may come down from Liverpool without a supply of any
therapeutic     drugs    they might    be   taking and we make
arrangements to ensure that we can help anyone in that
situation. I acquire a limited supply of essential drugs,
including the sleeping drug temazepam. I have mixed feelings
about that drug; I have seen the stomach contents of far too
many people    who have takenfatal overdoses ofit along with
other drugs and alcohol.       Someone produces an excellent
leaflet on bereavement published by Cruse, and I settle down
to read it. About the only useful things I do are to talk at
some length to a police officer who had been at Hillsborough
about his experiences     and doleout headache         tablets to
relatives and a couple of social workers. Eventually, I        am
transferred to another, smaller, reception centre where I do
talk   to   a  few  relatives    as   well   as  discussing   the
psychodynamics of the     situation    with a group of social
workers and a priest.

Finally, I am sent to the Medico-Legal Centre, a building I
visit quite often in the course of my everyday work. I form
part of a team with a clinical psychologist and a social
worker who accompany relatives whilst they       are taken to
identify a body and whilst their formal statements are being
taken by police officers afterwards. I am impressed by the
competent and caring way in which the officers carry out
their difficult    task.  I also spend some time with my
colleagues    in    pathology,   discussing    the    forensic
investigation of the disaster. Rather to my surprise, my
primary professional training turns out to be very useful.
Many of the relatives ask me questions about the mode of
death in particular cases and about the state of the body
they have just viewed. A number of practical problems of
accommodation and transportation come up and are sorted out
with the help of the police and Social Services. I see my
first "Sun" reporter in the flesh, and whilst he doesn't much
resemble his "Spitting Image" stereotype,     I am not over
impressed by his behaviour or his appearance . I get home at
about 11.45 pm. I fall asleep easily but wake up shouting in
the small hours.

The next day is    an anti-climax. I spend some time at Red
Cross HQ discussing how we responded to the disaster and the
need to support and debrief our staff. The hospital, as a
whole, is relatively quiet although the Intensive Care Unit
is busy. That night, for the first time for many years, I
need a hypnotic drug to get me to sleep.

                                Page: 4
The following day, Tuesday, a detective sergeant brings me a
large cardboard box containing 94 blood samples from the
Medico-Legal Centre. I find the image of 94 lives reduced to
plastic envelopes containing small tubes of blood arranged in
serried rows on a laboratory bench profoundly disturbing,
paradoxically far more so than the grand guignol scenes in
the autopsy room that I witnessed on Sunday.

The next few days are taken up with a concentrated burst of
professional activity as I get involved with the scientific
investigation of the disaster and, to a limited extent, with
the clinical care of some of the survivors.        An   evening
debriefing session later in the week with the     Red Cross is
useful and interesting. There are copies of all the national
newspapers,   with   their   horrific   colour     photographs,
available. Not for the first time, I wonder about the total
desirability of a "free press", when journalists and their
editors   show such   an apparent   lack of    discretion and
responsibility.  Cards arrive at home     from a number of
Friends. I am touched and helped to learn that they are
thinking of me.

Elements of farce attend the visit of Prince Charles to the
hospital later in the week. All the staff who   were involved
in the hospital's response to the disaster are asked to
assemble in the main hall on the ground floor wearing clean
uniforms and their clip on identity cards. I have to be
photographed for a new one having lost several years ago the
one issued to me on my appointment. My views on sections of
the British press are not dispelled by the activities of a
photographer who manages, albeit without too much difficulty,
to persuade a buxom student nurse to adopt a less than
decorous pose whilst he uses up most of a roll of film on her
during the long wait before the royal party arrive.

How can I pull all my experiences of this event and its
aftermath together? Even more than a month later I haven't
been able to reduce it to a coherent whole. It remains in my
mind as a vivid set of disjointed images and memories; an
exhausted but still coping police inspector, a red eyed
social worker, a distraught mother, a fleck of blue paint on
a victim's pullover and the strange mixture of smells
(incense,  boiled  cabbage,  scent  and  cheap  alcohol)  in
Sheffield Cathedral during the memorial service   are just a
few of them. Two things I am sure of; knowing you are in the
thoughts of Friends does help in times of   stress and there
is little point in trying to establish rights and wrongs or
to find a scapegoat following events like Hillsborough: "Any
man's death diminishes me, because I am involved in mankind;
And therefore ask not for whom the bell tolls ; It tolls for
thee".




                               Page: 5
Robert Forrest is a member of Barnsley Meeting and QICJ. He
is a Consultant at the Royal Hal lamshire Hospital and a
Lecturer in Forensic Toxicology at Sheffield University. He
is a medical officer with the Ambulance Unit of South
Yorkshire Red Cross.




                             Page: 6
                                                                                                                                                                                COPING AFTER
WHEN TO SEEK HELP
Family and friends may helpyou all they can. But you may feel the need for extra help.
We can offer this, but only if you ask.
You should ask for help if:
• You feel you can't handle your deep feelings.
• You feel you aren't getting back together over a period of time.
• You continue to feel tense, confused, empty or exhausted.
• You have nightmares and can't sleep.
• You've no-one to share your feelings with.
                                                                                                   Liverpool also have a number (24 hrs) that can be
                                                                                                                       contacted                                                HILLSBOROUGH
• Your relationships suffer, or you develop sexual problems.
• You have accidents.
• You drink, smoke, or take drugs to excess.
• Your work suffers.                                                                                                                                                            Information to help anyone affected by the
• Others close to you are not recovering.
Even if you're helping others, you could become emotionally and physically exhausted.
                                                                                                                                                                                           Hillsborough tragedy
Don't hesitate to seek help. No problem is too big or small for us to helpyou deal with.                                                                                           issuedby Family & Community Services Sheffield
Everyone needs help — it is nothing to be ashamed of. Anything you say will be totally
confidential.
FINALLY, REMEMBER — You're the same person you were before this tragedy. There
is a light at the end of the tunnel. HELP IS AVAILABLE.



                                                                                                          (051) 225 3413
                                                                                                            or 225 3414
                                                                                                Both numbers are staffed by trained and experienced social workers. They
                                                                                                will help with material problem s or if you are upset and just w ant to talk.
                                                                                                Anything you say or any help you are given will b e com pletely private and
                                                                                                confidential. No problem is too big or too small for us to help with.

                                                                                                Sheffield FCs Dept, acknow ledge the help of Kent Social Services
                                                                                                Department an d other Authorities in preparing this leaflet



                                                                                           Printing donated by Kall-Kwik Printing, Sheffield (0742) 701582
                                                                                           Paper 'Spatial1donated by Guppy Paper, Leeds, (0532) 823111
                                                                                           Plates donated by Offset Plates 89, Sheffield, (0742) 430444
Someone you know may have been personally involved in helping those w ho died                        PHYSICAL AND MENTAL FEELINGS                                                                                    SUPPORT               — You'll need othe r people's physical and em otional help. D on't
or those w ho were injured in the Hillsborough Disaster on 15 A pril. Alternatively                                                                                                                                                          reject it. It can help to talk to others w ho have had sim ilar
you may know someone w ho died or w ho has been injured.                                             Even if you haven't fe lt these em otions, you r body m ight react to the crisis. This can
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             experiences.
                                                                                                     even happen m onths later.
For all those involved in those situations the experience w ill be a very personal one                                                                                                                               PRIVACY               — Sometimes you w ill ju s tn e e d to b e a lo n e ,o rw ith y o u rfa m ily
that w ill remain w ith them for life.                                                               Some com m on problem s are tiredness, sleeplessness, bad dreams, loss o f m em ory
                                                                                                     o r concentration, dizziness, palpitations, shaking, d iffic u lty in breathing, ch okin g i r ^ ^                                      and friends.
_ l:her people have been through similarexperiences and come through them. Your                      throat and chest, nausea, diarrhoea, m uscular tension, w hich m a y le a d to h e a d a c h e ^^B            ^ ^ i t remember, overactivity, o r letting yo ur feelings rem ain num b, w ill delay your
 experience was a very personal one but we hope that this leaflet w ul help you to                   backaches, o r neckaches, dragging in the wom b, menstrual disorders, change in sexual                           recovery. The pain o f the w o u n d w ill lead to healing. You may even com e o u t of this
 understand how other people have reacted in sim ilar situations. It w ill also show                 interest.                                                                                                       w iser and stronger.
 you how you can help yourself to begin to recover.
 EVERYONE FEELS THESE THINGS                                                                         FAMILY AND FRIENDS                                                                                              THINGS TO DO . . . AND NOT TO DO
 Fear           - of damage to ourselves and those we love                                           You m ight make new friends as a result o f th e tragedy. But it can also p u t a strain on                     D O N 'T b o ttle up your feelings. Make sure you express your em otions.
                       - of beingleft alone                                                          existing relationships. You m ight feel you 're n ot g etting enough support, o r th at you
                       - of breaking down                                                                                                                                                                            D O N 'T avoid talkin g about w ha t happened. T h in k about w hat happened and talk
                       - of something similar happening again                                        can't give as m uch help as o th e r people need. You m ight d rin k more, o r use drugs.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              it over w ith others.
 Helplessness          - what can you do in the face of such a tragedy?
                                                                                                     MAKING YOUR FEELINGS EASIER TO BEAR                                                                             D O N 'T expect the m em ories to vanish — they w ill stay w ith you fo r a long tim e.
 Grief                 - for death, injury and loss
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     These are things you should try to do:
 Guilt                 - for being alive, for not being hurt                                         NUMBNESS              — Your m in d m ight not be able to take everything in at once. At
 Shame                 - for seeming helpless or emotional                                                                   first you m ight feel num b, and the tragic events may even seem                        • Let your ch ild re n share your feelings and express th e ir own. They may be feeling
                                                                                                                             unreal. People sometimes w rongly seethis numbness aseither                               m uch the same as you.
 Anger                 - at what has happened and at who allowed it to happen                                                "b e in g stro n g " o r even "n o t caring".
                       - WHY ME?                                                                                                                                                                                     • Take tim e to rest, and be w ith friends.
 Memories              - of people you saw or knew and loved                                         ACTIVITY              — lt'sb e stto ke e p a ctiye .H e lp in g o the rsm ig h th e lp yo u .B u td o n 't
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     • Tell friends, fam ily, o r counsellors how you feel.
                                                                                                                             overdo i t — it could detract from the helpyou need fo r yourself.
 Hope                  - for the future
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     • As you begin to recover, keep your life as norm al as possible.
 Everyone has these feelings. They are especially powerful when people have died in                  REALITY               — We have to come to term s w ith the reality o f a tragedy such as
 circumstances like those at Hillsborough. And even stronger when you depended on the                                        H illsborough. G oingto the fun e ra l,go ing to where it happened,                     • Send the ch ild re n back to school. Let them carry on as norm ally as possible.
 person who has died, if your relationship was going through a bad patch. These feelings may                                 w ill help you to do this.
  ntensify if you were already coping with other problems.
I letting these fellings come out is part of the natural healing process. It doesn't mean you will
 lose your self control, but if you try to stop them coming out you could end up feeling even
                                                                                                     TALKING IT OVER — G radually you w ill need to talk and th in k about y o u rj
                                                                                                                       experiences. You'll probably dream about them too. C hildre n *
                                                                                                                       may w ant to d ra w a b o u tth is e v e n t,o r even play games about it.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      pda special warning. Accidents are m ore com m on w hen people are un d er stress. Be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      specially careful w hen d riving ; be m ore careful around th e home. This m ight sound
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     unlikely, b ut it is im portant.
 worse. Crying will help you to cope, too.
                     SOME MAIN EVENT TIMINGS     - HILLSBOROUGH
          TI ME          ~
      EXTERNAL  INTERNAL


     1200.48               Supporters arriving slow trickle.

     1356.33               Supporter volume entering ground increasing.

     1435.22               Perimeter gates open access to turnstyles.

X    1435.30

                 1438.48
                           Dense crowds outside.

                           Strong surge along dividing fence Encl. 3 & 4.

     1439.31               Boy being carried through Gate C.

><               1440.09   Beach ball in Enclosure 3.

                 1440.10   Further surge in Enclosure     3 & 4.

     1440.26                All Perimeter gates appear closed.

     1445.03                Police land Rover.

     1448.04 E              Gate *C * opened to eject supporter/others enter

     1448.31 E              Gate C closed.

                 1449.53    "Hole" develops within Enclosure 3.

                 1450.26    Considerable crowd movement in Enclosure 3.

                 1451.07    Liverpool team announced.

                 1451.47    Nottingham Forrest team announced.

     1452.06 E              Gate 'C' opened large numbers of supporters enter.

     1453.40                L. hand perimeter gates open supporters entering.

                 1454.08   Liverpool team onto the pitch.

     1455.17                R. hand perimeter gate seen open.

                 1455.22   Nottingham Forrest team onto the pitch.

                 1455.49   Strong surge from tunnel into Enclosures     3 & 4.

     1457.40                Gate 'C ' Closed.

                 1459.04   Gate 4   open.

     1459.12 E              Gate'C' open     supporters entering.

                 1459.30   Gate 3   open.

                 1459.30   Kick off.

                 1459.51   Gate 1 opened to allow supporters into Enclosure.

                 1504.52   Peter Beardsley's shot hits cross bar.

                 1505.24   Supt. Greenwood on pitch and match stopped

                 1507.15   Surge in Enclosure 3.
               !!?,€*.*<             - - iif




                      ,            t**     C%*^a
                      ' fc r * 4   €*■„   *?-» «. ;

jfy q ir. 03          <£L«
                                     ^ ■ T




                                     O
                                         ^s S s , - k s s s ^ T t^ :
    ft O L ^ d l- ^   K v \^   U dS ^K Vr~. K ^ ? ^ S S ^ \^ K T vm \^

                      V A V U ^                       CV ' ^ £ > ^ . X /

                                                       vl4    ^




•            h    e


                                                                  1 U JL /\
             c o n tr a c t by a B r itis h firm in        favour of a costly and dangerous                         “The signals of war are often partial,
             Edinburgh, Christian Salveson Co,             mission to repossess the islands.; The                confused and contradictory. Warnings
             landed on South Georgia to remove > . key factor was a sense of national                            of imminent conflict can be lost in- the- *
            'w hat^-as left of the old whaling             h u m i l i a t i o n c o m p o u n d e d by          general noise of international affairs,-
             statio n s a t L eith, S trom ness and        confidence that Britain would be seen                 explicit threats dismissed as- bluster
             Husvik.                                       to be u p h o l d i n g t h e n o r m s of            while intelligence assessments are
                                                           international behaviour.”                             caught in traditional patterns of
                   rgum ents intensified, m atters                                                               t h o u g h t , l i m i t e d by i n a d e q u a t e
             A       escalated, then came invasion of
                     th e F a lk la n d s , th e H aigh
             diplom atic shuttles, peace-m aking
                                                              Thejunta had occupied the islands in
                                                           the belief “that this was part of a subtle
                                                           bargaining process rather than force
                                                                                                                 information and contained by! sheer-
                                                                                                                 disbelief that the adversary; could1
                                                                                                                 possibly resort to violence, f v                   ^
                                                           m a je u r e ” . .I t s own f r e e d o m of
             efforts by Peru, the British task force,      b a r g a in in g m a n o e u v re was                    ‘‘Once war begins the signals of w ar
           “landings at San Carlos, air and sea            undermined from the start by popular                  become explicit and brutal, tending to
         , battles, the final push for Stanley             delight at the fulfilment of a deeply                 drown the subtleties of the original1
        ■ punctuated by the horrors o f" the - cherished national goal.                            j       3*    dispute and confound mediators*."
          x Belgrano, Goose Green . and. Bluff                 But  th  e writers    believe   that  “in one     Britain failed because it did nofei
           ' Cove. j                             * '                                                            ^recognise the coming signals of warp/
         - i ? Galtieri, the Scotch-whisky-swilling se n se A r g e n t i n a ’s s t r a t e g y h ad            Argentina failed because it believed 1
              president, holed up in the Playa de          succeeded”. The war hadenabled it to
                                                            attract international attention to the               th a t t h e s e s i g n a 1s c o u 1d b e >
              M ayo, B uenos A ires, who made                                                                    controlled.”              ! j                        :
           1 desperate telephone efforts in the             Falklands issue, convince the General
            *dyingdays of the Falklands occupation; ,■ Assembly of the United Nations that , "S The authors make no attempt to^
              to rally the temporary Falklands j t h i s was a d i s p u t e r e q u i r i n g a                  come to a definitive conclusion on thei
              Governor, Brigadier General Mano long-term settlement and put pressure                              true ownership of the islands. “Wee
              Benjamin     Menendez,   had  been  warned  >,on the United Kingdom to negotiate f doubt if such a conclusion , can; bet-
     no                                                                                                           r e a c h e d , tho ug jh m a n y h av e -
        l ^ n o t ta take on Britain ,by President seriously. ItVeven gained: America-                            tried... Neither casef is watertight.- Ini
              Reagan:                                       support    for.  this  stance,   f         v    '
                                                         '«   However?the?           resolution&had        no.,   practice, ownership since the islands
          ■ P r e s i d e n t R e a g an u rg e d an                                                              were first discovered-has been;settled,
              alternative to forcei saying, correctly    ^binding     force.    The  British   Government
                                                            now    saw     no    reason   to    discuss   tu~     by force/’; <;■>-             <r? , * '
          . as it turned out, that Britain would not                                                               <5* (Faber and Faber; £17.50) .
            ■ negotiate- under threats- andv would          future   of   th  e Falklands     with   anyo




                                                                                                                                       f *,* ; ! *x ^ f’               •*'
                                                                                                                                                    V( ■Wvvf
                                                                                                                                      ‘i r                             w

  tters that are nottheir
     ead of leaving local
  t officers to get on with                                                       TRUST the Commission for                       cultures, but not at the expense of
  ' ey try to second-guess                                                                                                       their general education., «
  ionals from a basis of                                                        lR acial Equality    to; insult a
    ignorance. Many; of                                                           Cleveland m other because                     ; Another mother has described *
  •wing councillors are                                                                                                        r h er experience of m ulticultural
   their own careers and                                                          she tried to act in h e r child’s              education^ Her child, was one of*
   :nsate for their failure                                                       best interests.        r ?? ■                  three white children in a'class. Of
  their muscles in local                                                                                                         the remainder, only three spoke
                                                                                        To suggest that she was acti­ English a t homey the others spoke
                                                                                     vated by racism when she asked ' a variety of Indian languages. : j
     t a question of Tory                                                            th at her daughter be moved to
     :ur. It is usually a
     nsible Labour versus
  Labour. For example,
                                        BERNARD                                      another school is intolerable. The , Not surprisingly* the, teacher
                                                                                     fact th a t the child’s father is half.\ was struggling, to teach .anybody
                                                                                     West Indian and t h e . family’s 7 anything. A t the end of the first
         es moved out of
  & escapesi Blunkett’s
     council; but several
                                         DINEEN                                      friends are mostly black makes it. 1i term, the parents were told that
                                                                                     doubly so.                                ■ their daughter was “doing well”
                                                                                                                                  because she‘ had managed to
  Dtherham, which is also                                                         ..'.v Themother objected to the child, ? complete           a wooden puzzle. (She
  cur but has a sensible
  ier the leadership of the
       Jack Layden.
                                    Talking                                          wasting her school hours learning
                                                                                     p o e m s i n U r d u a n d b e i n g had completed a similar puzzle at
                                                                                  , instructed about- Pakistani veg­ home 18 months previously .) ;
                                                                                                                                    What the assorted experts have
     not the Government,
     ed local democracy,
   medy now is to screw
                                    politics                                          etables. It had nothing to do witk
                                                                                      race but everything to do with . done to our children’s educatidff
                                                                                      language. Parents are happy for s over th e years is- little short of
                                    NOW that the Charity Commis­ : their children to learn about other criminaL                                    "       -■•■■■- •. ■ ’
    fin even further. It is         s i o n e rs p l a n to i n v e s t i g a t e                                                                             ■iif- *}
    try to control local
  t by= revenue alone;
  expert at finding ways
                                    Oxfem’s political campaigning,
                                    perhaps the charity’s employees
                                     will stop spending so much time
                                                                                   Hillsborough truths                                                                    4l

  ’ curbs, with the help of         arguing the" political toss.                       EVERYONE si^pathisesw ith the points ofphilosophy? Why are they
   :ounting and expensive               Whether it is illegal is a matter grief          • of —bereaved
                                                                                                ’ — - j parents. Itis high- so unwilling tot face the tru th ?,
                                     for the Commission. However, I time howeverthat. Liverpool fans • One of the eye-witnesses* who
 . icure itself must be con-         have no doubt that such campaign­ stopped using? such, bereavement ‘ have .written to me says; “On the
iLw a start, the Govern-             ing is stupid. The task of a charity              to I n s u l t an d h a r a s s d ec ent main road into Sheffield; people in
        realise that it blun-        is to get on with helpingthe needy, ■ poUcemen.” ';.                               v*- i -'1 Langsett, Stocksbridge, Deepcar,
       re p e a l i n g the- la w    not spout political sermons                                                                   O ughti bridge and Middlewood
   fcouncil powers were                                                                  It is disgraceful that police time - saw Liverpool supporters leavi—
Obligations laid down by            - Oxfanr says its objective is “to should*have bee n .w a ste d on
    [ councils had to seek           educate the public”. What arro­ outrageous allegations against the the                           pubs worse for drink and s
       for all borrowing. No         gance. If I require political educa­ South Yorkshire police chief, Peter carrying cans of beer at 2 45 p.m.
            should be permit-        tion, I shall not seek it from th e' Wright. Everyone with a scrap of They could not possibly have been
   Bng as councils have              Oxfam brigade who spend so much ’sense knows that drink was a in the ground oy 3 p.m.” These
                                     of their time- writing letters to con trib u to ry fa cto r a t Hills­ problems'              were the fans| who caused the
       assets, such as- the          newspapers.•                                                                                               and/ the*- soberj early
       of acres of housing                                                             borough: whycrucify the police for arrivals paid the penalty. - • ; ;
   [a Labour minister who               They seem incapable of realising saying so?
                                     that they are damaging their own                                 . .                          ; Hillsborough was an appalling
       councillors that “the                                                             What do Liverpudlians want? A • tragedy but it will not become less
   lover”. The news still            cause. It is no part of a charity’s
   Iched some of the town           1role to be either pro-sanctions or declaration that no Liverpool fans : so by hunting for: scapegoats, f
  Mthrifts. They are over­            anti-sanctions, pro-Palestinian or have ever been known to indulge. , .                             ......— ‘           ,
   tone discipline and Chris          anti-Palestinian. These are conten­ in alcohol; that they spend their AS IN law, so m war, the longest
   Just cut them down to              tious issues on which opposing entire leisure time sipping1bitter- purse finally .wins.— Mahatma
                                      views are held.                   4              lemon and debating the- finer Gandhi ’ ; . }
 I i
 ?2_               OTi

 SI                   0&<i-
2 -V '        •             <L
B r               fiHit-

                   0]   0


                  OGl

                  o o c)

3 ?               0X0

                  m
?/                0Z(
?L                0 ° l £),<]

71                00%
         \pi^U'4
           &■    /? .      f   /   e   t   .    s   J   -     >        ^ ^      < p f~



       0        t u b                                         ^         9/ „        r r


      ^?.                 $ -U & ) / / y                    fj*       ?/•*       ?V

      /£?.
                                                      %$-    *P-l -    ??£   ■Xitr-t^n,f




                                               /^ <     &^r{Z.C/ rJL         ^T "


                                                                        S?
ft-   ^ 5 “      fi+rti
                                                            } ( j      -r*
%




%
                 icJ

    'f y ^ L                        fl" Q -




        Q,       f-



    4        V />

                       — 1l3 / ^


f



        f fj




    % f k r           fat'O'?'**



             J ~ £ ^ j2 ~ z r ^ ;
                                  CITY OF SHEFFIELD - MEMORANDUM

From       Mark Tiddy                               To         Dr. Popper


Date       27th September, 1988
Ref        FIN/MT/MM
Tel Ext    4635                                        Ref



             DEPARTMENTAL SUMMARY - CLAIMS SUBMITTED FOR THE FIRST 24 WEEKS (24/52)


                                         PROFILE             ACTUAL         VARIATION   BASE=100%
          UNIT              BUDGET       EXPENDITURE         EXPENDITURE      (+/-)         %


       (40) Coroner          1500            709                900             + 191     127




         NOTES:   Includes pathologist payments May - July inclusive.




  AD2(FIN)
  (AD2ACM)
%y       £ //             ft c r-f                        C ,J / ^   / V       O   X


                                                            £ £ c          ,
      0    -             <1                  -W       r


     I          /■       $ /? A O )£ c C ,            *


 ■   f t       • K )     ( J / c j   t i J        f



                     J     Gxg&*,r-           f
    £ I                        ■£                                                                                                 ‘         /V^K»n)^“--

    / ^ X          ,    6J ■                                                                                                           ,^       ^               cr          /^ ^


           /7 ~ U ,„                A            ; ^              ' rT%-

               /> j ,     k                                           I c / °                        U
                          *                                             __                           T »z                M -M V                          ■?      n «

               /r;/7                                                  ' w >                                                                                   / * * - * !

              fjCH             ^                                  / r/?


               ^                                                  K 2 3                                                                                                                    fl,
                                                                      /r      -7       \            /^f/r 2            /&*-* <9                                       /‘^ " i "
                                                    7             /                '
                                            /                                                       A ? r?
                                        i                         I   /   /        7                                      Z. , . SJ
          /,< ,< :         ^                                   I 1                                                                                              // 44 7J >
                                                                                                                                                                         ?

                        //, ,                                  ir r J
              P e o ^ i/t^ L --                                                                                                                                ! V 3 i                 _z9
                   L     V          u                    ■/       i rf r                        7# 2                                  C




                                                               ,y t r*^                         w>                            p   ,—L I/O - r/ :^
                            /-\                               / d                                                            u*s4<^ '
                          , W 'a i                                                                                              '            ji+ i
                                                _^                                                            „                   . /✓
                                                                                                                                (U z.       '
          Z>                i iJ '*
                        £.<»***+*                                                              —
                                                                                               I^tA n
                                                                                                 /I Z         L*>'i
                                                                                                              ^ ' Caw ^ ^ T '           ; UUO- 0 »~
          fn A , ^ u / ^                                                                                                                /Y Y
           f    /■■( . j/VW
                          * ^ "                                                                                               t
                                                                                                '               ■      - - J *        > ^ J
          ‘U           ’- ^                          6                /uc                       ^
                                                     #**                                                      v/              /                     3           / ' ''
^         *                                                   _                                t*r>
W    s* ^ )                                     7                                          / ? * '’ '             "       ^                          , ,^<                / W i - ° v ]
      Jo           ^                                          A J 7                             ^    2                                                                                             , 4       ?
      ^            ^                                                                           ^                                                                      !        ^       ~         21         \ £
                                                                                                              fi/T -*     C^°                                                          O     -? t



                                                                                                                                                                          .o f O

                                                                                                                 /                             /?        .,       /4'X "'/
                                                                                               /7 ^ /         y^ W^                   ^ / ^         --                                 ^ ^

                                                                                                                        £ o f^ J ^ h                             ^
                                                                                                                  l* T ( j’i i i ^ r ' ^ k                        t                                   0 ,

                                                                                           *UWI .             r
                                                                                                              J^74'       ^tvlv?
                                                                                                                        . ^
                                                                                                                                      w v"
                                                                                                                                           ^        ^ y / C4P*' I '* '
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ^

                                                                                           7      ^ (               fiuL £                                                 ^       r        /# ^
                                                                                               (l? k ' l J         ■----                       "

                                                                                           j%'S'H I                   £<*/            d-                                               ^ ~~ ^
                                                      f'C icM                                       1^              J 0

                 II                             /?                                              i ra~® - 7 z
                                                                                                / -*■
                lA

                                                '? J / V -is
                                        t            '*        '        " '
                                                                            oiS~'                   ysT^°

                                            >                       ^                               /ro -          r °

                H                     & *A .              J                         ^4              /^ 9 -             <5^

                     'I                                   &             X                                         * ■j7;£ -

                                       ^                                    y                   ;                   z/
        f t S H 2_


                             1        /^ a                                                                        J*£


                             1        iy M                                                                   - °?

        h            )            l s y £ r                     '       ‘~ &        ?

                         I            fC        /^ > K ~ ,fe ^ /U J                                          ^

        "            I                                                                     i $p          %       r s
                                      O'1** /h*d                        f^               iilA
        tw           7                     a Jz? L    &                              j     /f/z . /)

  jO ti         2.                    fltfi-          f i / U *4                            / W . /-i
    i/
                                       ''*£*£* £                   f:



 h /v I                           /,!- 3 * ^                  /9 a ^ ^ j3->sJ l                 1 r /^ ~

H .7H I                           ^         /h J l fi* r , & * e .                              /s f ) - al

p s t4 L                                         f   ~ u~                                  ; r/? '           ^

fr /¥       I                    C & o -J f t /u h 4 / ^                                  ]£~2t>.            Q-)
                                       ©~i y^/ y/t/
                                                                                                           /" Z ^
                                        HILLSBOROUGH - INQUESTS
                                                                                                             j       i/o f — ^
                                    SUMMARY QF EVIDENCE - PROFORMA


     WITNESS NAME                                                                NOMINAL       NO
     DAY                                                                         DATE                 CODE
     NATURE OF EVIDENCE (e.g. Supporter, Relative etc)


 ASPECTS


 1.
 2.
           INTRODUCTION
           BACKGROUND
                          □
           (A) STADIUM     Al.     HISTORY      □         A2.       LAYOUT       □           A3. ALTERATIONS □
                           A4.     PROPOSED ALTERATIONS C D                 A5. PREVIOUS MAJOR EVENTS i                 I
                           A6.     PREVIOUS EPISODES            1956 □           1981 □        1987 l~1 1988 rzi
                           A7.     LICENSING □
           (B) TRANSPORT & ROADS      | 1                        fC) PUB SURVEY □
           (D) DEPLOYMENT - POLICE     88    □                  89    cm
           (E) DEPLOYMENT - CLUB
           (F) DATA
                                      88
                           f i . leppings
                                             □
                                             La n e
                                                                89    IZD
                                                                    F2.    PERIMETER GATES Q
                          F3. HORSES
                          F4. CONCERTINA GATES                  A     [Z]            B   □          < = □
                          F5. TERRACING                             F6. FIELD & POLICE                n

       IG\ DECEASED
                          F7. RESCUE/RESPONSE
                          61. NO & LOCATION
                          G3. REMOVAL
                                                                 G2. ENTRY TIMES                     □
       DECEASED BY NAME




       (H) HSE FINDINGS                □
3.
4.
       VIDEO
       SUPPORTERS
                             1981      □
                                       |
                          4A. PAST HISTORY
                                            |
                                                    LJ
                                                      _____
                                                          4B. TRAVEL
                                                                          1988
                                                                             □
                                                                                         □          1989
                                                                                         4C. LEPPINGS LANE □
                                                                                                             □


                          4D. LEPPINGS LANE BUILD UP
                          4E. CONCOURSE/TUNNEL
                          4F. TERRACE       £D        PERCEPTION      □          M W T W       □     CRUSH       □
                          4G. RESCUE & RESPONSE           □


5.     STADIUM            CLUB   □                    EASTWOOD       □            SHEFFIELD CC         Q

                          POLICE    □
 6.   PAST HISTORY
                     POLICE    E D             CLUB      ED             DOCUMENTS Q J


 7.   POLICE CONTROL ROOM


 8.   LEPPINGS I.AWT?



                    PUBLICAN □             SHOPKEEPERS            ED      RESIDENTS E D      POLICE        □


9.    LEPPINGS LANK BUILD TTP  1




                                                             □
                                                                                    □

                                                    OB
                                                    OB
                                                                              »


      RESIDENT/SUPPORTERS                  CLUB                               TURNSTILE OP
      PROGRAM SELLER                       SECURITY                           CLUB ROOM
      POLICE    - MERSEYSIDE               SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                 FOOT                      HORSE


      CONCOURSE/TUNNEL                   STEWARD         |___ |        TURNSTILE OP |     | POLICE
                                                                                                                 □
11. TKBBAfTK            ST JOHNS                    SYMAS                 BALLBOY          REFEREE         f     |
                        LINESMAN
                        POLICE -      TRACK
                                                    PLAYER
                                                              B
                                                            CONTROL ROOM
                                                                         MEDIA
                                                                                           OTHER |         j
                                      BA B B TK P           CRUSH


12.   RESPONSE RESCUE                 ST JOHNS
                                      POLICE
                                                                  SYMAS
                                                                  OTHER
                                                                                    MEDICS
                                                                                    SPECIFY
                                                                                              □

13.   POLICE CONTROL ROOM            SPECIFY

14.                                  SPECIFY




                                                         □
15.   EXPERTS
                         HSE   □               OTHER j        I          SPECIFY
                  CROWD BEHAVIOUR              EFFECT OF ALCOHOL
                  ALCOHOL LEVEL                BEHAVIOUR INDIVIDUAL
                  STRESS - DECISIONS          1     I
                  OTHER | | SPECIFY            ___                                                   • *   • •




16.   OTHER       SPECIFY                      ___
 QUESTIONS BY;    LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES




OTHER COMMENTS:
                                                           26th April          91




         SLP/JT.
         MG 90/3865D.




         Office of Population Censuses and Survey.
         St. Catherine’s House,
         10 Kingsway,
         London. W C . 2B 6J P .



         Dear Mr. Prendergast,

         Re: MARTIN TRAYNOR, KESTER BALL AND KEVIN WILLIAMS.

         Thank you for your letter of the 2nd of April received to-day.   As requested
         I have made the amendments to the Rev.99's-

         I confirm however that I spoke to you on the telephone and explained to you
         that the reason why I had referred to the stepfather of Kevin Williams was
         that I understood that although no formal adoption arrangements had been
         made, this lad had been living as part of the family and presumably had been
         looking to Mr. Williams as his dad for a considerable period of time.

         You confirmed that if there were any repercussions with the family,   these
         would be dealt with by you.


         Yours sincerely,




         S . L .Popper,
         H.M. Coroner.




BAGAAY
opes
■   ■   ■   ■   ■
                    I
                    ■
                        O FFIC E O F P O P U L A T IO N
                        C E N S U S E S & SURVEYS
                                                            St Catherine's House
                                                            10 Kingsway
                                                            London W C 2 B 6JP


                                                           Telephone: 0 7 1 -2 4 2 0 2 6 2
General Register Office                                     Extension:
                                                           G T N :3042


                                                           Fax Ext: 2 1 6 7




    Dr S L Popper
    Medico-Legal Centre                                   Our Ref: MG 90/3865D
    Watery Street
    Sheffield                                             Date: 22 April 1991
    S3 7ET



        Dear Dr Popper

    MARTIN TRAYNOR
    XESTEK BALL
    KEVIN WILLIAMS
    I am writing in connection with the certificates after inquest you
    issued in respect of the deaths of the above-mentioned who died at
    Hillsborough Football Ground on 15 April 1989. The certificates
    have been forwarded to this Office by Mr M Rigby, superintendent
    registrar for Sheffield registration district as it is now over 12
    months since the deaths occurred and the Registrar General's
    written authority for the registration of the deaths is required.

        May I refer you to space 6 in Part 1 of your certificates. First,
        as you may be aware, following the introduction of the Registration
        of Births, Deaths and Marriages (Amendment) Regulations 1982 it has
        been the practice in the case of any deceased child under the age
        of 16 to record in the register of deaths the words "son (or
        daughter) of ..... " followed by the names and occupations of the
        parents of the deceased. However, you will see that this
        information has been recorded in respect of the deaths of Martin
        Traynor and Kester Ball who were over the age of
        16 years. In the circumstances I would be grateful if you would
        delete any reference to the deceased’s parents names and
        occupations.  In the case of Kevin Williams who was under 16 years,
        the Regulations make no provision to record the name of a Step­
        parent and I would be grateful of you would delete the words
        "stepson of James Stephen Williams, an Engineer,".

        Would you please initial your amendments. A pre-paid reply
        envelope is enclosed for the return of the certificates.

        Thank you for your assistance.

        Yours sincerely
                             25 AHilL 1991.




Dr.3.L.Popper,
South Yorkshire Coroner,




Sear Dr. Popper,

........ .further tc iny letter dated 24th. April 1990» and- your acknowledging reply
dated 2 7 th. April 1990.........

I suppose I ought to have written earlier, 'but other things do press on my lite and I
do not have as much time at my keybaora as i would like.

You can well imagine from my previous letter, that J. was highly delighted at the
courage of the jury involved in the Hillsborough Disaster inquest. I did not need to
he in your courtroom to have formed the same views as that jury, and the accidental
verdict is one that I wholeheartedly agreed with when it ca;ne to my attention near
the Giid of la.s“t Lionth*

In this age where the aggrieved and grieving pursue a greed oriented avenue of;
"fuilt" "blame" and with compensation their goal - a completely healthless scenario
has come about. Your dear jury foreman on the 28th. March this year struct a nc e
blow against this situation by ;aaking the position of the greedy less firm as they
follow their cause in the civil courts.

Ky best regards. I remain,


Yours sincere^,




    ?/
  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER                                                    CITY COURTS
                                                                           THE TYRLS
For the County of West Yorkshire                                           BRADFORD BD1 1LA
        (Western District)                                                 Tel: 0274-391362




Dr. S. L. Popper,                                                          My ref: JAT/AP
H. M. Coroner,
Medico-Legal Centre,                                                    Your ref: SLP/LPL
Watery Street,
SHEFFIELD.
S3 7ET                                                                          3 April 1991




Dear Stefan,

It was kind of you to write and to telephone yesterday. I hope that my being there and
having discussions was of help. Certainly all the comments I hear are very positive as to the
way the inquest was conducted and I do congratulate you on seeing it through so well.

Kind regards.

Yours sincerely,




J. A. Turnbull
H. M. CORONER
TELEPHONE CALL T(jKATHERINE ROBERTS, HOME SECRETARY'S OFFICE

TUESDAY, 26 MARCH 1991


I complained t h a t I had w r i t t e n and faxed a l e t t e r t o Mr Rowland
on 26 November 1990.                 Having r e c e i v e d no response I d is c u s s e d th e
m a tt e r with h is o f f i c e ( l e a r n i n g t h a t he had broken h is le g , which
I r e g r e t t e d of c o u r s e ) .   Re-faxed i t on 19 December 1990 t o fax no.
907 127 32190, and have had no r e p l y , not even an acknowledgement
to d a t e .    Quite a p a r t from th e f a c t t h a t I have been involved in
th e Hillsborough in q u e s t s when we have been arguing over minutes,
I f i n d i t t o t a l l y u n a cce pta ble t h a t such a delay should occur and
a p a r t from which I wanted to hear on th e subst an ce of t h e l e t t e r .
I s a i d I wanted th e m a tt e r taken up a t a high level and i n v e s t i g a t e d
and d e a l t w it h .      She s a i d she was in a meeting, she was in th e Home
S e c r e t a r y ' s o f f i c e and t h a t she would r i n g back.
                                                        28 March



Our Ref:      SLP/LPL

Superintendent R egistrar
Surrey Place
SHEFFIELD
SI



Dear Mr Rigby

HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS

I e n c lo s e 95 Form REV.99s in r e sp e c t o f th e deceased.

Thank you very much fo r your c o-op eratio n in f a c i l i t a t i n g the
r eg istr a tio n .

Yours s in c e r e ly




S L POPPER
H M Coroner
R.H.B. STURT, M.A.(CANTAB)                                                                 34 & 36 CASTLE STREET
H.M. CORONER FOR COUNTY OF KENT                                                                     DOVER
  (CANTERBURY & DOVER DISTRICT)                                                                      KENT
                                                                                                  CT16 1PN
     TELEPHONE 0304 240250
                                                                                                        ALSO AT
           FAX 0304 240040
                                                                                                   68 CASTLE STREET
                                                                                                      CANTERBURY
                                                                                                         KENT
                                                                                                       CT1 2QB




     Our ref: RS/KB/CORONERSHIP                                                                    15th March, 1991
     Your ref: SLP/LL

      Dear Stefan,

                Thank you very much for showing me your excellent analysis of the law. I have a few comments.

      1.        I am not sure that it is not too complicated for the Jury, especially if it forms part of a long
                summing-up. This may be a bit too detailed and intellectual for them and I would be inclined not
                to cite individual cases.

      2.        On page 16, you say that gross negligence is not enough for manslaughter. I think this is a rather
                risky thing to say, as it implies there is a distinction between gross negligence and recklessness.

      3.        I think there should be somewhere in the direction, a statement to the effect that the Jury must
                accept the directions on the law which you give them, whether they agree with them or not, but
                that they are free to form their own view as to the facts, whether they agree with your view or not.

      4.        I think somewhere on page 8 you should say that mere carelessness is not enough.

      5.        I think, again on page 8, the words "has actually caused" are possibly ambiguous.                "Was a
                substantial cause" might be better.

               I presume that in your summing-up you will apply the guide-lines, including your excellent
      discussion on the importance of the emergency and the allowances that you make, to each of the putative
      defendants in turn.

                I shall be thinking of you next week and I hope it all goes well.

                                                             Yours sincerely,




                                                      f ■P   R.H.B. Sturt
                                                             H.M. Coroner for Kent
                                                             Canterbury & Dover District

      S.L. Popper, Esq., LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.,
      H.M. Coroner for South Yorkshire
      (West District),
      Medico-Legal Centre,
      Watery Street,
      SHEFFIELD, S3 7ET
                                                                      13 March             91


Our Ref:       SLP/LL

Mr 3 H B S t u r t MA (CANTAB)
H M Coroner f o r County o f Kent
34 & 36 C a s t l e S t r e e t
DOVER
Kent
CT16 1PN


Dear Richard

As d i s c u s s e d , I e n c l o se a photocopy of my d r a f t d i r e c t i o n s on law.
P le ase f o r g i v e t h e i r poor s t y l e but t h e r e i s n ' t r e a l l y much time
t o do p o l i s h i n g . I am w a it in g f o r Michael Powers t o see whether
he has any advice but I would value any comment or sugg estio n
which you i d g n t c ar e t o make. I am s o r r y about t h e i r l e n g t h .

I am happy to say t h a t I had pre pared my f i r s t d r a f t b e fo re I
heard fro.v? fir Howells and saw the d r a f t d i r e c t i o n of Mr B i r t .

I f you have any comments p le a s e l e t me have them as soon as
p o s s i b l e as I t h i n k I w i l l be s t a r t i n g my summing up probably in
the middle of next week.

Yours s i n c e r e l y




S L POPPER
H M Coroner
Our Ref:       SLP/LL                                       PRIVATE & CONFIDENTIAL

His Honour Judge A Simpson
c /o S h e f f i e l d Crown Court
4th Floor
Sol grave House
Bank S t r e e t
SHEFFIELD
SI 1QN



Dear Judge Simpson

J u s t a s h o r t note t o thank you f o r your kindness in coming t o see
me and giv in g me your help with som o f t h e procedural,(problems
a r i s i n g out of long c ase s where j u r i e s might well need more than
a day t o reach t h e i r c o n c l u s io n s .

I am s ure you w i l l be p le a se d t o hear t h a t t h e Crown Court
A d m in is tr a to r has indeed been most h e lp f u l and w i l l a s s i s t us
with ho te l arrangements as well as p ro v id i n g us with J ur y O f f i c e r s .

I hope t h a t perhaps some time in t h e           f u t u r e t h e r e may be ano the r
o p p o r t u n i t y f o r us t o meet. I f when   you a r e next i n S h e f f i e l d
and you have tim e, perhaps you could               g e t your Clerk t o g e t i n touch
with me and we might be a b le t o meet             f o r lunch.

Yours s i n c e r e l y




S L POPPER
H M Coroner
                                                                                     'f t A ,



POINTS FOR DISCUSSION

SUMMING UP AND JURY


1.    Timing f o r summing up.

2.     Timing f o r sending Jur y o ut .

3.    Any problems with meal's, f u r t h e r i n s t r u c t i o n ' , e t c .

4.    Accommodation ( o v e r n i g h t ) :

                  .   Location.
                  .   Presence of J ur y o f f i c e r s .
                  .   Degree of s e c l u s i o n .
                  .   Continuing c o n s i d e r a t i o n of i s s u e .

5.   Su pe rvi si on :

                  .   Number of Jury o f f i c e r s r e q u i r e d .
                  ,   Query a v a i l a b i l i t y from Crown Court.
                  .   Any o t h e r so u rc e s .
                  .   Training.
                  .   Use of P o l i c e O f f i c e r s .

6.   Summing up in general terms:

                 . Format.

                 . I n t e r u p t i o n s by counsel       a)   on   law,
                                                            b)   on   facts,
                                                            c)   on   inference,
                                                            d)   on   conclusions.

                 . Address with summary.

7.   Use of t r a n s c r i p t s .

8.   Use of e x h i b i t s .

9.    I n t e r r u p t i o n s from body of c o u r t - proc edure.
                                                                11 March              91


Our Ref:       SLP/Ll

Mr P Routh
Crown Court Administrator
Crown Court
SHEFFIELD
SI


Dear Mr Routh

I understand from Mr Jones th a t you have very kindly agreed to a s s i s t
me in two r e s p e c ts:

1.     With th e booking and appropriate arrangements fo r hotel
       accommodation fo r th e Jury and Jury O ffic e r s a f t e r the Jury
       have r e t i r e d , as I a n t ic ip a te they are l i k e l y to take more
       than a day to reach a c o n clu sio n .

       In order to avoid any p o s s ib le misunderstanding, th e c o s t o f
       the accommodation w ill o f course be met by S h e f f ie ld City
       Council as part and parcel o f th e Coronal expenses a sso c ia te d
       with th e in q u e sts.

       I r e a l i s e th a t you would l i k e as much n o tic e as p o s s ib le and i t
       i s my present hope th a t we w i l l be able to send th e Jury out
       on 25th March. I am p a r tic u la r ly anxious to tr y and conclude
       the inquest before the end o f t h i s month fo r a l l kinds o f reasons.

       Mr Jones or one o f h is s t a f f w i l l be in touch with you nearer
       th e time to tr y and sharpen up th e tim ing.

2.     I am a ls o more than g r a te fu l to you agreeing to l e t us have some
       o f your Jury O ffic e r s as I am very anxious th a t once the Jury
       have r e t ir e d th e people who look a ft e r them should know what
       they are doing. I f th in g s go according to plan, I w ill require
       them on 25th March.

       Obviously, any c o s t s or expenses a s so c ia te d with involvement
       with t h i s Jury w ill not f a l l to your account but w i l l be met
       1n th e same way as th e hotel accommodation, and no doubt you w i l l
       r a is e an appropriate in v o ic e fo r t h i s in due course.

May I say again how very g r a te fu l I am to you fo r your h e lp , which has
removed a con sid era b le an xiety from my should ers.

YOurs s in c e r e ly




S L POPPER
H M Coroner

CC'    H. \o
    J MERVYN JONES M Sc                                          HILLSBOROUGH IN QUI RY T EAM
    DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE
    CORONER'S OFFICER                                           NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
    Furnival House                                              Fowler Street
    Furnival Gate                                               Birmingham B7 5DA
    Eyre Street
    Sheffield S1 4QN
    Telephone: 0742-731546
    Fax        : 0742-731483
                                                                Your Ref:
    CHESHIRE CONSTABULARY
    Police Headquarters
    Chester CH1 2PP                                             Our Ref:    JM J I FR
    Telephone: 0244-350000 Ext 2091
    Fax        : 0244                                           Date.       7th March, 1991




    Dr S L POPPER,
    H.M. C or on e r,

•   Town H a l l ,
    Sheffield.




    JTJRY BAILIFFS


    Herewith my policy notes on this subject.

    Please will you write to Mr ROUTH and formalise the position regarding
    availability and fi nance.




                         I




                                                S h e ffie ld
       PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
POLICY NOTE



THURSDAY 7TH MARCH 1991


1150 HOURS


Telephone discussion with Mr Geoff BINGHAM (Crown Courts Circuit
Administrator), based in Sheffield (Tel 0742-755866). I discussed with Mr
BINGHAM the issue of Jury Officers. He said he was most willing to assist
subject, of course, to the availability of staff and finance. He referred me
to Mr Peter ROUTH the Administrator for the Sheffield Crown Courts on
0742-701224, for Jury Officers and suitable hotels for overnight
accommodation. He also said the matter would need to be formalised by the
Coroner in writing direct with Mr Peter ROUTH and copied to Mr BINGHAM.

As matter of important information, the Crown Courts will be closed for
criminal business between Wednesday 27th March, and Monday 8th April 1991. If
the Coroner were to send the Jury out on the Tuesday after Easter (ie Tuesday
2nd April, 1991) there should be no difficulty supplying Jury Officers. Other
times could be more difficult.


NB. If the above plan fails I have a contingency plan to allow three Cheshire
Officers with no previous involvement with South Yorkshire Police, the
investigation or the Inquests to fulfil this duty.


POLICY NOTE


THURSDAY 7TH MARCH. 1991


1210 HOURS


Telephone discussion with Mr Peter ROUTH, Crown Courts Administrator, Sheffield
(Telephone: 701224).

Mr Peter ROUTH will assist the Coroner with the provision of the Jury bailiffs
and will also book a suitable hotel for the Jury. However, he will need as
much notice as possible to provide the Jury bailiffs and one clear working day
for the booking of the hotel.

Mr ROUTH suggests that the Coroner writes to formalise this arrangement and
also to agree the costs to be met by the Coroner’s funding agency. It is
unclear whether they will charge for the bailiffs but this will need to be
covered if they do.

He also suggests that I keep Mr ROUTH up-to-date with progress.   He re-affirmed
the ease of assistance for the week of Tuesday 2nd April, 1991.
FRIDAY, 8th MARCH 1991

On Thursday, 7th March a t about 8.10 pm. I went t o th e Sing 0 a r Chinese
R es ta u ra nt i n te n d in g t o have a meal on my own. Having s a t down I n o ti c e d
a group which in cl ude d somet&f whom I thou gh t I re c og ni se d as a local
s o l i c i t o r , a t another t a b l e .

Having o rd e re d , t h e gentleman stood up and came over t o me, he ob vious ly
having r e c og n is e d me, he en quired whether I was on my own and i f I wished
t o j o i n them. I did so and d i s co v e re d t h a t he v^s ^ c o m p a n y with his
w if e , h i s p a r t n e r and an accountant£and h is wife^ 7wfc$ewas t h e Chief
Executive of th e fi r m . I changed my or d e r and ordere d th e same meal
as they were having.

The s o l i c i t o r was Mr Gregory and a f t e r a p e ri o d of time I r e c o l l e c t e d
t h a t he was a s s o c i a t e d with t h e f ir m of Keeble Hawson who, of co u rs e,
are i n s t r u c t i n g Mr Maxwell on b e h a l f of t h e City Council. By t h e time
I had tho ug ht of t h i s we were a lr e a d y e a t i n g and I f e l t t h a t i t would
be i n a p p r o p r i a t e a t t h a t s ta g e t o withdraw from t h e t a b l e .

Most of t h e evening was spent in d i s c u s s i n g th e usual t h i n g s - c h i l d r e n ,
th e Gulf, s o l i c i t o r s ' f e e s e t c . Hil lsborough was mentioned, in general
te rms, but nothing whatever was s a i d with r e g a rd t o t h e i s s u e s or p o s s i b l e
v e r d i c t , or anything which I c o n si de re d are or were p r e j u d i c i a l or
improper. The p r i n c i p l e p o i n t s which were mentioned w er e: -

1.    We made some comment about th e q u a l i t y of th e b a r r i s t e r s but
      n e ed l es s t o say I did not i n d i c a t e who I thought was b e s t but
       i t was a t t h a t s ta g e I began t o r e a l i s e t h a t he knew something
      about t h e m a tt e r because he made some comment t h a t he hoped
      t h a t he was employing th e b e s t b a r r i s t e r .            I mentioned t h a t i t
      was i n t e r e s t i n g t o see th e d i f f e r e n t q u a l i t i e s and in p a r t i c u l a r
      how good one of them was in i d e n t i f y i n g w it n e s s e s from photos.

2.    They sympathised with me, I d e s c r ib e d what was happening as a
      nightmare.

3.    I commented t h a t we had been s i t t i n g f o r a long time with th e
      Jury and some s u r p r i s e was e xp re sse d t h a t i t was s t i l l th e
      same one. The q u e s ti o n was asked as t o t h e i r s e l e c t i o n and
      I e xp la in ed t h a t i t had been e n t i r e l y random except t h a t we
      had excluded people who knew the y would not be able t o make
      a commitment and I had arranged f o r a s u r p lu s of j u r o r s t o be
      p r e s e n t on th e opening day so t h a t i f anyone was d i s q u a l i f i e d
      we would be a ble t o s e l e c t someone e l s e .             I e xp la in ed t h a t we
      had de vis ed a type of l o t t e r y in or d er t o t r y t o s e l e c t out of
      t h e p o t e n t i a l body of j u r o r s an e n t i r e l y random s e c t i o n and
      t h a t t h a t in f a c t had been achi eve d, but I was very f o r t u n a t e
      in t h e q u a l i t y of th e Jury and we had only l o s t about iH days’, J                           if l
      one f o r a fu n e ra l and t h e o t h e r two f o r i l l n e s s e s of c h i l d r e n .


                                                                                   /continued.
FILE NOTE (continued                 2)

FRIDAY, 8th MARCH 1991


4.     The only o t h e r comment of any moment was t h a t th e acc ountant
       mentioned t h a t hi s daughter i s very good f r i e n d s with Mr
       D u c k e n f i e ld ' s daughter and a comment was made t h a t he t h e r e f o r e
       knew of th e Press a t t e n t i o n which he had had, although on th e
       o th e r hand he a ls o knew of a c o n s i d e r a b l e amount of s u p p o rt .
       I i n d i c a t e d t h a t I did not want t o c o n tin ue t a l k i n g about t h a t .

Had         r e a l i s e d Mr G regory's r e l a t i o n s h i p t o t h e in q u e s t when f i r s t
i n v i t e d , i t i s q u i t e l i k e l y t h a t I would have d e c l in e d but u n f o r t u n a t e l y
I had f o r g o t t e n h is involvement.

The c o s t of th e meal was about double what I would have expected t o
pay but I paid i t myself.




S L TOPPER
TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH MR STURT

MONDAY, 4th MARCH 1991, at 5.3 0 pm.


I d i s c u s s e d with him what he thought about simply re ad ing p a r t of
Mr Wh ite 's s t a t e m e n t , le a vi ng out t h e c o n t r o v e r s i a l b i t .   He
thought t h i s was an a c c e p ta b le way                    analagj&ts- ^sfeta& ge'of
s ta t em e n t in crimi na l p ro ce ed in g s.


He took t h e view t h a t i f I f e l t t h a t any Jury p r o p e rl y d i r e c t e d
could^reach a v e r d i c t of Unlawfully K il le d in r e s p e c t of any
p a r t i c u l a r person then I ought t o withdraw t h a t v e r d i c t from
th e Jury in r e s p e c t of him, even i f I l e f t i t a v a i l a b l e in
r e s p e c t of o t h e r s .


He was s u r p r i s e d t h a t counsel took a c o n t r a r y view.              He s a i d t h a t
he would be i n t e r e s t e d t o see t h e d r a f t         d i r e c t i o n on law and
he a l s o very generously o f f e r e d t o be a v a i l a b l e f o r d i s c u s s i o n
and indeed t o come up t o S h e f f i e l d i f I f e l t I needed hi s su p p o rt .




S L
               SHEFFIELD REGISTRATION DISTRICT
                                  M IC H A E L RIGBY
                              SU PERINTENDENT REGISTRAR      Register Office
                                                             S u rrey Place
                                    OFFICE HOURS:
                                  MONDAY TO FRIDAY           S h effield S1     1YA
                                  9.00 a.m. to 4.00 p.m.



Your Ref:
 Our Ref:   MR/MA                                            Telephone No. 7 3 5 3 . .fr.9.

                                                             Mr Rigby

27 February 1991

Mrs J Taylor
Secretary to
Dr S L Popper
H M Coroner
Medico Legal Centre
Watery Street
SHEFFIELD
S3 7ET

Dear Mrs Taylor

Re: Hillsborough

Thank you for your letter and enclosures dated 22 February 1991 which
will be of great assistance to ray office when dealing with the registration
of deaths relating to the above.

I do appreciate the trouble you have taken to give me the relevant information
which will ease the difficulties to the Registrars post registration.

 I will bear in mind the change of solicitors of the relatives            of Gary
 C Church when Dr Popper's Inquest Certificates are received.

 Thank you once again.

 Yours sincerely




 Superintendent R ^ i s t V a r
         i
 *




                                                          22nd February       91




     JS .
     MR/MA.




     Mr. M. Rigby,
     Superintendent Registrar,
     Sheffield Registration District,
     Register Office,
     Surrey Place,

•    Sheffield. SI 1YA.




         Dear Mr.   Rigby,

         Re: Hillsborough.

         I enclose herewith the list of names and addresses of the deceased and also
         of their solicitors as discussed with you on the telephone.

         I have iust heard from Dr. Popper that the relatives of Gary C. Church
         have changed their solicitor.  I do not as yet have this information to hand
         but will let you have it as soon as it is in my possession.

         If you need any more details please do not hesitate to contact me.

         Yours sincerely,




         Joan Taylor,   Secretary to H.M.Coroner.




BAFAAD
    Name and address           Name and address           Solicitor’s
    of deceased.               of Solicitor.              Reference.


    Thomas Anthony Howard,    David Phillips,             IRH/LM/HOWARD.
                              Harris & Whalley,
                              268 Stanley Road,
                              New Strand, Bootle,
                              Merseyside. L20 3 E R .


    Inger Shah,               Mr. P.L. Goodenough,        LIT1/C5/L7.
                              Official Receiver to
                              Supreme Court,
                              Penderel House, 287
                              High Holborn, London
                              WC1V 7 H P .

 Gary Harrison.               E. Rex Makin,               TS/GJM.
                              Whitechapel,
                              Liverpool. LI 1HQ.



 David George Rimmer,         Brighouse, Jones & Co.,    SM/SMW.
                              28 Derby Street,
                              Ormskirk, Lancs.
]
                              L39 2BY.


Colin Mark Ashcroft.         William H. Lill & C o . ,   CRF/JJ.
                             9 The Cross, Lymm,
                             Cheshire. WA13 OHY.



Ian    D a v i H UTial an
                             Silverman Livermore,        DRF/SB/WHELAN.
                             11/13 Victoria Street,
                             Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




James Robert He nnesey.      Linskills,                  GT/MJ/Civil.
                             Harrington House,
                             Harrington Street,
                             Liverpool. L2 9QA.




David Hawley,                E. Rex Makin,               TS/GJM.
                             Whitechapel,
                             Liverpool. LI 1 H Q .



BAFAAA
  James Gary Asm'na 11     Alexander Harris & Co.,         DNHDC.
                           Ashfield House, 54 Hyton,
                           L iverpool.




 David Steven Brown.       Gorna & C o .,                  A TP / J L /
                           Virginia House, Cheapside,      Brown.
                           King Street,
                           Manchester. M2 4 N B .




 Peter Andrew Harn'gun     Mackrell & Thomas,              ST/LC.
                           144 Liverpool Road,
                           Page Moss, Liverpool.



 Roy Harry Hamilton.      Kennan Gribble & Bell,          CB/CP/
                          40 Crosby Road North,           H112A.
                          Waterloo,
                          Liverpool. L22 4QQ.




 Colin Wafer,             Silverman Livermore,          DRF/SB.
                          11/13 Victoria Street,
                          Liverpool.  L2 5QQ.




Gary Christopher Church   Silverman Livermore,          DF/LS/
                          11/13 Victo ria Street,       C hu r c h .
                          Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




Carl William Rimmer.      Silverman Livermore,          DRF/SB
                          11/13 Victoria Street,        R i m me r.
                          Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




Paul Brian Murray         Knight & Sons,                JGT/SKB.
                          31 Ironmarket,
                          Newcastle-under-
                          Lyme , Staffordshire,
                          ST5 1 R L .




BAFAAA
                             3


 Christopher Barry                David Philipps,                IRH/LM/
 Devonside,                       Harris & Whalley,              D447.
                                  268 Stanley Road,
                                  New Strand,
                                  Bootle, Merseyside L20 3ER.




 Paula Ann Smith,                 Caplan Goodman & Coote,         CPC Mr
                                  107 Townsend Avenue,            Caplan
                                  Liverpool. LE11 8ND.




 Tracey Elizabeth Cox            Quinney & Harris,               RH/KH.
                                 117 High Street,
                                 Wooton Bassett,
                                 Swindon, Wiltshire,
                                 SN4 7AU.




Marion Hazel M c C a b e ,       Michael Thomas & Co.,           MN/ SS.
                                 10/12 Southernhay,
                                 Basildon, Essex.




Vincent Michael                  Christopher Thomas & C o .,     ACS/JB
Fitzs immons.                    4 Bank Buildings,
                                 Charring Cross,
                                 Birkenhead,Wirral L41 6EJ.
                                 (acting for the family)



                                 Rigby & C o .,                  CMG/MSF/
                                 406 High Street, Winsford,      F194.
                                 Cheshire. CW7 7DU.
                                 (acting for former spouse)



                                 W hi tt le s,                   MH/TL/
                                 Pearl Assurance House,          F39 99 .
                                 23 Princess Street, Albert
                                 Square, Manchester. M2 4ER.
                                 (acting for common law wife).




Brian Christopher                Dooley & Co . ,                 TM/CO
M a tthews,__________            P.O. Box 5,                     4815
                                 122 Cherryfield Drive,
                                 Kirkby, Merseyside. L32 8AA.




BAFAAA
                          4



Peter Andrew Burkett,         Silverman Livermore,          DRF/SB.
                              11/13 Victoria Street,
                              Liverpool. L2 5QQ.
                              (acting for w i d o w ) .



                              Bell Lamb & Joynson,          GLS/W699.
                              51/53 Wallasey Road,
                              Wallasey, L45 4NN.
                              (acting for parents).



Henry Charles Rogers,         Walker Smith & Way,           JFI/B.
                              102 Whitby Road,
                              Ellesmore Port. L65 OAG.




Joseph Clark,                 Mace & Jones,                SDM/JS/
                              30 Sherbourne Square,        H 2 5 2 8 1 .001/
                              Huyton, MerseysideL36 9UR.   Gilchrist.




Francis Joseph McAllister,    Brian Thompson & Partners,   MH/McAlli
                              Richmond House, Rumford      ster. Y89V
                              Place, Liverpool.L3 9SW.     291.


Joseph Daniel McCarthy,       Charles Russell Williams &   JEKF/PJR/
                               J am e s ,                  TW 1136/1.
                               Hale Court, Lincolns Inn,
                               London.WC2A 3UL.




Steven Joseph Robinson,       Coyne Learmonth,             A CL /LMJ/HI.
                               135 Liverpool Road,
                              Great Crosby, Liverpool.




Eric Hankin,                   Lees, Lloyds & Whitley,     F JR /NRF.
                               Castle Chambers, Castle
                               Street, Liverpool.


Alan Johnston,                 Silverman Livermore,
                               11/13 Victoria Street,      DRF/SB.
                               Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




BAFAAA
                            5




Henry Thomas Burke,       Canter Levin & Berg,            KP/CB.
                          PO Box 21, 18 Newtown
                          Gardens, Kirkby L32 8RR.




Keith McGrath,            Edwards Frais Ronald,           MR/KT.
                          Refuge Assurance House,
                          Derby Square,
                          Liverpool. L2 1T2.



James Philip Delaney,     D.P. Roberts Hughes & Denye,    GER/LMC.
                          55 Allport Lane,
                          Bromborough L62 7HH.




Jonathon Owens,           J. Frodsham & Sons              DP/STC.
                          13/15 Alverton Street,
(                         Prescot, Merseyside L34 5QW.




Christine Anne Jones,     Joseph A. Jones & Co.,          JK/WR.
                          Barclays Bank Chambers,
                          New Street, Lancaster, LAI 1EH.




Kevin Tyrrell,            David Matthews & Co.,           DM/SAP.
                          65/67 Dale Street,
                          Liverpool. L2 2HJ.




Ian Thomas Glover,        Canter Levin & Berg,            LF/KB.
                          46/48 Stanley Street,
                          Liverpool. LI 6AL.




Christopher Edwards,      Walker Smith & Way,             JFI/B.
                          102 Whitby Road,
                          Ellesmere Port. L65 OAG.




Peter Francis Toot l e,   Silverman Livermore,            D R F/ L D .
                          11/13 Victoria Street,
                          Liverpool. L2 5QQ.
                         6



Peter McDonnell,             Silverman Livermore,               DRF/LD.
                             11/13 Victoria Street,
                             Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




Eric George Hughes,          Crombie Collins,                   JRC/WP.
                             Elwyn House,
                             9 Market Place, Uppingham,
                             Leicestershire. LE15 9QH.




Paul Anthony Hewitson,       Coyne Learmonth,                   ACL/LMH/
                             135 Liverpool Road,                HI
                             Great Crosby, Liverpool
                             L23 5 T E .




Graham John Wright,          Alexander Harris & Co.,           DNH.DC.
                             54 Ashfield Road,
                             Sale, Cheshire. M33 IDT.




Carl Darren Hewitt,          Rich & Carr,                      DMR/SKB.
                             P.O. Box 15,
                             Assurance House,
                             24 Rutland Street,
                             Leicestershire. LEI 9GX.




Nicholas Peter Joynes,       Davies, Wallis, Foyster,          PAB/CC.
                             5 Castle Street,
                             Liverpool. L2 4XE.
                             (acting for w i d o w ) .



                             Lees Lloyd Whitely,               FJR/NRF.
                             Castle Chambers,
                             Castle Street,
                             Liverpool. L2 9TJ.
                             (acting for parents).




Carl Brown,                  W iddows,                         AL/SB.
                             P.O. Box 1, 2nd Floor,
                             South Wing, Turnpike House,
                             Market Street, Leigh, WN7 1 D Z .




BAFAAA
                         7



David William Birtles,       Silverman Livermore,                    DRF/SB.
                             11/13 Victoria Street,
                             Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




Gary Collins,                Woolwich Lander & Savage,               ADS/COL.
                             256a Stanley Road,
                             Bootle, Liverpool L20 3ER.




Patrick John Thompson,       Silverman Livermore,                    DRF/SB.
                             11/13 Victoria Street,
                             Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




Andrew Mark Brookes,         Shakespeares,                           MJAH/LHS.
                             10 Bennetts Hill,
                             Birmingham. B2 5 R S ,




Kevin Daniel Williams,       Goffey & C o .,                         RBF/AF/W.
                             Turret House,
                             3 Chapel Lane,
                             Formby, Merseyside.      L3 7 4 D L .



Simon Bell,                  Wall & C o . ,                          MC/MJC/A6168
                             98 Bridge Road,
                             Litherland,
                             Liverpool. L216PH.




Stuart Paul William          Paul Watson & Co.,                      BPW/WB .
Thompson,____________        lc Preston New Road,
                             Churchtown, Southport
                             PR9 8 P B .




Anthony Peter Kelly,         Richard Dawson & Co.,                   RD/CB/K001.
                             Lauren Court,
                             Wharf Road,
                             Sale, Cheshire. M33 2 A F .
                             (acting for w i f e ) .

                             Silverman Livermore,          DRF/SB.
                             11/13 Victoria Street,
BAFAAA                       Liverpool. L2 5QQ (acting for mother).
              -    8   -




Nicholas Hewitt,             Rich & Carr,                    DMR/SKB.
                             P.O. Box 15,
                             Assurance House,
                             24 Rutland Street,
                             Leicester LEI 9GX.




David William Mather,        Silverman Livermore,            DRF/LM/H.
                             11/13 Victoria Street,
                             Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




                             Dooley & C o .,                 TM/CB/4786
Martin Kevin Traynor,
                             P.O.Box No.5,
                             122 Cherryfield Drive,
                             Kirk b y ,
                             Merseyside. L32 8AA.



                             Silverman Livermore,            DRF/SB.
Paul Clark,
                             11/13 Victoria Street,
                             Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




Gordon Rodney Horn,          Silverman Livermore,            DRF/SB.
                             11/13 Victoria Street,
                             Liverpool. L25QQ.
                             (acting for sister).

                             E. Rex Makin & Co.,             TS/GJM.
                             Whitechapel,
                             Liverpool.LI 1HQ.
                             (acting for mother).




                              Dooley & C o .,                  TM/GB4912
 Christopher James Traynor
                              P.O. Box 5,
                              122 Cherryfield Drive,
                              Kirkby, Merseyside. L32 8AA.




                              Canter Levin & Berg,             NMF/MM/SK
 Colin Andrew Hugh
                              2nd Floor,                       9246/01.
 William Sefton,
                              Whelmar House,
                              South Way,
                              Skelmersdale WN8 6NU.



 BAFAAA
                                  9



                                                               TM/CB/4785.
Barry Glover,                   Dooley & Co.,
                                146 Queens Drive,
                                Liverpool. L13 OAL.




                                                                MH/JONES/
Richard Jones,                  Brian Thompson & Partners,
                                Richmond House,                 Y 8 9V 261.
                                Rumford Place,
                                Liverpool. L3 . 9SW.




                                Silverman Livermore,            DRF/SB.
Sarah Louise Hicks,
                                11/13 Victoria Street,
                                Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




                                                                DRF/SB.
William Roy Pemberton,          Silverman Livermore,
---------------------------- 11/13 Victoria Street,
                                Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




                                                                 ACS/JB/Fox-
Thomas Steven Fox,               Christopher Thomas & C o .,
                                 4 Bank Buildings,
                                 Charing Cross,
-----------------------------      Birkenhead, Wirral,
                                 L41 6 E J .




                                 Brian Thompson & Partners,      MH/CHAPMAN/
 Raymond Thomas Chapman,
                                 Richmond House,                 A89V228.
                                 Rumford Place,
                                 Liverpool. L3 9SW.




 John McBrien,                   Mrs. J. McBrien,
                                 The Old Vicarage,
                                 Well Street,
                                 Holywell,
                                 Clwyd. CH8 9PL.
                                  (representing self)



 Gerard Bernard Patrick         Napthans,
 Baron,                         I 5 Winckley Squre,
 ------------------------- Preston
                                 Lancashire. PRl 3 D T .          NPK/PE.
                             Canter Levin & Berg,           KP/CB.
Alan McGlone,
                             P.O. Box 21,
                             18 Newtown Gardens,
                             Kirkby, L32 8RR.




                             Silverman Livermore,          DRF/SB.
Stephen Paul Co poc,
                             11/13 Victoria Street,
                             Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




                             Silverman Livermore,           DRF/SB.
Michael David Kelly,
                             11/13 Victoria Street,
                             Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




                             David philips Harris           IRH/LM.
Paul William Carlile,
                             & Whalley,
                             268 Stanley Road,
                             New Strand,
                             Bootle, Merseyside L20 3ER.




                              Tilley Underwood,            DFT/HM.
 Kester Roger Marcus Ball,
                              7 Chequer Street,
                              St. Albans,
                              H e r t s . AL1 3 Y J .




                              Leighton Davis,              CALD/MER.
 Derrick George Godwin,
                              Buttercross House,
                              14 Langdale Gate,
                              Witney,
                              O x o n . 0X8 6 E Y .




                              Mace & Jones,                SDM/JS.
  John Alfred Anderson,
                              30 Sherbourne Square,
                              Huyton,
                              Merseyside L36 9UR.




  BAFAAA
                         11



Martin Kenneth Wild,          Bishop & C o .,            AJH/SM.
                              45 Market Street,
                              New Mills,
                              Stockport SK12 4AA.




Peter Reuben Thompson,        Cuff Roberts North Kirk,   DC/IC.
                              25 Castle Street,
                              Liverpool. L2 4TD.




Graham John Roberts,          Percy Hughes & Roberts,    G C I HDCI
                              29 East Gate North,        R30 .
                              Chester. CHI 1LQ.




David John Benson             Silverman Livermore,       DRF/LD.
                              11/13 Victoria Street,
                              Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




Thomas Howard                 David Philips Harris &     IRH/LM.
                              Whalley,
                              268 Stanley Road,
                              New Strand,
                              Bootle. L20 3ER.
                              (representing ex-wife)

                              Silverman Livermore,       DRF/SB.
                              11/13 Victoria Street,
                              Liverpool. L2 5QQ.
                              (representing parents)



Philip John Steele,           Coyne Learmonth,           ACL/REB/ST.
                              135 Liverpool Road,
                              Great Crosby,
                              Liverpool. L23 5 T E .



Jon Paul Gilhooley,           Silverman Livermore,       DRF/SB.
                              11/13 Victoria Street,
                              Liverpool L2 5QQ.




 Paul David Brady.            Yaffe, Jackson Ostrin,     4/B.
                              Princess Building,         0327/RJJ/
                              81 Dale Street,            AH.
                              Liverpool. L2 2 H Z .
                                   12



Carl David Lewis,           Dooley & C o .,                 TM/SC/4767.
                            P.O. Box 5,
                            122 Cherryfield Drive,
                            Kirkby, Merseyside.
                            L32 8AA.




Gary Philip Jones,          Morecroft Dawson &              RHD/AAG.
                            Garnetts,
                            Queen Building,
                            8 Dale Street,
                            Liverpool. L2 4TQ.




Stephen Francis O ’Neill,   E. Rex Makin,                   TSGJM.
                            Whitechapel,
                            Liverpool. LI 1HQ.




Barry Sidney Bennett,       Silverman Livermore,            DRF/SB.
                            11/13 Victoria Street,
                            Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




Victoria Jane Hicks.        Silverman Livermore,            DRF/SB.
                            11/13 Victoria Street,
                            Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




David Leonard Thomas,       Layton & Co . ,                 CS/DRW.
                            Oriel Chambers,
                            14 Water Street,
                            Liverpool. L2 8TD.




Stephen Francis Harrison,   Edwards Abrahams Doherty,       AD/JW.
                            125/127, Picton Road,
                            Liverpool. L15 4HG.
                            (representing m o t h e r ) .

                            Silverman Livermore,             DRF/SB.
                            11/13 Victoria Street,
                            Liverpool. L2 5QQ.
                            (representing family).

BAFAAA
Arthur Horrocks,         Fanshaw Porter & Hazlehurst,   NLJ/KLH.
                         11 & 61 Hamilton Square,
                         Birkenhead, Merseyside,
                         L41 6A X .




Philip Hammond,          Bartlett & Son,                DPH/CAH I
                         Marldon Chambers,              2783.
                         30 North John Street,
                         Liverpool. L2 9QN.



Adam Edward Spearritt,   Silverman Livermore,            DRF/SB.
                         11/13 Victoria Street,
                         Liverpool. L2 5QQ.




Lee Nicol,               Wall & C o .,                  JSB/SEH I
                         34 Crosby Road North,          A6296.
                         Waterloo,
                         Liverpool. L22 4 Q G .




BAFAAA
04/02 '91   08v46   FAX 0742 726247            MEDICO LGL CNTER         1001



                                       ACTIVITY REPORT              /


                    TRY TRANSMISSION AGAIN

                    ERROR PAGE                              ##104


                    TRANSACTION #             0825

                    TTI                       FORENSIC PATH

                    CONNECTION TEL            736900

                    CONNECTION ID                      G3

                     START TIME   /}          02/04 08:45

                    USAGE TIME                  00'48

                     PAGES                      1
               SHEFFIELD REGISTRATION DISTRICT
                               M I C H A E L RI GBY
                           S U PERINTENDENT REGISTRAR        Regi ster Office
                                                             Surrey Pl ace
                                 OFFICE HOURS:
                                                             Shef f i el d S1 1Y A
                                MONDAY TO FRIDAY
                               9.00 a.m. to 4.00 p.m.



four Ref:
Your        SLP/LL
 Our Ref:   MR/MA                                            Telephone No. 7 3 5 3 . 2 0 .

                                                             Mr...Rigby.......
 31 January     1991


 Dr S L Popper
 HM Coroner
 Medico Legal Centre
 Watery Street
 SHEFFIELD
 S3 7ET

 Dear Dr Popper

 Thank you for your letter dated 25 January 1991- I have informed the
 Registrars of Births and Deaths and the Registrar General of the change in
 plans. We now expect the Inquest Certificates to be forwarded direct to
 this office.

 There are no facilities at this office or at the Register Office in Liverpool
 enabling us to check that addresses of people named on your orders for burial/
 cremation are the same now as in April 1989 -

 If you have the names and addresses of any solicitors who were dealing on
 behalf of the relatives of the deceased I would ensure that not only would
 the Registrars write to the person named on the burial/cremation order but
 also to the solicitor (if any) concerned with that particular death informing
 him of the registration of the death.

 Thanking you for any assistance you can give in this direction and also for
 your co-operation in this matter.

 Yours sincerely




 Superintendenlf'^Rel^'strar
R.tf.B. STURT, M.A.(CANTAB)                              34 & 36 CASTLE STREET
H.M. CORONER FOR COUNTY OF KENT                                   DOVER
 (CANTERBURY & DOVER DISTRICT)                                     KENT
     TELEPHONE 0304 240250
                                                                CT16 1PN
        FAX 0304 240040                                           ALSO AT
                                                              68 CASTLE STREET
                                                                CANTERBURY
                                                                   KENT
                                                                  CT1 2QB




     Our ref:     RS/KB/CORONERSHIP                26th February,           1991
     Your r e f : SLP/LL

     Dear Stefan,

           This is just to let you know that somebody involved in
     your Inquest rang up this office a week or so ago and asked
     what I had done about warning witnesses that they might
     incriminate themselves. I did not speak to this person, but I
     got Johnnie to send him the transcripts of what I had said on
     the subject at my Inquest.    I just thought that you should
     know.

                                      Yours sincerely,




                                      R.H.B. Sturt
                                      H.M. Coroner for Kent
                                      Canterbury & Dover District
     S.L. Popper, Esq., LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.,
     H.M. Coroner for South Yorkshire
     (West District),
     Medico-Legal Centre,
     Watery Street,
     SHEFFIELD,  S3 7ET
                                              T mrn




                             OVQ-^M:
                             frWta.




                              i? tN'teovjcc

ii ia l f e it e S if c lS    ^ R c O V S"»
FAX 0742 726247           MEDICO LGL CNTER



                   ACTIVITY REPORT



 TRANSMISSION OR



 TRANSACTION =            0850

 CONNECTION TEL           736900

 CONNECTION ID                     G3

 START TIME               02/19 09:18

 USAGE TIME                 00 49

 PAGES                      1
                                                             Hillsborough Working Party,
                                                             Chief Executives Office,
                                                             Room 5,

LIVERPOOL                                                    Municipal Buildings ,
                                                             Dale Street,
                                                             L IV E R P O O L   L69 2D H
                                                             Telephone: 0 5 1 - 225 2334/3
                                                             Fax: 236 2047
                                                             D X 14206 L IV E R P O O L

                                                             Y o u r ref

                                                             O u r ref

                                                             Date    14th February 1991.


    Dr. S. L. Popper,
    Coroner,
    South Yorkshire (West) District,
    Watery Street,
    SHEFFIELD
    S3 7 E T .



    Dear Dr. Popper,

    This Hillsborough Working Party wishes to express its concern and dismay
    at your refusal to place the Football Supporter's Association's written
    submission, of December 3rd 1990, before the Hillsborough jury as they
    so requested.

    That submission or 'letter' presented by the FSA remains in our view,
    a credible, considered and broadly based synthesis of legitimate
    evidence.

    That football supporters in attendance at Hillsborough remain legally
    unrepresented at the Inquests is, of course, something you have no
    influence over.  But as fans giving evidence continue to appear in
    isolation the one organisation that can best reflect their experiences,
    concerns and interests has, effectively, been denied an input by
    virtue of your decision on the FSAs submission.

    As a written        submission is the only means of representing the views of

•   the FSA your
    Accordingly,
    decision and
                        position on this matter is both perplexing and disturbing.
                        on behalf of the Working Party, I express unease at your
                        the lack of any noteworthy explanation in your reply to
    the FSA.

    Yours faithfully,




     Cllr. H. Chase,
     Chair H.W.P.




    When calling or telephoning please ask fo r
                                                          7 February         91




MEMORANDUM


to :   mr m m

CC:    HAMMOND SUDDARDS



With r e fer e n c e t o your not® t o West Midlands P o l i c e , Or Nicholson 1s
not going t o tie addressing th e I ssu e o f l a t e a r r iv a ls or alcohol
c o n te n t, as t h i s 1s not w ith in h i s f i e l d .

You w i l l , o f c o u r se , be aware fr o a th e cowwents made 1n court on
6 February, what thoughts I have regarding s y sutaralng up and p o s s ib ly
a n a ly s is o f th e e x i s t i n g e v id en ce.




" S I POPPER
 H M Coroner
              L
^   f ^ Q s o          pistil___



                       / q / ^                  ^         g.           ^ & y r i u ( X / r           ______

         z^    7     /Q X      o       ^                       Q   / <Lc J ) ^       XI          C i ^ o ___

               ~   r~ ^T           X                 £Vn ^2/jj J*/nT             V~             jUo q * (
     ' d      ^ c <£>4 o   /                         >                 O^        /          f^ r- £> /^ h — ^




    C n w ^                / tg        ~    j ^ ~ '^ f i ^ o                         ^       r x
     ></ /i a / ?     *     *j^L           bi       ~\   C s #" /                    s~?f   /%
    /%   £ & € -.                                        -f        A        ^    / l ^ g i r e
MEETING WITH DR NICHOLSON, MR GAINS, D                                     , M JONES, S L POPPER


4 .1 5 pm. on Wednesday 30 January 1991



Very long meeting t o d i s c u s s what p a r t of t h e HSE Report should be
used as well as t h e s u b j e c t t o be c over ed.              Decided t h a t we would
cover:-


1.    The c ounting of s u p p o r t e r s in through t u r n s t i l e s and g a t e ,
      t o g e t h e r with some comments on t h r o u g h - p u t , p o s s i b l y
      a l l o c a t i o n of t u r n s t i l e s and volume.


2.    Accounting o f s u p p o r t e r s on t e r r a c e , i n c l u d i n g l e an i n g crowd
      model, anthrop ome tri c measurements o f c a p a c i t i e s , l in k e d
      with and t o crowd movement and le ani ng model, and query
      c o l l a p s e of b a r r i e r .


3.    The b a r r i e r c o l l a p s e .   We agreed t h a t t h i s evidence should be
      as n ear t o l ay terms as p o s s i b l e .          There were two a s p e c t s :

      (a)     t h e f o r c e needed t o break t h e b a r r i e r and I wanted them
              t o deal with t h e i r work and then bring in by way of
              comment, d i s s e n t i n g views.

      (b)     t h e t e s t i n g which would i n c l u d e t h e i r u n d e r st an d in g of
              t h e Green Guide, t h e i r u n de rs t andi ng of t h e p o s s i b i l i t y
              of i n t e r p r e t a t i o n as per Eastwoods with p o s s i b l y some
              comment on t h e wording.

      (c)     t h e i r u nde rs t an di ng of t h e r i g t o g e t h e r with comments on
              i t s use (nut) and o p e r a t i n g i n s t r u c t i o n s .



SLP
31 J anuary 1991
         SHEFFIELD R W ' K T R X n c m n i& T B IC v

                              !    -
          %
" ■ ... .V-                                            ,   YA
28/01 '.91   11:22            FAX 0742 736182                                H 1WAYS & TRAFFIC                     MEDICO LGL CNTER          @001




        SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL                                                            FAX NO 0742 736182
        DESIGN AND BUILDING SERVICES                                                      TEL NO 0742 734
        2 - 1 0 CARBROOK HALL ROAD
        SHEFFIELD
        S9 2DB




                                                       Fax TRANSMISSION


        TO...\d-\l^/S.                           £                                                                  ‘

        FAXNO..........................................................                               -...................

                                                                                                     ..........

        FROM.......................................                                                             -........

        TEL NO...........................3 ^ .^ ^ - * ! ? .......1........... - .... ....................................

         date se n t .                 -5 .'?..........................................................
                                                                    W i t/^,/
        TOTAL NO OF PAGESOnduding this cover sheet)                    .....:..TS....................



         MESSAGE:

         37                             Vo           f jj*          ^                                                        ^

                 Ci f * * ?                            .-Afo-           ^         <=~          ***-*7

         ~uj                                 5* * ^             M'V'A.             Covert                                pl^o


         0 aA>Mr5»W«w)                  uuw>^\               Dc*            C h ^S            •Miifoy,




    ^        X           i AC-Ua*Q .         W«                                                   te **.                         VN   W rA

                                                  pXtJO            C ^ 4 U m S » « «^ S .
28/01 '91        11:23           FAX 0742 736182                                  H'WAYS & TRAFFIC                                 MEDICO LGL CNTER                   @002

                                 ALCO HO L AND ROAD A C C ID E N T S                                     IN         S H E F F IE L D *


     *

                   AN      IN -D E P T H         A N A L Y S IS     OF T H E             1989            FATAL             ROAD A C C ID E N T S




         i     BACKGROUND




         1 -0        ft     R esearch              R eport        produced                in        O cto b e r               1990       by     th e         C ity


         C o u n c il,           ’ ALCO HO L             AND        ROAD A C C ID E N T S                           i      THE        S IZ E          OF      TH E

         PROBLEM            IN       S H E F F IE L D                  <    R e fe re n c e              i     ),          e s tim a te d           th a t      in


         any        one      y e a r        in    S h e f f ie ld ,              betw een               25%             and    50%       o f    a l l        road


         a c c id e n t      d e a th s          o c c u rre d      in          a c c id e n ts              in         w h ic h    a lc o h o l        was       a


I        m a jo r    c o n tr ib u to r y             fa c to r .




         1 . I      T h at       e s tim a te         was       based            upon         a        l i t e r a t u r e          re v ie w         o f    some


         o f      th e      m ore       w id e ly        p u b lis h e d             e s tim a te s               o f      a lc o h o l         and          ro ad


         a c c id e n ts         (    See        R e fe re n c e s          £    and      3       ).




         1 .£        F o llo w in g               th e      p u b lic a tio n                     o f         th e            R esearch               R e p o rt,


         p e rm is s io n             was          g ra n te d             by    th e         C h ie f                  C o n s ta b le         o f         S outh


         Y o rk s h ire          P o lic e        and     H.      M.        C o ro n er           fo r        S outh           Y o rk s h ire           (    West


^        D i s t r i c t         ),       to      e x a m in e     t h e i r          f i l e s         re g a rd in g              th e       31       p e o p le


         who      w ere       k i l l e d        in   road        a c c id e n ts             in        S h e f f ie ld             in     19S3.             T h is


         e x a m in a tio n           was        c a r r ie d     o ut          to    g iv e        a        b e t t e r       p re c is io n           to    th e


         e s tim a te        quo ted             in   p ara g rap h               1 .0    above.
28/01 '91         11:24             FAX 0742 736182                                             H'WAYS & TRAFFIC                              MEDICO LGL CNTER                           @003
           5_SU M M A R Y O F                    IN F O R M A T IO N FROM T H E P O L IC E                                      F IL E S

i   • *    5* O            The            e x a m in a tio n                      o f     th e         P o lic e      f i l e s           has           g iv e n              m ore


           in fo rm a tio n                     th a n               is          a v a ila b le               from          th e          norm al                     S T A T S I3

           s o u rce s.                   They                have               shown            th a t         w ith            re s p e c t               to         d r iv e r


           im p a irm e n t,                    4     d e a th s            can         be     a t t r ib u t e d           to        excess            a lc o h o l             on


          tn e       p a rt       o f       at        le a s t            one         m o to r      v e h ic le            d r iv e r         in v o lv e d              in    th e


          a c c id e n t.                 O f       th e        fo u r        d e a th s ,          one       was      a        r i d e r       who          w o u ld         have


          been         ’ o v e r        th e          l i m i t ’             when           th e       a c c id e n t          o c c u rre d ,               w h ile          th e


          re m a in in g                th re e                 f a t a l i t i e s            w ere            p assen g ers                  t r a v e ll i n g                 in


          v e h ic le s           d riv e n               by       ’ o v e r          th e     l i m i t ’       d r iv e r s .




          5 « i         T h e re                w ere              n in e             ca se s           w here         a          n o n —i n j u r e d                  d r iv e r


          in v o lv e d           in       th e           a c c id e n t              was      not       re q u ire d             to      p ro v id e             a     B re a th


          T e s t.           In         s ix          cases,                      <     M o to r        V e h ic le         h it s            P e d e s tria n                who


          d ie s      ),          none              o f       th e        d r iv e r s         in v o lv e d          w ere           re q u ire d            to        g iv e       a


          b re a th           t e s t .               In           a n o th e r          th re e           a c c id e n ts ,                  each            o f         w h ich


          in v o lv e d             a t         le a s t           tw o      v e h ic le s ,             n ot      a l l        o f       th e          n o n -in ju re d


          d r iv e r s        in v o lv e d                   in     th o s e           a c c id e n ts         w ere           g iv e n       a    b re a th             t e s t.




          6   E X A M IN A T IO N                OF TH E F IL E S                        O F HM CORONER




          6 -0          F o llo w in g                    a    d eath            a s s o c ia te d            w ith         a    road          a c c id e n t,                th e


          C o ro n er             w i l l            e v e n tu a lly                    h o ld          an        In q u e s t,                   in         o rd e r           to


          e s ta b lis h                th e              c irc u m s ta n c e s                 o f     th e      d e a th ,            and            to            le g a lly


          d e c id e       upon            both               th e        In t e r n a l         Cause          o f    D eath             (    e .g .         fr a c tu r e d


          s k u ll      ),          as          w e ll         as         th e     E x te rn a l           Cause            (    e .g .            Road               T r a f f i c


          A c c id e n t            ) .          E v id e n c e              w ith           re s p e c t       to     th e           In t e r n a l         Cause               o f


          D eath        is        ta k e n           from            th e        Post         M ortem           R eport               c a r r ie d       out            by    th e


          Home       O f fic e             a p p o in te d                 lo c a l          p a th o lo g is ts .
28/01 '91      11:24               FAX 0742 736182                                         H'WAYS & TRAFFIC                                MEDICO LGL CNTER                     @1004

        6 -1             P a rt         o f      t h is      e x a m in a tio n                  is        a    c l i n i c a l            e x a m in a tio n             o f


        th e          B lo o d                A lc o h o l            C o n c e n tra tio n                     L e v e l.           T h is          is        u s u a lly
 *
       c a r r ie d               out            a t             th e           Post        M ortem ,                  a lth o u g h th e r e                 may         be


        c irc u m s ta n c e s                   when        t h is             is   n ot        done            (    eg,           th e     c a s u a lty           d ie s


        s e v e ra l              days           a f t e r       th e           a c c id e n t’ s              o c c u rre n c e             ).        S o m etim e s,


        th e r e         may         be        an      ’ a n te         m ortem ’                serum               sam p le        ta k e n ,            f o r   b lo o d


       t e s tin g             re as o n s.                 In        th e s e       cases,                    th e     BAC         le v e l        can     a ls o        be


        p u b lis h e d                 and         i t     can         o fte n          be      a       m ore        r e l i a b l e             in d ic a to r          o f


       th e        BAC         le v e l          c lo s e        to         th e     tim e           o f       th e     a c c id e n t,              because             th e


        sa m p le           o f      b lo o d          is    ta k e n            so o ner            to        th e     tim e        th a t         th e    a c c id e n t


        iif iL .   u l i t j j. Li ul i1wi-    o c c u rre d .




        6. £            The          BflC        le v e l         in        a    p e rs o n 5s             b lo o d ,              can       d e c lin e ,           once


        a lc o h o lic                  c o n s u m p tio n                 has      ceased.                   For           th e        a v e ra g e          person,


        th e       r a t e        o f         d e c lin e         is        about          1 5 m g /l0 0 m l                 BAC-    per        hour.          T h is      is


        e q u iv a le n t               to       about           One            U n it     o f       A lc o h o l.             \    The      a c tu a l        r a t e    o f


        d e c lin e               depends                 upon          v a rio u s            fa c to r s            such          has         w e ig h t,          sex,


        e f f ic ie n c y               o f      th e       liv e r ,             food         in ta k e ,            e tc .        >,




        6 .3          H ow ever,                    once          a     p erson            d ie s ,            t h e r e       is    t h e        p o te n tia l         fo r


        p ro b lem s               in         e s tim a tin g               a    BflC      l e v e l ,               d u e    t-o    d e c o m p o s itio n               o f


        th e          body.                   W ith              re s p e c t            t o          ro ad             a c c id e n t f a t a l i t i e s                 in


        S h e f fie ld ,                 t h e      b o d ie s          a       kept       in        a     r e f r ig e r a t e d            s t a t e       p r io r     to


        th e       Post           M ortem ,               and         so        such       p ro b lem s                a re        overcom e.




        6 .4             D f          th e          £6      A d u lts             k i l l e d        in          S h e f f ie ld               in      1989,             the


        m a jo r ity               d ie d         w ith in             1£       h o u rs       o f       th e        a c c id e n t’ s            o c c u rre n c e



                       * Died w i t h i n i£ h o u r s .......... - • £2 f a t a l i t i e s
                         Die d w i t h i n 2 4 h o u r s . . . . . . . . . . . .    i f a t a l i t y
                       * Died w i t h i n 7 2 h o u r s ............               ■=:f a t a l i t i e s
                       * D i e d m o r e thain 7 2 h o u r s -----               3    fatal i t i e s
28/01 '91        11:25             FAX 0742 736182                                           H'WAYS & TRAFFIC                                   MEDICO LGL CNTER                            ©005

          6 .5       In       t h is         stu d y ,                 th e     r e s u lts             from           th e          Bf l C-     e x a m in a tio n              fo r


     ’    th e       ££         a d u lts            who           d ie d       w ith in            12       hou rs                  o f         th e             a c c id e n t’ s


          o c c u rre n c e              have                 been           used         to     e v a lu a te                 th e            c o n tr ib u tio n                o f


          a lc o h o l        to       th e        cause               o f    th e        a c c id e n t.              In       3      o f       th e s e          cases,         an


          ’ a n te       m artera’             BAC            r e s u lt        has          been          used.               In      a d d itio n ,                an    ’ a n te


          m ortem ’                 r e s u lt                 fr-om t h e           a d u lt           who       d ie d            w ith in £4                    h o u rs        is


          a ls o     in c lu d e d .               Thus            th e       t o t a l        sam p le              s is s            is        £3     f a t a l i t i e s .




          6 .6           The           r e s u its             o f       she      BAC          f i r.c i r g =             a re        q iv e n         in           TABLE          4


          b e i ow i




          TABLE           4    BLOOD               ALCOHOL                   C O N C EN TR A TIO N                   LEVELS                I     m g /iO O m ls             )     OF


          ADULTS          K IL L ED            IN        ROA D          A C C ID E NTS              IN       SHEFF IE L D                      IN     1 9 6 9 . ______________



     CLASS         OF                              None                       Less                         B etw een                             B etw een                        M ore
     ROAD        USER                          D e te c te d th a n                       50            50       and           75               SO a n d           160th a n       IS O


    P.      C y c lis ts                                  :                          c                                                                       o                          0
     M.     C y c lis ts                                  i                          0                                                                       o                          1
     C ar      D r iv e r s                               h                          u                           u                                           O                          0
     C ar      P assen g ers
     P e d e s tria n s                                   7                          c:                          £                                            i                         0


          TOTAL.                                         15                          £                           £                                            1                         3



          6 .7           The       a   do    vs-     c a o le           s ^ q s t i            chat          £       o “       n e         £3       a d u lts             te s te d


          nad        a        BAC            le v e l              in         e .'';c £ i           ?        sa +e                                      ’*         a t      le a s t


          50 m g /lO O m i              s.         I t        .s       nc t e c      t --at         ■: f     t -~j e       b    cea vhs,                     th re e            w ere


          o ed escr i a n s .                  The            ot n e r        i-'r-. r e a     f a t a l it ;ss                 a re           ’ riiavc-inea *            in     th e


          Pol ic e            re c o rd s .               .In          s c o i t i o r.        to       tre s E            s i x       f at a 1              c a s u a lt ie s ,


          one      o f    th e         c a r       p assen g ers                      i 11 e d      ,      >,no        had           no        a ico no i.           d e te c te d


          in       h is                b lo o d ,              d ie d w h ile                t r a v e ll i n g                in      a       c a r d riv e n              by      a


          d r iv e r      who          s u p p lie d               a         p o s itiv e           b re a tn              te s t.
                                                            25 January          91



Our Ref:          SLP/lL


Mr M Rigby
Superintendent R egistrar
S h e f fie ld R e g istra tio n D i s t r i c t
R eg ister O ffic e
Surrey Place
SHEFFIELD
SI 1YA


Dear Mr Rigby

HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS

I r e fe r to our e a r l i e r correspondence in October 1990 regarding Rev 99s.
I have been r e f l e c t i n g on t h i s matter fu rth er and I think I w ill fo llo w
my normal procedure and send th e documentation to you rather than tr y in g
to make s p e c ia l arrangements.

The one th in g th a t concerns me a l i t t l e b i t i s th a t some o f th e people
who would be named on the Rev.99 as having receiv ed my order fo r b u r ia l/
cremation, may have moved s in c e April 1989. Is th ere anything you need
from us which would a s s i s t you or have you got a system to cope with
that?

Yours s in c e r e ly




S L POPPER
H M Coroner
                                                            26th Octo be r      90




         SLP/JT.
         MR/MT.




         Mr. M. Rigby,
         Superintendent Registrar,
         Sheffield Registration District,
         Register Office,
         Surrey Place,
         Sheffield. SI 1 Y A .

         Dear Mr. Rigby,

         Thank you very much for your very helpful letter of the 23rd of October.   I
         do appreciate the care and attention which you have applied to the queries
         which I have raised.

         I will be in touch with you again regarding this aspect,   as soon as I am able
         to do so.



         Yours sincerely,




         S.L.Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.




BACAAZ
                SHEFFIELD REGISTRATION DISTRICT
                                M I C H A E L RI GBY
                            S U PERINTENDENT REGISTRAR        Regi st er Office
                                                              Surrey Pl ace
                                  OFFICE HOURS:
                                                              Sheff i el d S1 1Y A
                                 MONDAY TO FRIDAY
                                 9.00 a.m. to 4.00 p.m.



 Your Ref:   SLP/JT
  Our Ref:   MR/MT                                            Telephone No. 7 3 5 3 . 2 0 .

                                                                 Mr Rigby

23rd October 1990

Dr S L Popper
H M Coroner
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
SHEFFIELD
S3 7ET

Dear Dr Popper

Re:    Hillsborough Inquests

Thank you for your letter dated 22nd October 1990 concerning the procedure
of registration of the deaths of the above.

Unfortunately the Registrar General has no legal authority to effect a
registration of a death and thus the death must be registered in the place
where it occurred. Once the Registrar General has considered the matter
and given his authority for the registrations to proceed, he will forward
the inquest certificates to this office with a single death register to
enter all the deaths of this tragedy.

Normally in the case of an inquest certificate received at this office from
yourself through the post, and no relative is present, the Registrar
effects the registration and sends a form 344 (for Social Security purposes)
and an application form for a death certificate from this office to the
person named on the inquest certificate as having received your order for
burial or cremation, together with an explanatory letter.

I have already nominated a Registrar to effect all the registrations on
receipt of the Registrar General's authority, and,'as previously explained,
a letter with the necessary forms would normally be sent to each person
named as having been issued with the burial or cremation order.

However, it may be preferable in this case to forward these documents to
the solicitors acting for the bereaved families as you suggest. Thus if
you could inform me of the names and addresses of these solicitors and for
whom they are acting, I will ensure that the Registrar forwards any
documents to the solicitor concerned.

Thanking you for all your assistance in this matter.

Yours sincerely




Superintendent Ffegis^far
                                                            22nd Oct ob e r   90


         SLP/JT.
         MR/MA.




         Mr. M. Rigby,
         Superintendent Registrar,
         Register Office,
         Surrey Place,
         Sheffield. SI 1YA.

         Dear Mr. Rigby,

         Re; Hillsborough Inquests.

         Thank you very much indeed for your letter of the 17th of October.
         What is not clear to me is how the death registrations will be dealt with
         after the Registrar General has considered the matter.  Will he be issuing
         the certificates direct to the bereaved families or will people have to
         attend at Sheffield to collect them from your office?

         If the Registrar General will issue the certificates direct, (which I think
         probably is the most convenient way) can you please let me know what
         arrangements if any you or he would propose, so that you might know who to
         send them to.

         It might be possible and perhaps most convenient if they were sent to the
         solicitors acting for the bereaved familes, because that would just be one
         address but no doubt you will consider this point.

         Yours sincerely,




         S .L.Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.




BACAAG
                 SHEFFIELD REGISTRATION DISTRICT
                                    MICHAEL RIGBY
                              SUPERINTENDENT REGISTRAR       Regi ster Office
                                                             Surrey Pl ace
                                     OFFICE HOURS:
                                    MONDAY TO FRIDAY         Shef f i el d S1 1Y A
                                    9.00 a.m. to 4.00 p.m.



Your Ref:
 Our Ref:     MR/MA                                          Telephone No. 7 3 5 3 . ..2D..

                                                             Mr.,.. Rigby.......
 17th October 1990

Dr. S. L. Popper,
H.M. Coroner,
Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
SHEFFIELD
S3 7ET


Dear Dr. Popper,

Re.*        Hillsborough Inquests

With reference to your letter dated 12th October 1990 regarding the above,
it will be necessary to report all ninety-five deaths to the Registrar
General by the reason of their occurrence over one year ago.

I have consulted with the Registrar General and he has agreed that it
would be in order for you to forward all ninety-five Inquest Certificates
to him direct rather than initially forwarding them to this office.

The Registrar General has asked me to inform you that when you forward
these certificates to him that you mark the outside of the envelope with
the reference M&G90/3865D and address it to:
The Registrar General
General Register Office
St Catherine's House
10 Kingsway
LONDON
WC2B 6JP

He will then consider the matter.

I must point out that any envelopes received at that address with no
reference on them are sent to the Registrar General's office in Southport
for attention.

I hope this reply is to your satisfaction as I am, like yourself, anxious
that there is no delay in dealing with the registration process in order
to alleviate any further distress to relatives.

Thank you for your assistance in this matter.

Yours faithfully,




Superintendent Registrar
*
#
      TEL   N o ,0244+341226




c-i
*




#
Coronial Cover 1 - 24 February 1991



Friday         1           Dr Halle

Monday         4           Dr   Forrest
Tuesday        5           Dr   Forrest
Wednesday      6           Dr   Halle
Thursday       7           Dr   Forrest
Friday         8           Dr   Forrest

Monday         11          Dr   Forrest
Tuesday        12          Dr   Forrest
Wednesday      13          Dr   Forrest
Thursday       14          Dr   Forrest
Friday         15          Dr   Forrest

Monday         18          Dr   Forrest
Tuesday        19          Dr   Forrest
Wednesday      20          Dr   Forrest
Thursday       21          Dr   Forrest
Friday         22          Dr   Forrest



Subject to Alteration


Prepared 20 January 1991
HILLSBOROUGH INCIDENT 15 APRIL 1989 - MEETING BETWEEN REPRESENTATIVES OF
ELROND ENGINEERING LTD AND THE RESEARCH AND LABORATORY SERVICES DIVISION OF THE
HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE ON 18 JANUARY 1991


1.       PURPOSE OF THE MEETING


The meeting was held at the Sheffield premises of Research and Laboratory
Services Division (RLSD) of the Health and Safety Executive (HSE). The purpose
was to discuss points of apparent disagreement between the reports produced by
Elrond Engineering Ltd and HSE on technical aspects of the incident that
occurred on 15 April 1989 at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club’s Hillsborough
Stadium.

2.       PRESENT

Deputy Chief Constable J Mervyn JONES - Cheshire Constabulary
Detective Inspector C PERKINS - Cheshire Constabulary

Mr N J BURNE - Elrond Engineering Ltd
Mr S O ’CONNOR - Elrond Engineering Ltd
Mr R ROLLIT - Elrong Engineering Ltd

Dr   C   E NICHOLSON - RLSD, MSE
Mr   G   A C GAMES - RLSD, HSE
Mr   P   F HEYES - RLSD, HSE
Mr   G   NORTON - RLSD, HSE
Mr   D   WATERHOUSE - RLSD, HSE

3.   DISCUSSION

DCC JONES explained that he was advising Dr S POPPER, Sheffield’s Coroner,
during the conduct of the Inquest to determine how 95 people died during this
incident. He said that the intention of the present meeting was to prevent
detailed technical matters from being debated in the Coroner’s Court, possibly
to the confusion of non-specialists.

DCC JONES said that the Coroner would be requiring HSE to give evidence during
the Inquest, which was likely to continue until March 1991. Elrond Engineering
would not be called as witnesses but would be represented by Hammond Suddards
who had retained them as technical advisors. He likened his own presence at
this meeting to that of a referee.

Mr BURNE said that he had many years experience of providing consultancy in
matters of dispute and arbitration. Elrond Engineering had been retained by
Hammond Suddards who were acting on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police. The
policy of Elrond Engineering was to present the facts truly and not to
’massage’ them to suit a particular case. He said that the findings of the
Elrond report that dealt with barrier 124A was based on an examination at West
Bromwich of this barrier, calculations, and site tests, all of which correlated
well.  Elrond’s findings were not just those of his own staff, but were
supported by Dr DICKIE of Manchester University, Dr BAKER of Imperial College,
and Halcrow and Partners.

Dr NICHOLSON said that there appeared to be two areas of contention between
Elrond and HSE; i.e. the estimate of the number of people in Pen 3, and the
collapse load of barrier 124A. He suggested that the occupancy of Pen 3 should
be discussed first and this was agreed.
                                       -2-


3.1 NUMBER OF PEOPLE IN PEN 3


Mr NORTON showed the enlarged, composite photograph that he had used to
estimate the number of people in Pen 3 and Pen 4. He explained the method that
he had used to estimate the number of people in Pen 3 and Pen 4. He had
employed computer-aided draughting equipment for the superposition of crush
barriers, for the transfer of areas missing from photographs, and for counting
visible persons.

MR NORTON emphasised that only faces that were definitely visible had been
counted on the three rearmost rows, and that an estimated packing density of 10
persons/m2 had been used on the poorly defined front row. This packing density
was based on tests conducted at RLSD, and was supported by the trend of
increasing packing density in the rows down the terrace.   It was his opinion
that HS E’s estimate of 1,576 persons within Pen 3 (HSE report IR/L/ME/89/32)
would underestimate, rather than overestimate, the true occupancy of Pen 3 at
15.03 hours, the time marked on the composite photograph.

Mr BURNE said that the only photograph of the crowd available to them had been
the one shown in Lord Justice TAYLOR’S report. He said that Elrond had not
counted people standing within the area marked by cross-hatching at the mouth
of the tunnel.  It was his opinion that it should not be considered to form
part of the area of Pen 3 because people were not intended to stand there. He
said that Elrond had attempted to estimate the number of persons in obscured
areas.  He asked for RLSD’s estimate of the time that barrier 124A collapsed.

Dr NICHOLSON said that HSE had made repeated attempts to identify the collapse
of barrier 124A by examining video recordings of the crowd inPen 3, but had
been unable to make a positive identification of this event.

Mr BURNE said that Elrond had examined video recordings of the crowd in Pen 3
and had ’worked back’ from 15.15, a time identified by an ambulance on the
recording.  They had concluded that barrier 124A had collapsed between 15.05
and 15.06.

DCC JONES said that the evidence of witnesses suggested that barrier 124A had
collapsed between 15.00 and 15.06. His own best guess, based on this evidence,
was that the collapse occurred at 15.04.

Dr NICHOLSON asked whether Mr BURNE now found RLSD’s figure of 1,576 persons in
Pen 3 to be acceptable, in view of the explanations and discussion.

Mr BURNE said that he preferred a figure more in the region of1,400 persons,
but conceded that RLSD had worked from better information.

3.1.1 THE ALLOWABLE CAPACITIES OF PENS 3 AND 4


Dr NICHOLSON referred Mr BURNE to Page 26 of the Elrond report where it is
stated that "a density of 67.5 persons/10m2 represents a density representing
completely full capacity". Dr NICHOLSON said that even on the basis of a
person occupying a rectangular rather than an elliptical area of terrace, the
calculation provided a packing density of 80 persons/10m2. Mr BURNE said that
he would re-assess this particular calculation.
                                       -3-




Mr BURNE said that he wished to draw particular attention to the ’Green Guide’
recommendation that people should not be more than 12 m from an exit. HSE’s
report IR/L/ME/89/35 made no reduction in the capacity of Pens 3 and 4 to
compensate for the departure from a recommendation.  Its implementation would
reduce the allowable capacities of these pens considerably.

Mr WATERHOUSE said that the authors had not considered themselves qualified to
make estimates of allowable crowd capacity, other than where the means for
making a mathematical calculation was indicated in the ’Green Guide’. He
referred to the final conclusion of this report which listed six further
departures from the recommendations of the ’Green Guide’, together with the
statement that "the maximum combined capacity of Pens 3 and 4 should be reduced
further because of these six departures."

Mr BURNE said that the capacities of the emergency exits from Pens 3 and 4
would also reduce the maximum allowable capacities shown in the HSE report. Mr
WATERHOUSE agreed that this might be the case. He and his co-author had
confined their estimation of maximum allowable capacities to the arrangements
on the terrace.

DCC JONES said that he would draw the attention of the Coroner to the matter of
the capacity of emergency exits that had been raised by Mr BURNE.

3.2 COLLAPSE LOAD OF BARRIER 124A


Mr BURNE commenced by explaining the load-deflection diagram shown on Page 60
of the Elrond report, and its significance when considering the failure of a
crush barrier.  He pointed out that there was a mistake in the illustration of
barrier 124A in HSE report IR/L/MM/89/11 in that the angle section forming the
front leg of support 3 had been drawn the wrong way round.  This was
acknowledged by H S E ’s representatives.

Dr NICHOLSON and Mr HEYES asked for a definition of failure, as used in the
context of the Elrond report. Mr BURNE said that failure involved yield,
cracking and tearing, all of which had occurred on barrier 124A. He agreed
that initiation of yield did not necessarily mean collapse, the term used by
RLSD to describe the failure of barrier 124A.

Mr BURNE said that a computer analysis made by Elrond, and subsequent tests
conducted by SGS on similar crush barriers, had demonstrated that barrier 124A
should be deemed to have failed the proof test made on it by Eastwood and
Partners in 1988. He said that Eastwood and Partners’ had mis-interpreted the
test requirements of the ’Green Guide’, and that the tensile properties of
wrought iron reported by HSE tended to overestimate the strength of the upper
rail of barrier 124A.

Mr HEYES pointed out that the tensile properties stated in HSE report
IR/L/MM/89/11 were not used in H SE ’s calculation of the collapse load of
barrier 124A, but were obtained from a bending test on a wrought iron top rail
taken from barrier 129. Following further discussion of the properties of the
barrier materials it was agreed that the tensile test properties obtained by
SGS and HSE were in reasonable agreement.
                                       -4-


Mr NORTON asked whether the computer analysis made by Elrond was an elastic
analysis and was told that it was Mr GAMES said that there were dangers in
predicting the mode of collapse of barrier 124A from an elastic analysis.

Mr BURNE emphasised that the results of Elrond’s computer analysis and SGS’s
site tests were in agreement, and were supported by Dr DICKIE, Dr BAKER and Dr
WEAVER on behalf of Halcrow and Partners.  The analysis had been made for the
conditions of continuous rail and broken rail. Analysis and test results had
shown that yield of the top rail occurred with a loading of 2.5 KN/m, that the
fracture occurred at 6 KN/m.

Mr BURNE said that barrier 128A had failed during tests made by SGS at less
than 6 KN/m.  Dr NICHOLSON said that the tabulated results on Pages 24 and 25
of Appendix G of the Elrond report suggested that this barrier had withstood a
force of 7.24 KN/m. Mr BURNE said that the forces shown were marginally in
error and that a force of 7.24 KN should be taken to mean between 7.24 KN/m and
6 KN/m. An inaccuracy in the calibration of the pressure gauges with the
hydraulic jacks used to apply the test force caused the gauges to indicate
forces that were too high.  The degree of inaccuracy was not known, but was
probably of the order of a few percent.

Mr BURNE said that a cracking noise was heard during the testing of barrier
128A when the indicated load was 6 KN/m.  Examination had shown that the top
rail had cracked under one of the retaining clips and that a fracture was
present in the bottom rivet hole of the rear leg of the centre support.

There was a lengthy discussion on the details of the SGS tests and their
correlation with the elastic analysis of the stresses in the barrier. Mr BURNE
said that Elrond’s computer analysis showed that the first region to yield was
at the lower edge of the gusset plate was on the rear leg of the supports, and
that this occurred at 5.25 KN/m.

Mr NORTON and Mr GAMES said that RLSD’s elastic finite element analysis had
also shown this be the place where initial yielding would occur.  Their
analysis indicated that yielding would commence in both the top rail and the
supports at a load of less than 6 KN/m.

Mr BURNE said that barrier 128A was not so severely corroded as barrier 124A
and that the results of their analysis and the SGS tests caused him to conclude
that barrier 124A would have failed at a load of less than 6 KN/m on 15 April
1989.

Mr WATERHOUSE said that it was his opinion that span 3\4 had been the first
member of barrier 124A to collapse, due to the formation of plastic hinges.
This was followed by the collapse of span 2\3 as end 4 of span 3\4 parted from
its support and commenced pivoting about support 3. HSE’s calculations
suggested that this collapse commenced when the loading on span 3\4 was
approximately 8 KN/m.

Mr BURNE disagreed with this sequence of events.  He said that collapse
commenced at support 3, although it was probable that the collapse of this
support and that of the top rail of span 3\4 occurred almost instantaneously.
                                       -5-




Mr WATERHOUSE asked if Elrond could be more precise in their estimate of the
collapse load of barrier 124A rather than stating it to be less than 6 KN/m.
Mr BURNE said that Elrond had stated a value of 5.25 KN/m on Page 6 of their
report and referred Mr WATERHOUSE to the diagram in Appendix L. Mr WATERHOUSE
said that Stage 2 of this diagram showed yielding below the gusset plate of the
rear leg of a support at a load of 5.25 KN/m, this being followed by Stages 3
and 4 in which increased deformation occurred up to a load of 7 KN/m.

Mr BURNE said that this was a mis-interpretation of the diagram, which was
intended to show the loads required to produce yield at different regions of
the barrier. He said that calculated results could be supplied to substantiate
the diagram in Appendix L. In response to a request by Dr NICHOLSON he said
that he would try to provide him with a copy of the report written for Halcrow
and Partners by Dr WEAVER, and to pursue the matter of the calibration of the
hydraulic jacks and gauges used by SGS in their tests.




D. Waterhouse
22.1.91
                                    School of Financial   Pond Street
Our ref:   LML/RH                   Studies and Law       Sheffield SI 1WB
Date:      17 January 1991                                Telephone 0742 720911
                                                          Direct line 0742 533728
                                                          Fax 0742 533726
                                                          Telex 54680 SHPOLY G

                                                          Director
                                                          K Harrison BA

The Coroner's Office
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield 3




Dear Sir


I am a part-time lecturer at Sheffield City Polytechnic, and am
also engaged upon research for a Master's degree into 'Post
Traumatic Stress Disorder* and its implications for the Law of
Tort. In this connection, I should be most grateful if you would
supply me with a transcript or any relevant information regarding
the inquest into the deaths of the victims of the Hillsborough
disaster. This would be of great assistance to me in my studies.


Thanking you in anticipation.




Yours sincerely




Lesley M Lomax
01/02 '91   09:35   FAX 0742 726247                        MEDICO LGL CNTER   ®001



                                                  ACT IV ITY REPORT



                     T R A N S M I S S I O N OK



                     TRANSACTION =                        0822


                     TT1                                  CORONERS

                     CO N N E C T I O N IHI,              736900


                     C O N N ECT ION ID                            G3
                     ST ART iI Mi                         02.01    09.34


                     U S A G E TIME                         0!)' 47


                     PAGES
        M.S. HOWELLS
                                                                    te e ,
H.M. CORONER FOR THE DISTRICT
      OF PEMBROKESHIRE
                                                                 mi           'ei'tace.

Telephone: Milford Haven (06462) 78129                                             ven.


YOUR REF:                                                   15th, January               91
                                                                                   19
MY R E F :     MSH/JM




       Dear Colleague,

            I have recently had occasion to obtain from Mr. Peter
       Birts, QC, an Opinion and draft Directions to the jury on
       the topic of unlawful killing and corporate manslaughter.
       I am, of course, willing to make copies of the Opinion and
       draft Directions available to other Coroners,        but in
       fairness to my Local Authority who have had to pay a fee of
       £2,000 plus VAT for the Opinion, I cannot makes copies
       available free of charge. Equally, nobody wishes to make a
       profit, so possibly the fairest way of going about matters
       is to ask if you would be interested in receiving a copy and
       then I can notify all those who have expressed an interest
       what the cost would be. If there is sufficient response, L
       anticipate that the charge would be £50 or less.         j /

               I look forward to hearing from you^                 !_[       1 1

                                         Yours sincerely,
       Telephone:      (0 7 4 2 )7 2 6 4 4 4


         Facsimile:    (0 7 4 2 )7 3 5 0 0 3


Telecom Gold 79:


             Telex:
                       LLA 3020


                       265871 MONREF G (quote ref LLA 3020)
                                                                                                          C O U N C I L
                                                                                                                                              k(M*b
  Y o u r reference:       JMJ/FR

   O ur reference:         MW/PSW
                                                                                                          Administration & Legal
              Date:        23rd November           1990                                                   Department
                                                                                                          Head of Department
                                                                                                          M ark W ebster,   c ity solicitor
                               Mr M Jones MSc
                                                                                                          Town Hall
                               Deputy Chief Constable
                                                                                                          Sheffield
                               Cheshire Constabulary                                                      S1 2HH
                               Police Headquarters
                               CHESTER
                               CHI 2PP




                           Dear Mr Jones

                           RE:             HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS

                           Thank you for your communication of 21st November 1990 concerning the
                           availability of the Council Chamber for the Inquests on the days when the
                           Council is due to meet.

                           During my conversation with your Administrative Assistant, Sue Harper, on
                           Monday, 19th November, I stated that the Chamber will be available to the
                           Coroner and that arrangements would be made for the Council meeting to
                           take place elsewhere.  I understand that Sue Harper, subsequently
                           telephoned my office and asked my Secretary to fax confirmation of such
                           arrangements and this request was complied with the same day.

                           With regard to future Council meetings, the same reasoning .and .approach
                           is to be adopted namely that the Council will not bfe^mfe^ting^ the
                           Coroner wishes to sit on those days; in other words, the Inquests can go
                           ahead and the Council will make alternative arrangements unless we
                           experience particular problems with the 28th November.  If problems do
                           arise which will need consideration before the next Council meeting in
                           January 1991, I am confident they can be resolved by our officers co­
                           operating.

                          A further request from your Administrative Assistant this afternoon is
                          that a response to your letter must be received before arrangements for
                          next Wednesday can be made.  I hope my response is sufficient.

                           Yours sincerely




       KeithTrelfa        city Solicitor and Head of Administration                                                                           Elizabeth Bashforth
       Senior Assistant Head
       (Administration)                                                                                                                       Assistant Head (Legal)




                          CC Dr S L Popper, HM Coroner
                                                       For telephone enquiries on
       R2220/X14                                          this m atter please ring:   ..(STD Code 0742)
                        HSE
                Health & Safety Executive



                                            to    13-     bo


                         v*Jik         lo




^ o i o H             \ |) I o v m \ ^            ^


               tav W i t
                                   t ^ v \ \       § * )!%


^ W      l \ W vcvdjL ^|\JU *C vvU _ K

.te i    \\X   u J j ^ V '


                with compliments



    Sovereign House, 40 Silver'Stf^et, Sheffield S1 2ES
                   Tel: 0742 739081
    10 Figure 3 shows how major injury numbers and rates
                                                                    that self-employed people have a higher fatal injury rate
    have changed since 1986/87. The provisional 1989/90
                                                                    than employees (see previous paragraph), this suggests a
    figure for reported major injuries is 19 941, virtually the
                                                                    high level of under-reporting of major injuries by self-
              thf,fmal figure for 1988/89- The fmal figure for      employed people. This is even more marked for over-3-day
    1989/90 is likely to be around 20 600. Taking account of
                                                                    injuries where the 1989/90 reported rate of 58.0 was less
    the increases in employment levels referred to in
                                                                    than one twelfth of the rate for employees, although an
   paragraph 8, and if the upward revision is as expected,
                                                                    additional factor here may be a lower propensity for self-
   the final reported major injury rate seems likely to have
                                                                    employed people to take time off work.
               marginally from 91.3 in 1988/89 to around 92 in
   1989/90. This would still be well below the 1986/87 rate of
                                                                  N on-em ployed people
   99.1. It should be noted that comparisons for major
   injuries cannot be made between the years before and
                                                                  14 In addition to employees and self-employed people, the
  after 1 April 1986 because of a widening of the definition
                                                                 RIDDOR system includes a requirement to report injuries
  of major injury introduced by the RIDDOR reporting
                                                                 fe>non-employed people (described on the report form as
  regulations. The provisional 1989/90 figure for reported
                                                                  other persons’). In sectors such as construction, energy
  over-3-day injuries is 161 648, and the final figure is likely
                                                                 and manufacturing reported injuries generally relate to
  to be around 168 000. This would give an injury rate of
                                                                 members of the public. In the service sector they include
  749.4 per 100 000 employees, very similar to the rate in
  both 1987/88 and 1988/89.                                      injuries to pupils, patients and people in residential homes.

                                                                   15 The provisional 1989/90 figure of 197 fatal injuries to
  11 It should be noted that, contrary to the picture across
                                                                   non-employed people, which includes the deaths of 95
  industry as a whole, injury rates have risen in a number
                                                                  people in the tragedy at Hillsborough Football Ground, is
  of industries in each of the past two years. This is
                                                                   76 higher than the final figure for the previous year. The
  discussed further in paragraphs 22 and 23 below, but it is
                                                                  service sector is consistently the major source of fatal
  particularly notable that major injury rates amongst
                                                                  injuries to non-employed people (over 80 fatalities in both
  employees in the construction industry have risen by
  more than 10% over this period.                                 1987/88 and 1988/89), followed by construction and
                                                                  agriculture (each averaging around 13 fatalities in the past
                                                                  few years).
  S elf-em p loyed p eople
                                                                     16 As explained in last year’s Report, the process of
    12 The provisional 1989/90 figure of 87 reported fatalities
                                                                     examining the quality of the databases had revealed a
    to self-employed people is seven higher than the final
                                                                    significant degree of misinterpretation by employers when
    figure for 1988/89, reflecting an increase of 8.7% in the
                                                                    completing the RIDDOR report forms which had led to the
   number of self-employed people. The provisional fatal
                                                                    misallocation of a number of employees and self-employed
   injupr rate for self-employed people was 2.7, as compared
                                                                    people to the 'other persons’ category. Subsequent detailed
   with 1.5 for employees, reflecting the concentration of self-
                                                                    investigations have resulted in a revision to the injury
   employed people working in two high risk industries
                                                                    figures in this category for all the years since the
   (construction and agriculture). Over 80% of the reported
                                                                    introduction of RIDDOR, significantly affecting the picture
   fatal injuries to self-employed people in 1989/90 were to
                                                                   on numbers of major injuries to members of the public in
  workers in the agricultural and construction sectors
                                                                   some sectors - notably construction and manufacturing.
  which account for just over 30% of all self-employment.
  The provisional 1989/90 figures for numbers of fatalities
                                                                   17 The 1988/89 overall figure for reported major injuries to
  represent an increase in both these sectors, marginal in
                                                                   non-employed people has been revised downwards from
  the case of agriculture, but up from 36 to 44 in
                                                                   14 074 to 12 614, with similar revisions for the previous
  construction. This latter increase is in line with the 20%
                                                                   two years. Most injuries to non-employed people happen as
  rise in the number of self-employed people in the
                                                                   a result of service sector activity and this sector therefore
  construction sector between 1988/89 and 1989/90.
                                                                   accounts for a large part of these reductions.
                                                                   Proportionately, however, the most significant reductions
  13 The provisional 1989/90 figure for reported major
                                                                   have related to construction, where the 1988/89 figure for
 injuries to self-employed people shows an increase for the
                                                                  major injuries to non- employed people has been revised
 third successive year, again probably largely explained by
                                                                  downwards from 630 to 132, and in manufacturing, where
 the growth in the number of self-employed people,
                                                                  there has been a reduction from 515 to 57. For agriculture
 particularly in the construction sector. Over 70% of the
                                                                  and energy the figures have been revised downwards by a
 reported major injuries to self- employed people were in
                                                                  third and a half respectively. The revised figures are
 the construction sector and in that sector the increase of
                                                                  broadly consistent with those under the previous reporting
 170 between 1988/89 and 1989/90 was in fact greater than
                                                                  arrangements and may now properly be interpreted as
the net increase across all industries. The increases in
                                                                  relating primarily to members of the public.
injury numbers and rates for both major and over-3-day
injuries in each year since 1986/87 appear to be largely
                                                                  18 The provisional 1989/90 figure of 13 reported fatal
due to increases in the number of reported injuries to self- injuries to children in the agricultural, energy,
employed people in the construction industry. The figures
                                                                 manufacturing and construction sectors is substantially
moreover, substantially understate the position. The
                                                                 lower than the final 1988/89 figure of 23 (down from 9 to 2
reported major injury rate for self-employed people in
                                                                 in construction). The provisional figure for reported major
1989/90 was 40.4, less than half that for employees. Given
                                                                 injuries to children is also down in these four sectors from

                                                             66
                                                                                                                , ...
                             FIGURE 4 Fatal and major injuries to em ployees reported to all enforcement, authorities
                                      by SIC 80 class •* highest incidence rates per 100 000 em plovccs 1989/90uIS M * !
                                      (a) Data for period 1 April 1989 to 31 December 1989
                                                                                    mmm                              fiMP'i
                                                      Injury numbers
    8%iEI
                           Co:il fxtnicdon                                                                       n
    I®®
                               Otkc nvens



                     Metal manufacturing
     SlSSi*'
    MIfssesa                  Construction

                                  Forestry
                                                                                i s *
                  Food, drink and tobacco                                                  ,


            Timber and \vix>d<‘n fiiniiiLirc-

                         Man-made fibres
                                         u
    IlSfaiHifacture of meta! goods nos

         Non-metallic mineral products

                     Extraction of oil-^;is                                     IPliiil
                      Rubber and plasiic.s

                   Mineral oil prucessinjj

                              Railways (a)


                            M industries

                                                          •zM&m

117 in 1988/89 to 87 in 1989/90. However, although there               employed in many service sector activities means that,
 -'ere decreases in three of the sectors, the number of                while only the railway industry is among the 15 activities

«eported major injuries to children in the construction
 sector is 3 higher than the final 1988/89 figure of 46.

Particular industries
                                                                       with the highest fatal and major injury rates, six are
                                                                       within the top 15 for injury numbers. The figures for
                                                                       injury rates, which are also shown in Figure 5, confirm
                                                                       that these tend to be lower in the service sector activities.
                                                                       However, the rate in public administration approaches the
19 Figure 4 shows the 15 industrial activities with the                all industry average, while the rate for postal services and
highest fatal and major injury rates in 1989/90, together              telecommunications is above that for all industries.
with the provisional injury numbers for each of the
activities. It illustrates the relatively high risks run by            21 Figure 6 provides a similar analysis to Figure 4 for all
workers in these activities, in most cases at least double             reported injuries. The 15 activities accounted for 38.3% of
the average for workers in all industries. The 1989/90 fatal           all reported injuries, as against only 13.8% of
and major injur)- rate for the railways industry (estimated,           employment. Postal services and telecommunications, as
for reasons explained in paragraph 7) is likely to be                  well as coal extraction, construction and the food, drink
around 180 per 100 000 employees, well below the final                 and tobacco industry, are activities with both high rates
figure of 243.5 for 1988/89, but still high enough for it to           and high numbers.
fall within the list of 15 activities with the highest fatal
and major injury rates.                                         22 Table B lists those activities where the fatal and major
                                                                injury rates to employees have increased in each of the
20 In activities such as coal extraction, construction and      last two years. (Of these there is only one activity, renting
the food, drink and tobacco industry a combination of high      of moveables, where the rate increased in each of the last
injury rates and large numbers of people employed results       three years.) The Table includes some activities where the
in very high numbers of injuries. Overall the 15 activities     increase was small, some where despite the increase the
shown in Figure 4 accounted for 40.9% of reported fatal      ■' rate remained low, and others where the small number of
and major injuries, as against only 13.6% of employment.        injuries means that the rate can fluctuate markedly from
Figure 5 shows the 15 industrial activities with the highest    year to year. However, activities such as construction (up
numbers of reported injuries. The large number of people        10% since 1987/88) and food, drink and tobacco (up 8%)
FILE NOTE DICTATED 4.12.90. TELEPHONE CONFERENCE WITH DR.

MICHAEL POWERS, COUNSEL,   3.12.90.

Short conversation with Dr. Powers, about 6 8 minutes. Two

points discussed

1.   Property and witnesses.    Dr. Powers agreed that there

     wasn't any.   He also didn't feel that it was

     reprehensible.

2.   I then outlined to him the problem with McCauley's

     evidence namely, that he wanted to produce evidence

     relating to a previus incident at that ground, where

     he was describing a build-up, turnstiles not coping

     people climbing out etc.     Before I was able to put to

     Dr. Powers my thoughts, he said that in his view it

     would be right to allow the witness to give the

     evidence but limit it to a. what he actually saw and

     b. to allow this sort of evidence or questions

     relating to it in cross-examination when they were

     directed towards establishing the reliability/quality

     of the witnesses evidence.

     This sounded precisely what I had in mind.

3.   Dr. Powers said that he had not yet had time to look

     at my instructions.




 BADABZ
FILE   NOTE   DICTATED   4.12.90.   TELEPHONE   CONVERSATION WITH

JOHN BURTON 2.12.90._______________________________________

1.     John Burton didn't think that I could stop people

       photocopying the transcripts once they came into their

       possession.       I wasn't quite sure why he took that

       view. He also thought that shorthand writers usually

       have the copyright in their transcriptions         (I dont't

       think this applies in this case because Mr. Davison

       clearly indicated that the copyright was with us.

2.     I asked him about property and witnesses.          He agreed

       that people had a right to ask questions.

3.     I briefly discussed with him the problem with Mr.

       McCauley's evidence but he wasn't able to make any

       particular helpful or indeed any contribution to that.

       I made it clear of course to him that the final

       decision on the matter would be mine.

4.     He said he wished me well and that they were all

       behind me. With regard to the property and witnesses

       he said he had actually had a case where the witnesses

       not only were approached but were paid money.          In his

       view such facts, even without the payment of money,

       went to the credibility of the witness.




BADABY
FILE NOTE                                           1.12.90


Telephone conversation John Burton
in the afternoon

I asked him what he thought about transcripts and the duplication
at the reduced price. He seemed to think that once the transcripts
had been handed over, we had no further control over them and
didn't think that there was any copyright in them. He seemed
to base this on the fact that the fee originally did not refer
to photocopies and that this was a later edition. I couldn't
quite follow his reasoning on this point but he did feel that
there was no crime on society on whether or not the Council
allowed copies to be made available at a reduced price, subject
of course to ensuring that they only went to appropriate parties.
I asked him what he thought about people taking statements
from witnesses. He said he had had this before and, in fact,
in his incident he'd paid the witness. My impression was that
he felt that there wasn't very much he could do about it except
that in his view this destroyed the credibility of the witness
and what he did not to ask the witnesses whether they had had
any contact and if the answer was "yes", as far as he was
concerned compromised the quality of the evidence even if,
in fact, the witness was telling the truth. Clearly it was
a matter for the Jury to make that assessment.
I talked to him for a few minutes about the problem of intro­
ducing evidence of other matches as is with one of the witnesses
and asked him what he would do. He said obviously this was
a matter for me. His response was that it was a difficult
problem and didn't really know. He thought that it was perfectly
proper to ask a witness whether a similar incident had occurred
in the past in connection with other matches and to use the
information, so to speak, in part of the cross-examination
technique rather than as direct evidence. I said that I was
thinking of possibly allowing a witness to state as a fact
what happened but not to draw conclusions or to try and give
explanations as to why the situation had arisen. This is in
respect of a lay witness describing events at matches of 1989.
He thought that that might well be a quite convenient way of
dealing with the matter.
I thanked him for his help.



SLF/BW
                      Director ofPublicProsecutions                     DeputyDirector and ChiefExecutive
                                   Allan Green Q.C.                     D.S. Gandy CBOBE




                                           Director of Headquarters Casework
                                                      C. W. P. Newell




       D r S L Popper
                                                                            Crown Prosecution Service
       Medico-Legal Centre
       Watery Street                                                        Headquarters Casework
       Sheffield S3 7ET                                                     10 Furnival Street
                                                                            London
                                                                            EC4A1PE
                                                                            Telephone 071 -417
                                                                            Switchboard 071-417-7000




 ^urRef:                                 OurRef:      PGK/3341/89                      Date:     1^.11.90




      Dear Dr Popper

                                 Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

      Thank you for your letter of 9 November 1990 concerning Rule
      28 of the Coroners Rules 1984 and the Director of Public
      Prosecution's decision, that there were to be no criminal
      prosecutions instituted in this c a s e .

      I should be grateful if you would accept this letter as formal
      notification from the Director that an adjournment under Rule
      28 will be unnecessary" in this c a s e . The Director will
      consider any new evidence at the conclusion of the inquest
      hearings.

      Yours faithfully




      C: J CLEUGH
      Head of Police Complaints Division




      C C 011311




Fax 071-430-015^Q \                           Telex264719 LCSFIG                                     Britdoc DX499 London/
 or 071-430-202^s                                                                                             ChanceryLane
               1 3 /1 1 ; ’90      1 1; 2 t e ^ @   1 8 0 9                                    MEDICO LGL CNTER                    J ■■■
           ;v *' '■'■>' ^ - -s■-
                               ,»
                                F'■ ';i.                       ■.* '•*''       .         '■
          rr
                                                              office of h.
                                                                         m .coroner for                     MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
       '/&:\-                                                                                               WATERY STREET
                                                                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                                                            SHEFFIELD
                                                                         (W est District)
                                                                                                            S3 7ET
":ii
m                               STEFAN L POPPER, LLB,B.MEDSCL,B_M,B.S..M.R_C.Q_P.
                                                                               CO RO N ER


                                                        Telephornj: SHEFFIELD (07i2) 738721                                    19-9-0-



                       SLP/JT,




                       Dear Sir,

                       Re HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS - VIDEO REGORDINGS.



                       You will of course be aware that your client was interviewed under t_he PACE
                       procedure and that this interview was audio taped m the usual manne-L..

                       I also understand that in addition to the audio tape, a video recording of
                       the interviews was prepared.  This video recording being however so to i>peas;
                       extra statutory.  I understand that it was done with the consent of your
                       client, and on the understanding that it would not oe usea in proceedings.

                       It is my intention, to have the audio tapes played to tne Jury at an
                       appropriate point in the resumed Inquests.

                        It occurs to me however that if the video recording is of good enough quality
                        (which I in fact understand it is), that it might be better and easier to
                        follow if we showed the video recording rather than listen to the audio tape-

                        I would not however w i s h to do this without the express consent of yourself
                        and your clients.   I would therefore be grateful if you could please let me
                        know whether you. or your client would have any cbj ection to i»he vioeo
                        recording being used at the inquest.

                        I want to make it quite clear that this is entirely your decision and if you
                        would prefer that the video is not used, then we -will respect your
                        wish and use the audio tapes.




                        Yours faithfully,

                                    n

                        s.L./op^r
                        H.M.Coroner-




                                                      fentu                                   1,      (*■
           RBEOG
          BACAAU
                             OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR
                                                                MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                WATERY STREET,
                                            (W est D istrict)   SHEFFIELD
                                                                S3 7ET
STEFAN L PO PPER . LLB., B.MED. Sci., B.M., B.S., M R.C G P
                                                CO RO N ER


                       Telephone: SHEFFIELD 10742) 738721             9th Nov,     1990..
 Your Ref: PGK.3341.89


Mr. M.G. Kennedy,
Crown Prosecution Service,
Headquarters Casework,
10 Furnival St.,
London,
EC4A 1PE


Dear Mr. Kennedy,

                         Re: Hillsborough Football Stadium Disaster.


I refer to your letter of 30th August 1990 and my telephone
conversation with you on 7th Nov. 1990 in which I spoke to you about
Rule 28 of the Coroner's Rules 1984.

You will of course recollect that in August you notified me that
having considered the evidence the Director of Public Prosecution
had come to the conclusion that criminal prosecutions should not be
commenced against various specified parties. In the light of that
the provisions of Section 16 of the Coroners Act 1988 did not apply
and I have fixed the date for the start of the resumption of the
inquests into the deaths., of the various persons concerned as 19th
November 1990.

Under the provisions of Rule 28 I have to adjourn for 14 days
in certain events unless I have been previously notified by the
Director of Public Prosecutions that an adjournment is unnecessary.

In order to avoid procedural hiccups and unnecessary adjournments and
in view of the fact that you have already considered evidence in these
cases I would be grateful if you could let me have the Director's
notification as outlined above as soon as possible. I understand that
notifications in such terms were provided in the Zeebruggen disaster
inquests and I expect in other cases as well.

I look forward to hearing from you as soon as possible.



Yours, sinty^rely,



S. L. Popp4jd/
H. M. Cordnei^r


P.S. Letter faxed to 071 430 0154.
7 : ■              i        rh,         ■                                                                                                                   ** !"              -,t- ,             V        --                         i ,        .


S<.;„th                           '!\                                      *.'■         P • •5 !. , •                                        JtilV i! fiv




 . ,;S;                 ;               ' ' .. •


                                                                                                                                                                                   •        r‘         ' ‘
                                                                     •,:J-      .- .•■'- ■                                                                                                                  •
 ■V -* ;                                                 •T»■■ h -i.•- :!4 ' -it; '                                                                                                                          '
    -r.V ;it‘                                             v *'                 -....A


      :                                                  V •:                                                            K .
                                                              .                         t►,                              (, ••                                         .           •*
■ ■                -;r. * I ,                             <•*---v                                                               •!'•                                                        :1         '                J         '     fc.


              u'i■                                   , ,              , ...             t ,                       ....          > -.                                                           '.<~! f ;
                        t                                ■:           i-. ■ .              ..                 ■ . s.j ’ - *;
' s».<'                                     ;u » ir,c
; f!               1.                       '-f               ,           *•'      .




v --               * - s i.r.t •                                      V ’ ►                f                                                                f* '>      e f         1• s ‘                   1 •
; . : . -                                       ‘                     r                                        v ! ..                   'i            ■. ■                 ’                                                                                            ‘
.                                                             ; 'V                                                             ,                 !          1 c                    t                   «-i.                             >: *’        -.                          ■'■.    i - . i .-
:               -f- , • i                            r        , -r (                                                                                                           w!:*>                   a        j            r : :.           ;j- 1 ,, t i : \ - .:              ■..■■■< ‘ --r
                                                                                                                  Uu-                                                                                                11 '-                                              ’ -o-/‘ r.r
...-IP                                          i'.Vf 5                    i                    !         ; , .n                    .'■>              r> «■ I'                 1 J             '*          r ht                         r..’              .                         " v i -
                                                                                       1                  .       ••« i                                                                                     ' *.-1 .f !■> b’.-'- •■                                                                   ’<
w-:'*                   ,>     f ' H                : ' r .!                                                             f      ■ Of-                  -'                                                                    .* .     • j •;.,           \            .. J   ’           e       -


?,:rj !-                                                                                                                                                                                       ->■:,* ‘ ; r'-- '' r -                                                            ■-'•': ' ‘ •
 •            n.-. 1 v .-.(j-j >i-                                         p-»r -                                                                                                                --f       -
’ ••               i           tr-'.f                         t,':                                                                                                                                              .'. J * - . •-                  :-^-'
, f ,.,5                       >*,                   t                                     i                      -. .                       :   ■ t-            ' .           .        ‘                               >■
:iil          t ig t . ? r {t- .i. »                                                   •■5'f !. .41 1..-r »■*.

      I’ :l'                                                                            ■ ■„: 5-*'                                           ,

 .        : !       -                                                                               ....;-                                           ■’ . . .                          ..- S

                                                    j-'•                         . .»f. -, v *■'
                                                                               , ;             • a i•
                                                                                                    :v
                             f* • .                                                                                                                  .A                    .' ! ' * V
          :              (<.-.<■                                                   .. .. -5. ., -: ;.                                   - -’                    .---          <■ .                                                ; -
 ' . . f- -V:                           •                '}"<!                              ’             •-                                                               , v >. . v                                    ,          ;
      .        ,         f                                                                          -J.                                                                                                                                              ;        .

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    . . '.                    ....           , ..
                                                              5i i i

 i                                      .     *•>’'<-- ■ " '-                                                 -r-y '                                                                   t’-.':                       ' .. . .-»                                        ; ■

 r:f-w- * r                             r r -, ’ <-*.                                                              ,                                                                                                -         V                      v            -


ftnrf                                       .                     t            -V, ^   « ,J                   *          »;;V -
                                                                                                                                                                               --■K'"-‘'
 , *- .1- j ,                r , ; •;                 ^ ,             ,j                             t-                                                                    r >- 1 ,/                t< ‘            .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    - ^ : .. .I;
 I                     1- -,-xr. r                       sn- <• .-.j r .11-
      .                                                     : :. . <r.    >.. .                                              | -■                                                                                            :;
 t’ o r                     i lid i i                     c» i                 r e v i e w .


     ; n                                            \ r . . -. - - # -                 . ..                                         ?                   «..-

    V .5ff.:                                                  a*                                                    '•!:-■■■
 t                     t a k e-                 t (it-                Ci.J r >                      ;              f u f i ■                            r
                                                              JHJ/CP

                                                             6 November 1990

Hr Graham Kackrell
Secretary
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
Hillsborough
SHEFFIELD




RECX5HVESED INQUESTS

As you kuov, the inquests will be re-c<?nv*ned in Sheffield on Monday 19th
November 1990; If is conceivable that they will run for several weeks,

The Coroner, Dr S L Popper, will be holding the inquests vith jury meabsrs
who will require some familiarisation of the ground and the locality.

Dr Popper would propose to use Wednesday 28th November 1990 as the "flay out”
of court and I wondered, on his behalf, If It would be possible for a visit
to be made to the ground>   I appreciate that this is yet another request
and 1 sincerely understand the disruption it can cause; hopefully this will
be the last such visit from the ’’official” side.   It Is proposed to take the
jury out between 10 a,n>, end 1 p,m, on chat day» part of which will take in
your ground for say an hour,

I wonder, therefore, could vou and vour Chairman facilitate such a visit?
                                                   14th March 1990

Our Ref: Hills/sol/1


To solicitors on the record
acting for bereaved relatives,
and to the Hillsborough Steering Committee.


Uear Sirs,

              Limited Resumed Inquests - Hillsborough

iou will of course be aware that I have decided to resume the Inquests
(on a limited basis) into the deaths of the persons who lost their
lives on 15th April 1989 at Hillsborough.

You will also be aware that the intention is to take the post mortem
evidence together with a summary of the evidence as it relates to
location of the deceased, the time of death as far as it can
reasonably be established and to clear up any minor matters such as
spelling of names.

The basic format for the inquests will be that the evidence will
be presented either t>y way of documentary evidence eg. post mortem
report or in trie case of the summary by presentation by a West
Midlands Police officer.

The evidence will be presented in a non adversarial fashion and is
intended to give to you and in particular your client(s) non
controversial evidence as it relates to each individual deceased
which is available. I an sure that you will appreciate that tne
quality and quantity of evidence which it has been possible to obtain
varies from person to person.

It must be clearly understood and it is the basis on which I have
decided to resume the inquests at this stage that no evidence will be
taken nor will questions or comments be permitted which could be
considered as attacking or criticising anybody or person incorporate
or otherwise or which could in any way be construed as obstruction or
conproraising the investigation which is still being undertaken by the
DPP and on which to date no conclusion has been reached.

In order to enable yotp'and if you so wish your client(s) to be aware
of the scope of the evidence a copy of the summary will be sent to
you as soon as possible in order to enable you to consider it anti in
particular to enable you client to be prepared for the evidence.

Although it will not be possible to recast the summaries into a
different format it may that in some case there may be a particular
point which is not clear to you or there may be some question which
your client is particularly anxious about and which is not clearly
dealt v.’iLn on the summary or the post mortem.

In sucii a case please let me know the point or question that you wish
to have more information on. I cannot give any undertaking that
questions submitted can or will be dealt with but provided that the
points or questions fall within the parameter of the resumed inquest
then they will be sympathetically considered and if it is conveniently
possible to deal with them at the hearing it will be done.

It may also be that either you or your clients may be aware cl other
witnesses who are not referred to in the summaries. The case files do
not contain every witness statement which has been obtained.
Statements which are thought not to advance the evidence have been
excluded from the files prepared for me. However if you wish me to
consider any particular statement which you are aware of and which
is not mentioned in the summary please let me have details so that X
may consider it.

I think that in the majority of the cases it will not be necessary to
call the pathologist to the inquest but there may be a few cases where
a client particularly wishes to hear the pathologist in person. If
that applies to any of your clients please let me know as soon as
possible. I will then consider the evidence in the light of this
request.

I have to make it clear that under no circumstances will any South
Yorkshire Police officer be called to give oral evidence at these
resumed hearings. From my assessment of the files to date I think it
is unlikely that I will be calling any witnesses other than WIIP
officers and possibly in a few cases the pathologists to give oral
evidence.

The case files are in the course of being prepared and in order to
give you as nuch time as possible and also to spread the load over
a period it is proposed to start sending out the summaries towards
the enc of this week or the beginning of the next. A consequence of
this is that some families will be aware of the contents of the
summaries before others. I would begrateful if you would make it
clear to your client(s) particularly if theyare the ones whose
sur'.nary has not yet been sent out that there is nothing sinister in
this but that it is simply a question of logistics.

I am not yet in a position to let you know when any particular inquest
will take place. I will of course try to let you have as much notice
as possible but I am sure that you will appreciate that this is quite
a complex operation and that you must be prepared for alterations in
listing information even at the last moment.I appreciate the
inconvenience that this may cause and I will try to minimise it but I
fear that it is inevitable.

In this   connection I would be grateful if you would please let my
listing   officer whose address appears on the attached sheet know
whether   you are presently aware of any of your clients who do not
wish to   attend the inquest relating to their loved one.

Please also let my listing officer know whether there are any major
committments of your clients which might make it difficult for them
to attend on any particular dates. Whilst I will try to take such
information into account it may not be possible to meet all wishes
and the final decision on timing and date will be taken by me and my
officers.


Yours faithfully,


S. L. Popper.
H.M. Coroner.

                          Listing Officer
                                A G E N D A

                        Friday 2nd November 1990



Running Order of Court
Final List of Witnesses
Scene setters - Chief Suprintendent FOSTER


Documents in Court


Original statements/documents - complaints and discipline files


Witness expense forms


List of witnesses to Legal Representatives


Daily list of witnesses - given 48 hours notice


Rail warrants


Liaison Officer


Social Services meeting arranged - matters to be discussed ._


Model of Ground   —         ^


Final visit Friday 16th November 1990 - Who will attend?


Overtime - travelling weekends - inclement weather and hotel bookings
Weekend witness warning


Complaints - SPEARRITT, OWENS etc.


Disclosure of information


Dr POPPER’S letter of 27th October 1990 - Turnstiles


Proforma for Court
                                      TEL N o .0244-343197                 ;i   Uct   90 1 3 : 4 9   No . 006   P.




                    POLICY NOTE;




r.>                 WEDNESDAY 31 OCTOBER 3.990 - 1135 HOURS

                    T ele phone discussion v i t h Mr Cliff Smediey in respect or the
                    artartgerneftts for 6 Decemb er 1990 when   the ’’Special  t unction'1
                    will take y l a c « al the 'Town Hall*
                                                                                              f
                    1 have agreed chat the Coroner will make sufficient annouiiceiueiitB
;                   .on the days preceding the 6th that the facilities oi the M a n d e l ^ ^ X
                   ■ Room and Ch& Reception Room will M O T fce available, h o w e v e r 3 the
                     Inquests w i l l continue in the Council Charaher,




        ■v'
              ./




f




              ■
    h




thh
h>'
|v ■
        Telephone:        (0 742)734 611
  Telecom Gold 76:        LM X877 (Env. Health) LM X878 (Consumer Serv.)
               Fax:       (0742) 7 3 6464 (Town Hall Chambers)
                          (0742) 402531 (Trading Standards)
                          (0742) 73 4692 (Env. Services)
               Telex:     9 3 1213 227 0 (IF G)


     Your reference:                                                             cC I T Y
      Our reference:        RM/PB                                                C O U N C I L

                Date:       „ „   ,
                             30th October 1990


                                                                                 Health and Consumer
                                                                                 Services
                             Dr. S. Popper                                       Director
                             H. M. Coroner                                       D W Purchon       m ie h   AMinstwM

                             Medico-Legal Centre
                                                                                 Town Hall Chambers
                                                                                 1 Barkers Pool
                                                                                 Sheffield
                                                                                 S1 1EN




                             Dear Stefan



                             HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS
                             USE OF RECEPTION ROOMS ON THURSDAY, 6TH DECEMBER 1990


                             Further to our telephone conversation on 22nd October, I write to
                             confirm the request from Publicity Department that they be allowed
                             to use the Town Hall Reception Rooms on Thursday, 6th December for an
                             event which has already been booked, publicised and booking fees
                             received.

                             As I explained, any need to relocate the event to a hotel conference
                             suite would considerably increase costs and the event would make a
                             loss.

                             You agreed that you would avoid using the Reception Rooms on that
                             day, by an adjournment if you felt it necessary.

                             I have been asked to thank you on behalf of the Publicity Department
                             for your kind assistance and understanding in this matter.

                             Many thanks.


                             Yours sincerely




                             ROGER MICHIE
                             Assistant Director of Health
                             and Consumer Services

 All com munications                                                                                   V* Health and Consumer Services include:
      to be addressed                                                                 H EALTH Y;
                                                                                      SHEFFIELD!   \ A Air Pollution, Ammai Welfare, Cemeteriesand
'Director o f Health &                                                                             m f lli    Crematoria, Consumer Protection, Dog Warden Service,
 Consumer Services'                                                                                  liS f    Drainageand Pest Control, Environmental Nuisances
                                                                                                   Jw A       food Hygiene, Health and Safety at Work, Home Safety,
For enquiries on this                                                                                         Meat Inspection, Metrology, Noise Control,
  matter telephone           734632 — Mr. Michie                                                   ^          Standards Testing, Trading Standards.

                                                                                                                   p rin te d o n recycled p aper


                 R 8607
                                                         (CJL
FILE NOTE DATED 30.10.90. TELEPHONE CALL WITH MR. SMEDLEY

RE THE 6th OF DECEMBER AND THE HOLDING OF THE INQUEST IN

THE COUNCIL CHAMBERS.

Apparently the problem is that the limit of the number of

people in the public part of the Town Hall is 350.      They

anticipate using 60 to 100 in the Mandella Reception Rooms.

I said in that case we would limit outselves to about 200

which would give them an extra 50 above their highest

estimate.   I couldn't see any problems nor could he.




BACABL
                               2



FILE NOTE    29.10.90.   TELEPHONE                WITH
                                     CONVERSATION W       MR.
                                                    I T H HR.   FRAZER
                                                                FRAZER.


      r*
I told him the substance of Mr. Beechey's report to me

about Mrs. Coleman.       Mr. Frazer said         was a real

problem as far as he was concerned.          He agreed that the

meeting was intended for lawyers.          It was not intended for

the general public, but he could see that we might have

difficulty if she was actually physically in the building,

to exclude her.      He said his understanding was that Mr.

Hicks, the Chairman of the Group felt that she should not

be there.

I explained to him that I in principle thought that she

shouldnt be there though in practice I didnt really think

that much harm could come of it as we were not discussing

anything that we wanted to hide.

I was however very concerned that from what she had told

Mr. Beechey that the f a m i l ^c l e a r l y had high expectations

which would not be met at this meeting.           Mr. Frazer agreed

with t h i s .   He said that they did seem to think that there

would be all kinds of relevations, whereas the purpose of

the meeting was simply to assist the lawyers in sorting

things out to make the running of the Inquests

for themselves more smooth.          I asked him if he could

perhaps, despite the lateness of the hour, convey this to

people as I was very anxious that they should not come on a

wastedjourney.       On the other hand, I did not want them in

any sense of the word to feel that they were being




BACABH
                              3    -



excluded.   My objective was to make sure that they were

treated fairly^ correctly, that justice was not only done

but was seen to be done.

Mr. Frazer said that he had actually been on the phone with

Mr. Hicks when I rang through in the first instance when he

was trying to explain the object of this meeting to him.

Mr. Hicks apparently was going to try and let people

understand this.

Mr. Frazer raised the issue of re-opening the Inquests.

Apparently there were a few families who had some issues

arising out of the earlier hearings which they wanted

clearing up.    He said that he was trying to ascertain

precisely what it was but it might be worth just using a

day at the beginning to deal with any outstanding points.

I explained to him that it would depend on what was raised.

I mentioned that I had had a long letter from Mr. Glover in

which he raised several points which I was responding to

but in a nutshell I was actually saying no to him as I

didnt think that the points which he was raising justified

re-opening or were appropriate.        I said it really depended

on what was at issue.

He also told me that in fact they were not representing all

the deceased.   There was a substantial body who were either

not going to be represented and who had declared that they

had wanted nothing further to do with the matter or who

would represent themselves.       He didnt think that there

would be very many of these.      Apparently he kijfws who they




BACABH
are but at Mr. Hick's express instructions, he has not

disclosed the names as yet.   I explained to him that I was

less concerned to know who they were representing and was

more interested to know who they were not as we would have

to write to them to make sure that they knew what was going

on etc.   It was exactly the same point as before.   I felt

it was important that people should clearly understand

what was happening so that they could take proper rational

decisions.   He said he would have a word with Mr.   Hicks

and let me know.   I also explained to him that if some of

the people who were on his represented list subsequently

dropped out, then he could of course add those and we would

add them to our non-represented list so to speak.




BACABH
FILE NOTE   DATED   29.10.90.   RUSSELL,   S O C I A L W O R K E R PHONED.

She had heard about the meeting to-morrow 30th.                 Understood

that it was for lawyers mainly but for any interested

party.   Was it appropriate that she should attend.                 I

explained to her that it was for lawyers.              It was

procedural.    Interested parties were allowed to attend,

mainly so that they could be quite sure that everything

that was being done was above board but not appropriate for

them to attend.




BACABI
FILE NOTE.

Mr. Hylands H.S.E. rang.    He suggested a meeting on Monday

29th.    We agreed 2.p.m. at the Medico Legal Centre.




BABACM
                             OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR
                                                               MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                               WATERY STREET,
                                          (West District)      SHEFFIELD
                                                               S3 7ET
STEFAN L. POPPER. LL.B., B.MED. S ci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C G P
                                                CORONER

                       T elephone. SHEFFIELD (07425 738721        .3.1st, .October.,19 ..9.0




 Dear Sirs,

                        Hillsborough resumed inquests 19th Nov. 1990

 I refer to our meeting on 30th October 1990 at the Medico Legal Centre
 when we discussed various procedural aspects.

 One of the points which was raised was to try to construct an agreed
 extract from the report of Lord Justice Taylor which could deal as I
 understood it with in the main factual matters on which all the
 parties were agreed and so save time and effort.

 For some reason I did not make it clear at that point                   that I already
 have in hand the preparation of various statements to                   be presented by
 WMP officers which are intended to be 'scene setters'                   and which I
 think will meet the objectives which some of you were                   trying to
 achieve.

 I am writing to you now on this as it may help you in connection
 with your planning.

 If we can get the paper work together in time it may be possible to
 circulate these statements to those firms that were present at the
 meeting on 30th October 1990 in order to enable you to comment if you
 perceive any factual errors. If you have no comment I will take it
 that the statements are agreed. This will be of assistance to me, the
 jury and all the interested parties.

 I do want however to make it clear that the only evidence which will
 be relevant will be what is put before the jury and the circulation of
 such statements are intended simply as an aid to you .



 Yours faitMully,




 S. L. Popp^-
 H.M. Coroner
FILE NOTE DATED 21.10.90. TELEPHONE CALL FROM ROGER MICHIE

There still seems to be some confusion about the 6th of

December. Apparently Mr. Smedley has indicated to the other

people that they would not be able to use the Mandella

Rooms.   I said I could not understand t h i s .   I repeated

that I had been told.    Roger Michie said it was perfectly

clear that I could use the Council Chambers.       There had

never been any suggestion that I should'nt.        That my

suggestion of limiting our numbers to say 200 was entirely

reasonable.   He would sort it out.

I also took the oppoprtunity of pointing out that we would

have to have assistance at the Town Hall with the payments

of witnesses, but I understood that Sue and Mr. Draycott

were discussing this.    I also pointed out that it would be

difficult to release the Jury for just one day, say on the

6th of December and not pay them, and this could well be a

substantial sum of money.     I was very anxious that we

should'nt waste Council cash.




BACABM
\




    FILE NOTE DATED 20.10.90.       LETTER FROM MR. HYLAND, DIRECTOR

    OF H.S.E._______________________________________________

    After exchange of pleasantries we spent a few minutes

    talking about some H.S.E. matters in particular we talked

    about pressure for Manslaughter verdicts from various

    pressure groups, works accidents.       Mr. Hyland's view seemed

    to coincide with mine namely, that there had to be some

    very clear evidence of recklessness before one could even

    contemplate it.    Mere minor breaches of standards in

    themselves didnt really go far enough but one had to look

    at what people were trying to do.       Were they totally

                                ‘                 had they perhaps

                                                >-■adognaf p?-.

    We spent a few minutes discussing various aspects of

    Hillsborough.     I confirmed that I would like Dr. Nicholson

    to give evidence plus or minus anybody else whom he could

    advise.   This obviously was acceptable.      We discussed the

    problems with regard to the licensing.       He explained to me

    that on the whole the H.S.E. were not keen on licensing.

    They did licence Nuclear Establishments but they had a very

    high powered Inspectorate solely devoted to that.             They

    also licence one or two other things like petroleum storage
                                                Lh
    fcfeert had something to do with asbestos* ouad said these were

    inherited or forced on them but he could see that one of

    the problems with licencing is that people may take the

    view that if a licencing authority carries out inspections




    BACABG
                           -    2   -




etc., that the premises are in fact safe.    Not only that

people who attend take that view but obviously other

people who are connected with the running of the show.         I

drew his attention to the Home Office instruction which in

effect said that the licensing was'nt intended to abrogate

the occupiers responsibility.

We then turned to Rule 23 of the Coroners' Rules.     I said

that somebody had rung about this but he said he didnt know

who because he knew that this was the applicable Rule.         He

explained to me that in some respects Section 3 of the

Health & Safety at Works Act 1974 means that anything was

reportable to them other than perhaps something that

happened in the home, but they took the view that febe- oU*)

enforcement was primarily with somebody else e.g., local

authority, then the Health & Safety Executive would not get

involved.   This was exactly the same point of view as Mr.

Nattress and it was based on that point of view and the

fact that the local authority were represented, that we

have come to the conclusion in April^May time that Health &

Safety did not have to have a representative at the

Inquest. Mr. Hyland felt that this was still his view.         It

seemed to me that this was a reasonable /»sfrlaliation.   It

was a terrible waste of time and money to have their H.S.E.

people sitting in perhaps a very long Inquest to no

purpose, particularly as the local authority were

represented.   We felt that in the circumstances,   it was in

order for H.S.E.   not to have a representative there.




BACABG
We did know that the local authority in a sense were there,

and it mir§ht bo at the Inquest,   in a dual capacity i.e.,

as enforcing authority but also to answer in respect of any

complaints about the way they acted.

Mr. Hyland mentioned that the H.S.E. Annual Report would be

published in December and that there would be a reference

to Hillsborough as part of the statistical information.       I

asked him if he would be kind enough to let me have a copy

of the relevant bit in case this was raised or mentioned.




BACABG
                                                                                          s$b4ha#~>




                                                                        12th Oct obe r         90




         SLP/JT.



         Mr. H. Davison,
         J.L.W. Harphams,
         54 Queens Buildings,
         Qu een Street,
         Sheffield. SI.



         Dear Mr. Davison,

         I have be en informed that the local aut hority have n o w decid ed that w e can
         use the Counc il C h a mbe r at the Town Hall and w e antici pat e c omme n c i n g there
         on the 19th of N o v em ber 1990.

         Can you, subject to the usual caveats about adjournments, make the n ece ssar y
         ar rangements so that you can deal w i t h the t r a ns cri pti on of the evidence.

         We are still c o n side rin g w h e t h e r w e should produce the copies that w i l l be
         n ee ded or w h e t h e r w e should ask you to do so.     Can w e leave this poiont in
         abeyance for the time being?

         A l t h o u g h w e are p l a nni ng to start the Inquest p rop er on the 19th of November,
         it is p ossible that w e m a y have either one or two m e e tin gs w i t h lawyers prior
         to that date.          If I w e r e to w a n t to transcribe these u s i n g you r staff, I
         assume that you w o u l d be in a p o s it ion to make someone available.             I w i l l of
         course give you as m u c h notice as I can.

         Yours   sincerely,




         S.L.Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.




LESABV
                                                                                                fzJU
                                                                                                )*yxKjt

                                                                                          pj.




                                                                     12th October          90




         SLP/JT.



         Mr. M. Rigby,
         Superin ten den t Registrar,
         The Regi stry Office,
         Surrey Place,
         Sheffield.



         Dear Mr.    Rigby,

         RE HI LLS B O R O U G H INQUESTS-95 DECEASED.

         You m a y have read in the press that I a m resuming these Inquests on the 19th
         of November.     I do not yet k n o w w h e n they w i l l be completed, but w h a t e v e r
         date that w i l l be it w i l l be w e l l outside a year from the date of death.

         I am anxious to avoid ne edless distress or w o r r y to b e r e a v e d families w i t h
         regard to regist rat ion of the deaths, and I w o u l d be grateful if you could
         please let me k n o w whether, in the circumstances of this case, arrangements
         could be made that the R EV 9 9 * s are eith er sent direct to you from my s e l f and
         that y ou then issue the ap propriate certificates through the post to the
         relatives, or a lte rn a t i v e l y if yo u w o u l d think this was m o r e helpful, they
         w o u l d be sent to the Regi str ar Genera l and they co uld be dealt w i t h from
         there.

         If you have any other suggestion to smooth the o r g a n i sat iona l aspects of this
         ma t t e r please   let me know.




         Yours     sincerely,




         S.L.Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.




LESABX
»                                                        /t,/


    FILE NOTE DATED 10.10.90. TELEPHONE CALL TO PROFESSOR JAMES

    REASON, MANCHESTER UNIVERSITY 061 275 2 0 0 0 . _____________

    I put it to him that I was lc        it the issue as to

    whether or not there was any         >r information which

    might assist in answering the question as to the effect

    that stress produced on decision taking ability,

    particularly of trained people.    I instanced the

    description by Lord Justice Taylor of Mr. Duckenfield, whom

    he described as 'having frozen'.

    Professor Reason's initial reaction was that people did

    respond to stress by some adjustment to reaction and he

    went on to say the training should or would make a

    difference.



    I explained to him that in some respects, it did'nt matter

    what the answer was i.e., for or against but the object of

    my conversation was to try and ascertain whether there was

    any mileage in the thought and in particular whether there

    was any dowfe* to support anything which was said.

    Professor Reason said that he would have to think about it

    because obviously if there was no scientific basis for any

    statements it would hardly be worth making them.



    He wanted tt) know whether if he were involved (and he said

    this was a matter of interest to him    because it was his

    field) whether this would be in the context of an

    adversarial system.   I explained that althought strictly




    LESABL
                            -   2




speaking in coroner's inquiries^there would be a

substantial number of lawyers fetuswre and that as whatever he

said is likely to offend somebody, he would have to be

prepared for a very substantial^ examination.

I explained that I would have to consider the matter and

also take into accou^nt the question of cost, though I

wasn't suggesting that he should therefore not charge the

appropriate rate but it was a point that I had to bear in

mind.

He said that he would think about the matter and see

whether there was any mileage in it and that he would come

back to me in due course.       He wanted to know whether if I

felt that we wanted to pursue it I would want to see
p t
ftppggpricrbt) evidence and I said I thought so. I gave him

our phone number so that he could ring back when he had had

a chance to think about it.




LESABL
FILE NOTE     --                                             '
                                                        yi       / w
CLAPHAM INQUEST ; PROCEDURE                              '       cUy,U. ft** 0&{<U


I had a long conversation with Dr. Knapman.       He agreed to send the
copies of the summing up and the Opening day.Dr. Knappiaia on             the
whole thought that I ougth to try and minimise the amount of evidence
to take nad that I should restrict it very very tightly to the
question of How.      He felt that to explore issues     which .... a possible
verdict of Unlawfully killed were outside the scope of thatword.                I
pointed out to him that position in his case was rather easy as the
incident was restricted to just one event.       He agreed but said that
he could have gone through     all the strata of British rail who had to
supervise this work but he     decided against i t .   I pointed out to him
that Michael Powers felt that he had to do the whole evidence and go
into considerable detail.      It sounded to me as if he didn't agree with
Michael on this point.


|He did make a very interesting comment that he had been to see counsel
who had advised the D.P.P. in the Clapham Disaster.              Counsel apparently
had advised him that he should not try and distinguish              between gross
negligence and recklessness but that he should address himself to
either one or the other following the quote "Lawrence" case.              Apparently
there is a lot of conflict as to what the law on manslaughter is at
the moment.


I spent a few minutes discussing with him the verdict of Lack of Care,
he didn't think it was appropriate in his case and he doubted whether
it would apply.      I asked him what he thought about the fact          that if
Lack of Care was the ......     of self neglect whether it was ever
possible to have that verdict when isolated incidents have occurred
►on the basis that self starvation might well be self neglect but missin
one or two meals could hardly be classified as such, though in one sens
they were the beginning of starvation.      He thought that that might well
be right.


I thought about what Dr. Knapman said regarding ......... the inquests
but I didn't really feel that it was possible.         I telephoned Dr. Halle
and made arrangements for cover and then took the opportunity              of
discussing this issue with him.      Dr, Halle felt that it really wasn't
practical to try and tracate it.      Having spoken to Dr. Halle I also
had a word with my former deputy David Hinchliff.        He similarly felt
that there wasn't really any option but to proceed and deal with the
matter fully.      I felt relieved that my opinion was confirmed by these
two colleagues.
FILE NOTE   DATED   8.10.90.   TELEPHONE   CALL FROM   STAN   BEECHEY.




He would come up on Friday to discuss some of the

statements which are being prepared.          He mentioned that he

had heard from some Consultant Engineers called                 I

think who had done special studies on the steel of barrier

124A.    Apparently they had a video of this.          Did we want

it.     I said that it was highly unlikely but they should not

destroy it.

He pointed out that on Page 645 Dopcument 89 the Health &

Safety Executive indicated that 20 people per minute was

the rated throughput for the turnstiles.          I said that this

obviously a very important point because it went to the

question of whether a.         whether there had been sufficient

turnstiles or not and b. whether the assessment of

throughput had some basis.         I told him that when Caroline

went through the body file schedule she should for the time

being ignore all the relatives as it was quite likely that

I would want to call those anyway, we would then either

have to assess and make sure that they actually wanted to

come.

Stan Beechey also explained to me that Nigel Clough had in

his questionnaire said that he hadn't looked very much and

hadn't noticed very much apart from a bit of overspill.




LESABH
FILE NOTE DATED 6.10.90. TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH MR.

BINGHAM'S SECRETARY, CROWN COURT ADMINISTRATOR,    755866.

I asked what they did with regard to Juries who were sent

home either because of legal submissions or where somebody

fell ill and the case had to be adjourned for a few days.

She said as far as they knew they paid, because the Jury

were not free to do anything else, but she would check and

come back to me on t h i s . I explained to her that I thought

that was the correct thing to do but it would be nice to

know what the Crown Court in fact did so that we could

justify to the local authority who of course had to fund

the c o s t s .




BACACF
                                                          }




FILE NOTE DATED 3.10.90.TELEPHONE CALL TO ROGER MICHIE.

I explained to him that I had been to look at the Don

Valley.   Whilst the        was probably acceptable, it

wasn't ideal.    He said there had been a development.

Apparently the Councillors were now thinking of possibly

letting us have the Town Hall after all.

Whilst talking to him it occurred to me that if we started

up at the Town Hall and if we then found that we only had

very few people, we might be able to move back to the

Medico-Legal Centre and release the Town Hall at least

until we were ready to do the closing.     I mentioned this to

Mr. Michie.     He was going on holiday to-night but maybe

this is something which should be raised by the Chief

Executive next week.     I also suggested that he had better

find out precisely what the Don Valley would actually cost,

because my impression was that it would be more expensive

than he anticipated.     He said Mr. Batley would make

inquiries.




LESABC
                                                           s     I
                                                                \




FILE NOTE   DATED    2.10.90.

I spoke to Pauline Williams, who works for Mr. Webster or

the Chief Executive, T fin            enT'l~Q T,ThinJ«- she said she was

trying to arrange a meeting for the Chief Executive Mr.

Webster, David Purchon and myself to discuss accommodation

for the Hillsborough Inquests.          She offered me a couple of

dates Friday which was not convenient and Monday 12.15

which I said I would be able to make.

Shortly afterwards, Roger Michie phoned me.             He said he was

sorry to trouble me but Mrs. Pat Midgley, the Chair was

meeting with the Labour Group tonight and they were

discussing the question of accommodation.            He had been to

see the Don Valley Stadium and although they did have a

slight worry about the fact that it was a sports complex,

in all the circumstances, taking into account entrances

etc., they felt that it was a suitable venue, subject of

course to my approval.          They felt that it was infinitely

preferable to Furnival House, which would give a very bad

image and also not be as convenient or commodious.              There

were drawbacks,      for example it was out of town and so on.

I explained to Mr. Michie that a. I had not yet seen the

complex so it was difficult for me to comment, b. that the

case of / w         clearly indicated that it was my decision as

to where I went, but having said that I did not want to be

difficult and I was very conscious of the need to chose a

venue which would do credit to the Inquest and to the City,

and which would not cause exhorbitant cos ts .           I said one of




LESAAX
my main concerns about Don Valley was the fact that

although I had said that I was starting on the 19th of

November, I might have to adjourn, either because I was

requested by several parties or because sombody might want

to Judicially Review me or indeed there may be other

factors.     I was worried that if we had to adjourn the

stadium and not resume within a reasonable time, it would

no longer be available, and all the capital ingoing costs

would be totally wasted.     This was less likely at Furnival

House.     Mr. Michie said that might well be true but the

cost of going into Furnival House would be considerably

greater and on balance they thought that the stadium would

probably be better.     I said so long as it was clearly

understood, that this was a possibility , I would be

looking at it on Wednesday and I would     certainly want to

be as co-operative as I possibly could if I thought it was

alright and if the Council were happy with it, well then

clearly that was a very acceptable solution.




LESAAX
FILE NOTE   DICTATED   2.10.90.

I spoke with Sue Harper on the 1st.      She had seen the

memorandum prepared by John Batley. She wasn't entirely

happy with it because it did seem as if it was a foregone

conclusion that we would be going to Don Valley whereas I

hadn't even seen it.      She was also concerned about the

possible loss of cash if for some reason we had to adjourn

and couldn't resume at that location.

She was also concerned about the question of ordering.

She explained to me that there were technical problems that

whilst I could pass invoices generally speaking, to place

an order was accepting a financial commitment.      She thought

that if the Council were not prepared to give me an
                                           jk
indemnity if I were to place an order which^doubted whether

they would bearing in mind it hadn't been through

Committee, then another way of getting round this would be

to say that they should formally authorise me to sign

orders with an appropriate limit of commitment, then orders

could be signed on their headed paper and would be the

responsibility of the Council.      I thought that was a very

useful bit of information.

I explained to her about the Roach case and the position

that Coroners were in with regard to the purchase of goods

and services, i.e., they          the expenditure and then were

refunded by the local authority.

We discussed other possible alternatives and Sue mentioned

that she had spoken to the people at the Cutlers Hall.




LESAAZ
and they could almost have made it but they have got just

two or three functions which could intervene.   I asked her

to have another go at them, find out exactly when the

premises would not be available and also the cost so that

we could reconsider it because if it was really only just a

couple of functions, it might be possible to just adjourn

the Inquests for those days provided of course we could

leave our things there.   She said she would come to

Sheffield a bit early on Wednesday and have a look round as

this was difficult to do these things on the phone.




LESAAZ
FILE NOTE   D A T E D 2.10.90.

I rang the Coroner's Court in London.       Dr. Chambers is ill

and in hospital in Italy.        I asked them if they could

please find the transcript of the Roach case and send it to

me, a copy of it as soon as possible, if I needed it.         They

said they would do their best.




LESAAY
      HALCROW                                                                                      Sir William Halcrow & P artners Ltd
                                                                                                   Vineyard House, 44 Brook G'een          ?-
      Consulting Engineers                                                                         London W6 7BY, England
                                                                                                   Telephone 071-602 7282
                                                                                                   International Telephone •<- 44 71 602 7282
                                                                                                   Telex 916148 HalcroG
                                                                                                   Fax 071-603 0095
                                                                                                   International Fax +44 71 603 0095
                                                                                                  And at
                                                                                                  Burderop Park, Swindon,
                                                                                                  Wiltshire SN4 0QD, England
                                                                                                  Telephone (0793) 812479
   Elrond Engineering Ltd
   4 Highfield Road
   Edgbaston
   Birmingham
   B15 3ED

   FOR THE ATTENTION OF MR N BURNE


   1 October 1990                           Our ref      TL/SWH/11                                Your ref




  Dear Mr B u m e

 HILLSBOROUGH

 Thank you for your letter dated 19 September concerning copies of
 videos. West Midlands Police have confirmed that, following the
 DPP s decision, they do not at present require a copy of the video
 of the metallurgical testing on barrier 124A in relation to a
 criminal prosecution. However there is a possibility that it may be
 required for the Coroner’s Inquest scheduled to start on 19 November
 1990.  I have explained that you were coordinating the video copying
 and to avoid unnecessary expense they will contact you nearer the
 date of the inquest if they need a copy of the video.

Yours sincerely




   Weaver
  irector

c.c.            Detective Chief Supt Foster
                Hillsborough Inquiry Team
                West Midlands Police
                Nechells Green Police Stati< in
                Fowler Street
                Birmingham
                B7 5DA



Director*
R W Rothwell MA FICE                                                                                         Consultants
                             D J Pollock PhD MICE      1C Price FICE                J C Thome BSc FICE
(Chairman)                                                                                                   Sir Alan Muir Wood FRS FEng FICE
                            R S Gray FICE              N A Trenter MSc MIGEOL       P S Godfrey BSc MICE
A R Kopec FICE                                                                                               N J Cochrane DSc(Eng) FICE
                            D S Kennedy BSc FICE       J Weaver PhD FICE            1C Millar BSc MICE
(C hief Executive)                                                                                           R S Baxter F Eng FICE
                            C J Kirkland FICE          VM Scott BSc FICE            C P Barnard BSc MIPM
T D Casey MA FICE                                                                                            C L Clarke MA FICE
                            M R Stewart FICE FIHE      T P Walters BSc FICE         P JenKin BE MICE
A C CadwaHader BA                                                                                            V JW H oadO B E BSc FICE
                            J L Beaver FICE            J P Wood BSc FICE            B Walton MICE
(Secretary)                 P A S Ferguson MASM MICE   J Ahmed BSc FIE              A K AHum FICE FIWEM      Registered in England No 1722541
M S Fletcher MBE MSc FICE   C A Fleming PhD MICE       R N Craig BSc MICE           DH Beasley MA MICE       Registered Office
D O Uoyd BSc FICE           G D HMier BSc FICE         E P Evans MA FICE            P G Gammie BA FCA        Vineyard House, 44 Brook Green,
D Buckley FICE              J G May FICE               C T K Heptinstall BSc FICE   J D Lawson MA FICE       London W6 7BY
H G Johnson BSc FICE        R J Pannett MICE           A J Madden PhD MICE
FILE NOTE 29.9.90

Telephone conversation with Sue Harper.  She confirmed substancially
what Mervyn had said about in the file note of 28.9.90. She felt
that the problem was not with the Officers but that they were in
difficulty with regard to Council regulations. She though it would
be wise to clarify matters.  I said that I was going to write a letter
to the Chief Executive.
SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY
                                                                                                               I
South Yorkshire County Fire                                                                                %AA
H. E. Wright, M.l. FireE., F.B.I.M.                                                    West Division Headquarters
        Chief Fire Officer                                                             Wellington Street,      n
                                                                                       Sheffield,              f
                                                                                       South Yorkshire S1 3FG
                                                                                       Telephone: Sheffield
Divisional Commander        K.L.Mettam, J.P. Grad I Fire E.                            STD (0742) 727202

Our Ref:    W4125/JI/PD                    Your Ref:                                   Date: 28. 9.90
                                      Station Officer Ibbotson                                      358
This matter is being dealt with by                                                     Ext. No. .


     Sue Harper
     Principal Administration Officer
     West Midlands Police
     PO Box 52
     Colmore Circus
     Birmingham
     B4 6NQ


     Dear Madam

     Hillsborough Disaster Enquiry
     Medico Legal Centre, Watery Street, SHEFFIELD

     Further to a recent meeting between Station Officer Ibbotson and
     yourself at the above premises.  I can confirm that this Authority
     has no objections to the following temporary alterations to the
     coroners court

     1        A witness box containing ten seats to be removed, and a
              further three rows of ten seats per row provided to the front
              of the current public seating area.

     2        The three new rows should be provided with a 1 metre wide
              aisle in the middle and the seats fastened together in groups
              of five.

     These alterations will effectively increase the capacity of the
     coroners court from 70 to 90, the existing exits are adequate to
     cope with this increase. The new capacity figure must be
     considered an absolute maximum due to the size of the room.

     If you require any further information please do not hesitate to
     contact the officer dealing with this matter.

     Yours faithfully




     Divisional commander

     cc       The Coroner ^
              Dr S L Popper
              Medico Legal Centre
              Watery Street
              SHEFFIELD


                          All communications to be addressed to the Divisional Commander.
    t
t


                                       VEST MIDLANDS POLICE


                            HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - RESUMED INQUESTS


              Meeting with representatives of South Yorkshire Police Authority,
                       Sheffield City Council and West Midlands Police.

                                  Monday 24 September 2.30 pm

                          Medico Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield


                                           A G E N D A




        1.        Introduction


        2.        Venue



        2.1       Medico Legal Centre                         Appendix ’A ’ refers



        2.2       Alternative Venues                          Appendix ’B ’ refers



        3.        Associated Costs                            Appendix ’C ’ refers




        4.        Appointment of Liaison Officers




        5.        Press and Publicity




        6.        Any Other Business
                                                         APPENDIX ’A ’


HILLSBOROUGH INOTJTRY

NOTE FOR FILE


Monday 17 September 1990 1530 hours


I attended the Medico Legal Centre in Sheffield for a meeting with Station
Officer Ibbotson, South Yorkshire Fire Service.

I asked Mr Ibbotson for advice on seating arrangements in the court room
at the Medico Legal Centre. He confirmed the present fire certificate
allowed for safe evacuation of all personnel seated in the court room ie

40     in the fixed tier seating
10     in moveable seating to the left
10     jury seats
4      legal representatives
6_     other

70     total


i asked if the fire certificate could be extended to cover additional
personnel if the side seating was re-arranged. Mr Ibbotson confirmed that
an additional 3 rows of 10 chairs could be added leaving 2 side aisles and
an aisle between the fixed seating and additional rows.

To achieve this additional seating, 1 fixed unit of 10 chairs would have
to be removed leaving a total capacity for 90 people.




PRINCIPAL ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER
                                                               APPENDIX ’B ’


                            POSSIBLE ALTERNATIVE VENUES


Town Hall. Sheffield

Venue used by Lord Justice Taylor.

Leader of the Authority not happy to release these rooms for the purposes
of the Inquests.


Memorial Hall

Already booked for a number dates during the potential twelve week
period.  Sheffield City Council prepared to consider re-arrangement if
strongly supported for use by the Coroner.

South Yorkshire Fire Service       Training School

Not suitable in view of Fire Service involvement in the disaster.


Thombridee Hall - Great Loneston

Although owned by Sheffield City Council, situated outside Coroner’s area
of jurisdiction.


Oakleigh Junior School

Not available from January 1990, designated for use by Sheffield City
Council.


"Drama Space"    - Burnaby Crescent

Available for use.     Would require significant expenditure to prepare for a
Coroner’s Inquest.


Marks & Spencer (Moor Street)


Vacant premises, but initial enquiries reveal that a short term lease may
be costly.


F u m i v a l House - Floors 3 and 4

Available on a short term lease.       Work required to prepare as a court and
supporting office accommodation.
)




                  A Z>/*0//^/.

    2.0

                                                                                     ■ / T O / L   £   T S
                                                                                H"-
                                                                                ■:
                                                                                    -
                                                                                 2*- ■'   •,   '
                                                                                                   ■         *-j         tt--- c: = -   -   —.




                                                    21




          Taio
          / sCi MM*~l
                     (4-500)
          ->*£'<:>v>r                                    .A f.yC •?..&   ;
                                                                                                                    ■S&fV/LS<
                                                                                                                   'I*'.At, S



                         -itAJC— A.




                         c5 “ £   C   O   /V   2D
                                                                             A TV
                                              -r                                              E
                            r-c
                                  V:Vj,,,


                                               ) ■          ' ■ - '‘ v:-v'^ 33 0 f4535)




                                                     i'0";\3S
                                                     2 35
                                                     C4-S30                                                                 :;t'C452g)iSl
                                                                       > .(4^i0)2i4



             ^23fo(4S3>Z)
             2\
                                                                                                             (+529)   233




/ .<■•>'••

                                            7 // /                          O             p   * J - -A 7 T
r   T £ A Room"




    0 5 i(4 5 2 0 )k




               051
              (4-54-!);;.
