 H E R M A J E S T Y ' S C O R O N E R FOR S OUTH Y O R K S H I R E
                        (WEST DISTRICT)



         INQUESTS       INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    V I C T I M S OF T H E H I L L S B O R O U G H F O O T B A L L

                     STADIUM DISASTER

               ON T H E 15TH APRIL,              1989




                              Before

. S. L. POPPER,           LLB.    B.MED.Sci.          BM,   BS,      MRCGP

               (Her M a j e s t y ' s C o r o n e r )




                                 At

                       The T o w n Hall,
                         Sheffield.

                                 on

                     2 6th March,         1991




             T R A N S C R I P T OF P R O C E E D I N G S




   Fro m the N otes of J. L. H a r p h a m Ltd.,
         O f f i c i a l S h o r t h a n d W r i ters,
    55 Q ueen Street, S heffield, SI 2DX.
c



                            SEVENTY EIGHTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                                TUESDAY. 26th MARCH 1991

               THE CORONER:     We have been thinking, as you know, about

     BI   the Control Room staff and I have been talking to you about

          that yesterday.     I want to just briefly remind you about Mr.

          Murray because although we have talked about them in bits and

          pieces I just want to remind you of him.     There were, of

          course, four people in the Control Room but the two who we

          are considering particularly are the two senior people,

          namely Mr. Duckenfield and Mr. Murray.     I do not need to

          remind you of all the details but at around 2.30 or there

          abouts Mr. Murray told us that they had looked out.       They had

          seen a crowd outside Leppings Lane.    When I say they looked

          out I mean they looked on the screens and he was satisfied at

          that time that that crowd, and indeed the people who would be

          following would be able to get in.

               He also confirmed, as we already know, that they had

          some discussion regarding delaying kick-off and I have told

          you enough about that without going over it again.       He had

          another look out - he may well have done others but the one

          he remembers - at about 14.40 when Mr. Bichard pointed out to

          him there was a horse which was surrounded by people.          At

          that time arrangements were made for assistance to be given

          by Sergeant Goddard who had noticed it and decided that more

          help was needed.    He activated some assistance.     In fact, it

          was Sergeant Higgins and we also know about Sergeant Soresby.

               He then gave us an account of the radio going down and

          the effect that that had on the whole system.       You will




    Hi
S'




          remember he was asked quite a lot about that.     In fact you

          asked whether there had been previous radio problems, can you

          remember?   He said, "Yes, there had in the previous year".

      B| It   was not anything like this.    It was music which they were

          listening to and on this particular year they had tried to

          combat that by having a radio engineer on site, so to speak,

          and indeed he knew they were having trouble and turned up

          before they could actually call him which seemed as if at

          least the radio engineer aspect was working.     Nevertheless it

          did, according to them, cause a considerable amount of

          disruption.

                Then he reminded us that tannoy messages were sent out

          and we have discussed those as well.     Inspector Bennett came

          through and wanted more help and they sent an extra lot of

          people who I think, though I am not absolutely sure, may have

          included Sergeant Green.     Do you remember he was the chap who

          said he came round the front?

               He then said at about quarter to, to contact Mr. Lock

          because he thought that the turnstiles were working slowly

          but for some reason did not get through and in any event,

          whatever the reason did not make contact.    He then recounted

          the request from Mr. Marshall which we know quite a bit

          about.   His recollection is that there were four and they

          came in batches of two.    The first one was around 14.47.    He

          said, as indeed several other people in the Control Room,

          that he saw the gate open.    He said he thought it had

          relieved the situation.    At some time before 14.52 - it had

          to be before 14.52 because the gate opened at 14.52 - the




     Hi
                                                                    3

request must have been earlier.   It may only have been

fractionally earlier but at some point earlier than that a

further request came through from Mr. Marshall, this time in

rather more peremptory terms, and there seems to be very

little dispute between any of the people in the Control Room.

He turned to Mr. Duckenfield and said, "Are we going to open

the gates?" or words to that effect and the request was

couched, as we already know, in terms that if action was not

taken somebody would die.

     Shortly thereafter Sergeant Higgins came through with a

similar request and do you remember he spent a lot of time

trying to work out when this request came through.      Was it

shortly after, was it in fact six minutes later, and you can

actually see the Officers lined up.     It depends.   If you

accept PC Bichard's evidence that in fact you can tie it by

the pan, which I have already alluded to earlier, then it

would fit in with shortly after that.      He also recollects the

request from PC Buxton about postponing the kick-off and I

dealt with that earlier when I told you that Sergeant Goddard

actually said that it was too late because the players were

on the pitch, or words to that effect.      He approbated it ar.d

said, "I didn’t countermand it.   I could have done so if I

had wished.   I in fact agreed with it".

     His evidence is that he did not know that in 1988 any

diversion on the concourse had taken place with regard to the

central tunnel and as far as he is concerned - and this is

what he told us - he believed the ground to be safe, the

system under which he was operating was safe, and that it had
       worked satisfactorily in 1987 and 1988.   He also told us in

       addition to being the Controller and, therefore, if you like,

       the communicator and disseminator, the receiver and

    B | disseminator of information really through his staff and

       also, of course, a man of rank who was in a position to take

       decisions, he saw his role as including advising Mr.

       Duckenfield, particularly in the light of the fact that Mr.

       Duckenfield was a newcomer up this particular point.

            He confirmed for us that there was no specific reference

       to monitoring for overcrowding but his understanding was that

       the serials would do this as a matter of course.   He was

       quite open with regard to what was going through his mind

       when the Gate C was opened and that was it did not cross his

       mind to close the tunnel.   He went on to say that entry was

       into the concourse and he expected the people to disperse

       from there.   He did not expect that they would all go through

       the tunnel.   His primary concern, he said, was to relieve

       pressure, to avoid injury, and he went on to say that nothing

       else was obvious to him.

            Nothing of significance was noted on the terraces so far

       as his evidence is concerned.   He said, "I didn't see

       anything that attracted my attention to the terraces until I

       noticed that the gates were open and people were coming out

       on to the pitch".   Then he told us, as indeed nearly

       everybody else did, the fact that Inspector McRobbie, the

       Inspector who was really just there to learn, went down to

       see why the lady Police Officer was not opening the gates and




H
he also said it was not at all unusual for fans to have to be

redistributed.

     I have dealt with Mr. Duckenfield to a large extent

already but I will just remind you again in this sort of

serial way.     Mr. Duckenfield basically said that he operated

on the assumptions that (a) the ground was safe, (b) the

system of policing which he was employing and the operational

plan was one which was satisfactory and had worked in

previous years and (c) that he had a team of Officers who

were experienced and supportive.

     If I just pick him up, so to speak, from the time that

Superintendent Marshall made his first request, he

recollected that and he said, very much like Mr. Murray, that

when the gate     was opened and 150 to 200 people came   in he

took it, if I     can use that word, that the situation   had been

resolved.     The second request then came; the inference from

that is that the second request came as a new matter, so to

speak, and he realised that these requests were of an

unprecedented nature and to open the gates, in his words,

would destroy the whole of the planning.     It may, therefore,

not be entirely surprising if he hesitated for a period.       It

is clear that Mr. Murray, by the time this request came

through and also from the tones of Mr. Marshall, felt that a

decision had to be taken, yes or    no so to speak, and he

turned to Mr.     Duckenfield and in fact said, "Are we   goingto

open the gates?" or words to this effect.

     You have to remember that if you look at it;     forget

that 95 people died for a moment.     If you look at the request
as it came from a Superintendent who was outside who said,

"Unless you open the gate people are going to die", Mr.

Duckenfield had very little option in fact other than to say,

"Yes" to it.   To have said "No" to that request, and if

people then had died - of course, we do not know whether they

would but if they had died he would have been I think in an

exceedingly difficult position.




                         /So although it was his decision.
So although it was his decision he was in a position where

he may not actually have had much option about it.

      Having said "Open the gates" he was then faced with

a further request to open another gate, Gate A; did not

know where it was of course and I have already dealt with

all that so I am not going to repeat it, but that was

actioned partly, in fact Sergeant Goddard said that he

actioned it because having heard the instruction     to open

the gates there was not really any further need for

further authorisation, it was merely a matter of saying;

"Yes, go ahead and do it".

      I have already reminded you earlier that he was

aware that there was a large concourse; he was aware that

there was a tunnel leading off it; he was aware that there

were other routes off it, but he   was not aware of the

detailed geography according to    his evidence and I have

dealt with that yesterday if you   can remember.

      He went on to say that when he   gave thatorder his

aim was to save life and I think he used the expression

that he was "consumed" by this decision.

      He too did not notice anything, according to his

evidence, with regard to the terracing of any moment

until he saw that the gate was open on the perimeter

fence and then we are back on the story with Mr. McRobbie

and the opening of Gate 1 and we know that this was around

3 o'clock because there are photographs which you have

seen of Inspector McRobbie down outside that gate and so on.
     He explained to us that he expected to receive

support from Officers both on the track and on the West

Stand and that they would report overcrowding to him if

they noted it.
      He also told us that on the day he was not aware

of the difficulties which fans might have in moving

from one area on that terrace to another because of the

radial fences.
      We now know, because we have gone through it at

great length, that those gates at the back are not

visible - I think we can say that quite clearly - are

not visible when you have terraces full of people.

They may not even be visible when the terraces are not

that full of people, but what I think he is really

telling us is that he was operating on an assumption

that the terraces were being treated as a whole, as

one unit and at the time, on the day, he was not aware

- I am telling you what he is saying in brief - he was

not aware of the difficulties which people might have

in seeing and indeed getting to these gates.

      He also told us that mere disparity in numbers

as such would not be a matter for concern.     Disparity

plus something yes, mere disparity no.

      He was relying upon the fact that the system

which he was using had worked in the past; that as

far as he knew there had been no distribution problems

in 1988 or 1987.   When I say "distribution" I mean
                                                              9




distribution of fans on the terraces, and that was the

basic premise.
      He was quite clear from his evidence that he had

no plan prepared to deal with the issue of maldistribution

if it arose.     His explanation for that was that he would

expect if a situation arose, and he would not expect it

to arise given all the presuppositions which I have already

told you about, he would expect Officers to respond to

a "developing situation", was the term he used.

      He did not accept that there was on the day, as

far as he was concerned, an obvious risk to people when

the gates were opened and he also reminded us that the

time interval in which he had to take various decisions

was short, certainly short as far as he was concerned.

      We heard from Sergeant Goddard and P.C. Bichard

and substantially on timings there are discrepancies as

to who actually initiated the call, you know was it

Murray, was it Duckerifield, Sergeant Goddard, but the

stories coincide more or less with regard to timings.

      In particular they too say that they had not

noticed anything about the pens until people started

coming over the top or coming out through the gates

and they in common indeed with Mr. Duckenfield and

Mr. Murray had not associated the opening of the gate

with the situation that presented itself on the

terraces.
      Sergeant Goddard told us that if he thought that
                      /                                    10




there was an obvious risk then he would certainly have

said something about it and he also told us that he

did not link Gate C with the tunnel.

      On the other hand he said he was not actually

asked to make that association and that is actually a

very important point by one of these two Officers.

They were in the Control Room but they were not in

charge, they were not taking the decisions, they were

effecters.    They were effecters who had a considerable

amount of experience but they were not carrying the

responsibility for the match.

      P.C. Bichard with regard to the terracing I have

already mentioned, he did not notice anything until

people started coming over and his interpretation of

it was that it was a pitch invasion and he based it

upon the fact that it looked exactly the same as

occurred in 1988.    Different time admittedly, he

quite clearly said that, but it looked the same.

People were coming over.    He said:   "That is a pitch

invasion".    He may also have been influenced by the

fact that when the 14.48 opening occurred he described

it as "the fans having burst through the gates".     We

don't know.    It is very difficult to put yourself into

other people's minds, but whatever the connections were

that is how he saw it and he did not connect the tunnel,

as I have already said, with people coming over.

      He said that he was fully occupied with Leppings

Lane and the problems - by that I mean the outside
                                                           11




area - and the problems associated with its resolution.

      He also said - and this I think was an interesting

comment - he said in his view there was room within the

ground.   If there had been no room within the ground

then his thinking might have been different.




                       Now that is a very risky
        No w that is a very risky bit of evidence because we

don't actually know what he would have thought in a

d if f e r e n t situation so be careful.      Do not make too m u c h of

that.

        I also want to ment i o n Mr. J a c k s o n very,   very briefly.

Mr. Jack s o n was the A s sistant Chief C o nstable and the most

senior officer on duty        that day.      His r e s ponsibility was in

respect of the whole of South Yorkshire,            not specifically

for the m atch and he had no direct duties in relation to

that match.        He did attend and it appears to me that he

a ttended as a guest,      a l t hough he m ight well have been

pleased    (a) to see the m a t c h and (b)    to be there beca u s e it

was a big event anyway.

        His evidence was     that he had signed     the Ope r a t i o n Order

when it was p r e sented to him.          He had seen nothing untoward

in it and we have already heard           from lots of people     that it

su b s tantially followed previous patterns so that isn't

entirely surprising.

        He also confirmed,     as indeed Mr. Mole and Mr. Lock,

that he was quite satisfied that Mr.           Ducken f i e l d was a

competent Police Officer,        suitable    to be a Divisional

Co m m a n d e r and as such in charge of an event such as a

football match.

        He did visit the Control Room at about          two o'clock,     or

so m ething like that,     and there was some talk but it sounded
to me as if it was more,       "Hello.     E v erything OK?" and then

he went off.


        He then disappeared,    if I can use that word,       and I do

not complain about      this because he had no r e sponsibilities

w ith regard to the match.        He di s a p p e a r e d and took his seat

in due course in the directors'          box.      He says he never

noticed anything about Leppings Lane terraces because he was

not really looking at them,       but shortly after kick-off he

did notice there was something wrong and once he realised

that pe o p l e were coming over the top he got up and went to

the Control Box.

        It was he who had to authorise Operational Support and

he did so at ten past.         It was requested somewhat earlier

than that and there is some conflict of evidence as             to who

actually requested it.         Was it Mr.       Duckenfield or was it

Mr. Jackson?       Mr. Duckenfield   thought       that he had requested

it.      Mr. Bichard thought it was Mr. J a c k s o n who had

requested it.

        Whether   that is right or not,     the Control Room clearly

had not u nderstood that it was Mr. J a c k s o n who had requested

it b e c a u s e they came back and said,       "Needs ACC approval."

Well,    of course, he was there so it was not too di f f i c u l t to
      I do not think very m u c h turns on that as to who

precisely said Operational Support.               They were both there,

Mr. Du c k e n f i e l d and Mr. Jackson.

      Mr. Jackson e x plained to you and,          indeed,    to all of us,

the m ethodology of comm a n d in disaster situations and              the

reason why he did not kick Mr.          Ducken f i e l d out of the way

and take over control of the disaster as such.

      Bearing in mind      that he did have wider

responsibilities,      namely South Yorkshire,        and of course

there was no g u a rantee     that something else might not happen

which might divert him,        you may feel that that is a

reasonable way of setting about             the control structure.

      He,   in common w ith nearly everybody else,            said that as

far as he was concerned,        although he did not have any

detai l e d knowledge of the ground,          he had always    taken it to

be safe for the p u r p o s e for which it was intended.

      He also said that although there was nothing specific

about safety in each individual             Serial bits about    the

Operational Order,      he would have expected Officers           to have

that in their minds.

      I have merely men t i o n e d Mr. J a c k s o n so you can see I

have not forgotten him,        so to speak,      and because he happened

to be there.       However,   his part in the decision making

process on that day, whe n it did b egin to become actual was

well after all crucial decisions had already been taken,
opening gates,       even call i n g ambulances,       was about the same

time as Operational          Support had been requested.

       Th e last person whom I want          to mention,      and I have

me n t i o n e d h i m on many occasions,    but    I just want    to d raw it

together a little bit,          is S u p erintendent Marshall.

Superintendent Marshall of course wasn't in the Control Box

at all.       He was outside.          I am not going to repeat what I

spent a couple of hours on yesterday about what was

ha p p e n i n g outside,   the activities of the fans,         the

a ctivities of the moun t e d officers,            the activities of other

peo p l e who were around.         You can remember that I am sure.

It must be clear in your mind.               You have heard it often

enough.

       Mr. Marshall did        two things w h i c h I think he accepted

were unprecedented.            Well,   that is not quite right.            He

did one thing w hich was unprecedented and that was he closed

Leppings Lane early.

       I have already gone over          that and given you some

guidance as to what I consider the significance of that

p a rticular activity in relation to the disaster.                    If you

remember I said I had grave doubts whet h e r it would even

fall into the "but          for" category:      "But   for the closing of

Leppings Lan e did X nu m b e r of people die?"              Even if it did

you m ight hav e c o n s i d e r a b l e d i fficulty in fitting that

d e c i s i o n into the d e f i n i t i o n of r e c k lessness w hich I have
already given to you and which I will be repeating in a

little while.


       The second thing he did was...            He told us that until

about 2.30 or perhaps even a few minu t e s after that,             there

were a lot of people      there but that in itself did not worry

him.     He was not worr i e d by the number of people but at

some point he said,      and indeed others said,       that he and the

Police Force were overwhelmed.           Having assessed the

situation he decided      that action had to be taken to relieve

the pressure at the front because if that did not happen he

foresaw injury and,      indeed,    towards    the end he foresaw

death.     He therefore initiated       the request for the gates to

be opened.

       Other people,   of course, were        there as well,     as we

know, because PC Buxton was doing things,            Inspector Bennett

up at the top, Mr. Purdy,        Mr. H a nd-Davis w i t h his horses,

the N o t t i n g hamshire people who came up,     there was quite a

lot of other activity,      but his activity in the main was

di r ected at,   as he saw it,     relieving    the pressure at the

front.

       We have spent a lot of time thinking about alternatives

that he could have employed.           Should he have chosen A

instead of B?       Should he have p o s t p o n e d kick-off?      Should

he have sent people down that side road behind the South

Stand?
     Superintendent Marshall explained to us that he did not

do it and he gave us some reasons.     It is d i f ficult to know

whether all those reasons went through his mind on the day.

I suspect they did not.




            The   long and the short of it
The long and the short of it is that he felt the only way

to deal wit h the situation was         to open the gates even

though this was,     if acceded to, another unpre c e d e n t e d act.

       You have to be very careful.          Simply because somebody

can say that there were alternatives does not mea n that an

action w h i c h somebody has   taken becomes wrong,       or that it

immediately falls into the category of causing an obvious

and serious risk of injury.        Just because       there are ways

of doing    things better - assuming for a mi n u t e      that you

thought they could be done better and Mr. Marshall did not

agree that they could - he never thought that he could get

the people down the road and he did not even,             in evidence

he said,    even in retrospect he did not really          think that

postponing    the kick-off would have been the solution.              He

may be wrong in that but that was his view.


       He put through the requests and he put them through

in a p e remptory ma n n e r towards    the end.   If you are

satisfied,    and we have gone through all the evidence

already about how other people had assessed it,             that there

was a serious risk - or indeed that there was a risk to

life and limb - then you may find it di f f i c u l t to say that

to remedy    that was something,       a step w h i c h should not have

been taken,   beca u s e the c o rollary   to that,   of course,    that

if you say well I can see a risk to life and injury but it

breaches our o p e r a t i o n a l pla n and therefore we w ill not do

it,   if you think that through you realise           that is not
really a tenable situation,       p a r t icularly w hen somebody

dies.


        You have also got to remember w i t h regard     to Mr.

Marshall that he did not,       in fact,    open the gates and this

I think is a very important point.           He could have opened

the gates in my judgment,       because he was a Superintendent

and a l t hough the gates opened from the inside,       so he was

physically unable to do it because he was on the outside,

it may well be that if he had gone up to the gate,           banged

on it and said,     "Open that gate",      bot h the Stewards and

the junior Officers       inside w ould have done what he told

them but he did not do that.        He radioed through and

wanted it a uthorised and he wa n t e d it done from the

inside,    if you like,    through Control.


        Now that is a very important point whe n you come to

think about Mr. Marshall because if you agree w i t h that

then of course he certainly did not do an act,          and in fact

it may be di f f i c u l t even to see an omission,   and it may

also be difficult    to fit hi m into some of the other

categories of the legal d e f i n i t i o n because if his request

was in order to avoid injury you may have some difficulty

in saying that was a b r e a c h of duty,     or that was a failure

to care for the h e a l t h and welf a r e of the people who he

was   looking at.


        On the other hand,   as I have already poin t e d out to

you, by putt i n g the request    through and particularly
putting it through in the p e remptory manner in w h i c h he

did he put the people in the Control Room into an

exceedingly difficult situation,        for the reasons w h i c h I

have explained to you,      and just in passing     this is where

one of the problems comes up because you cannot aggregate

- you remember this is one of the points          in what Lord

Justice Watkins      said - you cannot add together the acts or

omissions of different people and say take this one,               and

this one,   and this one,    and this one and add them all

together,   then this is bad,      this is reckless.     You can't

do it.    Each person stands on his own so it may be that

you may get different people who,        if you look at them

individually,    have maybe been negligent,      they may even

have been incompetent but it is not sufficient.            You have

got to be able to fit them into the defin i t i o n of

reckless,   and you have to do it taking into account all

the evidence,    including their explanations.

      So what we have then is,      in fact,   three u n p r ecedented

things,   I think,   in relation   to this event.      The first one

was   the closure of Leppings Lane.       The second was     the

evidence of the Officers and it is a ma t t e r for you to

decide what we i g h t you put on this in the light of all the

evidence,   that the arrival of the crowd in the numbers             in

w h i c h they did and in the ma n n e r in w h i c h they did created

an unpre c e d e n t e d situation outside the turnstiles,   and in

a sense you may feel that that is so because           there is no
evidence that this sort of p r o b l e m had ever arisen before.

Mr. McGauley    told us about a huge crowd.          Do you remember,

he was the chap who lived in Wadsley Lane w i t h his little

baby?     He said there was a big crowd there.            His vie w was

they w o u l d n ever get in.    Unfor t u n a t e l y he did not stop to

w a t c h and secondly he had n ever been to a football m atch

for ten years,    so it is very d i f ficult to put too m u c h

weight on his assessment.         He did get into the Ground;         the

m a t c h was not postponed;    the only thing he reme m b e r e d that

people    (a) were escorted round,      you know,    transferred,

relocated,    and (b) that people were climbing up into the

stands sometime during the match.           So he did make     that

reference    to it but it is not one w h i c h I think you can

build very m u c h on.     In fact,   I don't   think you can build

anything on it in the light of his limited knowledge.                 I

am sure his observation was right that there were a lot of

people there but whet h e r he was right that they w o u l d not

get in was another matter.         If he had stopped there and

watc h e d it w ould be dif f e r e n t but he did not,   he said he

was only there for seconds or a minute,           a short time

anyway.


        If you then boil - if I can use that w o r d - all this

down and see what is it really that we are talking about,

you have,    I think,    you may feel that the chain of

causation is the presence of a large crowd,            and I don't

think that you can exclude the fans on a "but for" - but
for the presence of the fans in that location in that

c ondition   the disaster w o u l d not have happened.   That is

the first one.     The second one is the opening of the gates

- but for the opening of the gates.        The third point is

but for the entry of the fans in substantial numbers on to

the central    terraces   the d i s aster would not have happened,

and but for the fact that these terraces became,         I think

one can't get away wit h it,     they became overcrowded

because Dr.    Nicholson counted it and they clearly were

overcrowded,    this disaster did not happen.      And it depends

to a certain extent where you dra w the line but in a final

analysis you may feel that the real apex of the problem is

the issue of whet h e r or not   there was such a failure in

not diverting    the fans from the tunnel that you can

classify that as creating an obvious and serious risk of

injury.




                                 It is not quite as simple    ....
     It is not quite as simple as that because when you are

considering the issue you have also got to take into account,

and this is in fact the evidence of certainly Mr. Duckenfield

and the evidence of quite a lot of other people, as to

whether or not one could;    whether it was obvious that the

entry of the fans on to the terraces would be in such a

manner as to lead to the overcrowding.    So there are two

aspects to it.   There is the closure of the tunnel and the

entry of the fans.    You will know, because I have already

told you, that it is perfectly possible to have more than one

substantial cause.    So they are not mutually exclusive.     You

may feel that the two things both applied and that both were

substantial causes.

     The real difficulty is deciding whether or not -

assuming for a minute that the person whose conduct you are

considering, and really for practical purposes I am now

thinking of the two Officers in the Control Room, and they

have to be taken separately, remember that, you cannot

aggregate their acts - whether or not the situation on that

day in the circumstances in they were, with the knowledge

they had, created an obvious and serious risk of injury and

whether they were, on the one hand, indifferent to this risk

or whether they recognised the risk and they deliberately

went ahead and took it.

     There is another possibility and indeed it is implicit

in some of the explanations that Mr. Duckenfield gave us,

namely that they recognised the situation but thought they

had dealt with it in the sense that he took the view that
once they were in the concourse there was space, they would

recover, and that there was no particular risk.     Of course,

it all hinges, as I said to you yesterday, on whether    or not;

what the assessment, if any, of the pens were        becauseif the

pens were either not observed or were observed and not noted

to be abnormal then that might help you in deciding whether

or not there was an obvious and serious risk to the people

involved.

     One of the big problems, of course, is that whenever you

think about this, and when everybody thinks about it, one has

to ask the question, "Obvious and serious to who?".     You have

heard the Officers say, "It wasn't obvious to us" and if you

believe them you might say that that is the end of the matter

and it may be but you might - would it have been obvious to

somebody else?   This I find quite a difficult problem in

deciding how to explain this to you because it would be quite

wrong to say that, if this were a trial say, somebody had

been guilty of manslaughter - which it is not by the way, it

is not a trial - on the basis of what somebody else might

have thought because you try people on the basis of their

thinking and knowledge and not on the basis of what somebody

else might think.

     Where do these other people fit in, the other

experienced, skilled, professionals of average ability as I

described them, the reasonably skilled Policemen?     I think

they fit in in this way;   that you measure the understanding

of the Officer or Officers or person or persons whose conduct

you are calling into question by what somebody else of
                                                                    25

reasonable skill and experience would have recognised.        Then

you assess whether in the light of that judgment the

perception of the Officer in question or the person in

question was so defective that it can be described as giving

rise to an obvious and serious risk.     This is a rather

difficult and complicated concept but I think that is the way

to approach it because otherwise you are in danger of

substituting other people's ideas into the person's, whose

conduct you are considering, mind.     What you are trying tc

establish is whether in fact what he was thinking had some

substance.

     I am getting to the end of this.     Is there any evidence

of what either Officer might or might not have thought?        I

draw your attention to one or two and the first one - and

these are not in any particular order - is Mr. Hand-Davis.

He is the mounted Inspector.   Do you remember?    He saw Gate A

open and a lot of people go in but it would appear that he

thought to himself, "Where on earth are they going?"        There

you have an Officer who did apparently think straight away

that people were going through a gate, "Where are they

heading for?".   You know the geography, of course, is

slightly different between Gate A    and Gate C but be thatas

it may he realised that a problem    might arise     if you leta

lot of people in through a gate and indeed Mr. Cobb realised

that as well but he is not a Police Officer.

     What did he do?   He went round to the Control Box,

surveyed the scene and decided itwas a pitch invasion.         He

was very sorry, as you know, when he was here giving
evidence.   He said it was a matter of regret to him that he

had come to that conclusion.     Although he had recognised that

there may be a problem with the people going in, when he got

round, what he saw and what he thought was a pitch invasion.

In fact, he left the scene and took his mounted Officers to

the location where he thought it would be needed in order to

cope with that very situation.
     Mr. Marshall;   I have already mentioned him to you and

his opinion and view that if overcrowding was noted on the

pens then a diversion might have to be effected which would

have to be taken into account.     Mr. Goddard and Mr. Bichard I

am not going to repeat for you because I have only just told

you about them but their evidence is that they did not make

the connection.   They did not see anything on the terraces

and they did not link the gate with the tunnel and that is,

of course, an important point when you are considering the

question.

     Mr. Lock, who is an ex-Police Officer knew about the

closure of Leppings Lane, the road I mean, and was not

particularly concerned about that even though it was not

something that had happened before.     He had no prior

knowledge that the possibility of disaster could occur.     So

far as he was concerned the ground was safe and so far as he

was concerned the terraces could be treated as a whole though

in his days he was aware that there was a system of diverting

fans but, of course, he had never done a Semi Final.

Nevertheless he had an assumption that if need be fans would

be diverted.
     I think one of the most interesting pointers of Mr.

Lock's evidence is that first of all when he learned the gate

was opened, and I have already alluded to this, he did not

sort of rush out instantly.    It took him quite a while to get

from where he had learned of the first incident to the pitch.

Nor was he alarmed by the fact that there were 4,500 spaces

still to come.    He then returned, if you remember, and he

discovered the gates had been opened in a more substantial

manner and even then, when he had got back on to the pitch,

and even though he had already previously noted a disparity

in the filling of the pens, he still thought that it was a

pitch invasion.    That was his first reaction to the

situation.   As I have already said he was not particularly

worried about the numbers.    The numbers were, of course, as I

have already said, huge, but you have to put them in relation

to the totals and forget about the Nottingham people because

it is a bit misleading if you do that.    Just think about the

terracing and the West Terrace.

     Yesterday I mentioned Mr. Mackrell and I said that he

busied himself in various activities.    In fact, he was on the

field from time to time and he had noted the disparity as

well and that had not given him any cause for concern either

but, of course, I am not blaming him in any way for that.     As

far as he was concerned he had other duties to perform but

the point I am making is that he had seen it.    He was a

senior man in the company and he did not think it was

necessary to take any further action.    He also told us, which

is pretty obvious, that this particular event on the 15th
April turned out to be unique and hopefully never ever to be

repeated, not only at Hillsborough but anywhere.     There had

been no previous suggestion from anyone that overcrowding of

such a nature could arise or occur or that anybody had

contemplated the possibility of death resulting.     Finally he

also told us so far as he was concerned the terraces were

treated as a whole.

     Chief Superintendent Mole was not, of course, there on

the day.   Well, he was but not until about five o'clock.         The

Operational Order basically was his.     I do not think he

designed it from scratch but the one that was being used w*s

the one that he had employed and that he had approved.       He

told us he was not aware of any diversion from the tunnel.

He also told us that in Semi Finals the terraces were treated

as a whole.   He explained all about sequential fillings but

on the Semi Finals the terracing was treated as a whole.

He had no problems in the previous years and he would have

expected his Officers to monitor and respond to any

situations which arose.

     In passing I think it is probably right to say that

there must have been some breakdown in communication - if Mr.

Lock is right and Mr. Mole is right - at some point at senior

Officer level as to what occurred on the concourse with

regard to the tunnel.     He said that prior to the 15th April

nothing had occurred in his view which could have alerted the

Police to the situation which presented itself at 14.52,

and this is an important point because what he is talking

about is the situation outside, and this, as I have already
                                                         29




mentioned to you, cannot be ignored when you come to

assess the reactions inside.

       He   felt   that if he had been in that situation

he would    have done the same, he would havesought to

reduce the pressure on the outside and for what it

was worth he thought the decision to open the gates

was correct and he also said, interestingly enough,

that if people were in as bad a state as one would

deduce from those comments, that he would have

expected them to seek to recover within the concourse

area   and then to disperse.

       He   told   us that he had never had anydifficulties

with regard to the signing, but then of course he

had never had 2,000 people or so come in suddenly,

relatively suddenly through a gate.

       He like most of the Officers said that he

would have expected his Officers to use their

initiative, report matters and respond to situations.

       He told us that he would not have been alarmed

by disparity on its own at 14.50.

       He also expressed the view that he would have

expected people to use their commonsense when

entering an enclosed confined space like a tunnel

and not to rush down it, because I have already

told you that the tunnel and what was happening - he

was not there so he does not actually know the manner

of progress of people - and I have already alluded
                                                                            30




to you that the manner of progress of people down the

tunnel is very difficult to assess but if Mr. Bullis is

right, if Mr. Hughes is right and even if you consider

that there were quite a lot of the deceased who came in

relatively late and who finished up fairly far forward,

there must have been some pressure taking people forward

into the terracing.
        His v i e w w a s that his plan h a d b een tried and tested

and was s a t i sfactory but he c o n c e d e d that open i n g the gate

d i d pres e n t and create a d i f f e r e n t situation.   His baseline

on w h i c h he o p e rated was that the s t a d i u m was safe;   that

the radial fences w e r e there to s ort o u t the prob l e m

w h i c h had o c c u r r e d in 1981.

        So there you have a number of people, none of whom

of course had had an experience identical or similar

to what had happened at Hillsborough and this is of course

a problem because you are not likely to find anybody be

they experienced or not who had that situation, and you

therefore in a few moments, well fairly soon when you will

be retiring, will have to try and weigh and sort out what

you make of the story; what you make of the explanations;

what you make of the law; what you make of the assessment

that other people have made of the situation as it was,

and in thinking about it you have to take into account all

the evidence including all the explanations the people

whose conduct you are calling into question have given

you.
                                                           31




      You have to take into account, well you must

decide whether this was an unprecedented situation indeed.

You have to decide whether the response which was made

was governed to a certain extent by the actions or inter­

actions of other people and whether in the final analysis

having satisfied yourself that there was a duty of care;

that there was a failure; that there was a substantial,

whatever it is you are thinking was substantial and you

may not of course even get past those points, but if you

do you then have to decide whether the act or omission

which you are considering was reckless, namely did it

create an obvious and serious risk of injury and if the

answer to that is "yes" you have got to go on and thinks

"Did the person whose act or omission we are considering,

had he recognised it and said:      'I don't care, I am

going out to take it' or was he indifferent to it?"

The mere fact that he did not recognise it, I will read

you the wording correctly in a moment, is not sufficient.

      The point about that is negligence on its own is

not the same as recklessness.    It is very important to

have that distinction clearly in your mind.    The fact

that people made mistakes; that they might be liable

for civil damages; they may have made serious errors

even, but they may even have been incompetent is not the

same as saying that a person is being reckless within

the meaning of the definition.

      I have stressed this at great length because it
is important that you should understand not only the

positive argument but the negative ones as well because

you need to take a correct decision in the light of the

evidence and of the law and as I have already said,

just two more things on this, you must not aggregate, you

must not add the activities of different people together.

You have got to be satisfied that what you are considering

is attributable to just one person.    There may be more

than one person who might fulfil the criteria but each

person stands on his own and under no circumstances, of

course, must you name anybody and in addition to that

you have to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt on this

particular part of the conclusion.
      If the answer is that it falls on any of the grounds

or that you cannot   be satisfied     beyondreasonabledoubt

on any of the grounds   then you move on to the next issue

which is is this an accident or misadventure; was there

an intentional act which had unintentional consequences

or, we all know what the word "accident!' means, was it a

coming together of multitudinous bits which added up

in the end to disaster and that you decide on the balance

of probability and   if you can't     decideon that youbring

in an open verdict   on the basis     that there is insufficient

evidence to enable you to reach a decision.

      Now I am not going to let you go yet.     I am going

to stop for ten minutes and then I am very briefly going

to go through each individual case and just remind you of
                                                                    33




their names and the causes of death and p o s s i b l y their

ages an d things   like that beca u s e I think it is e xceedingly

important that w e finish,    a part fro m the final   legal

direction,   on w h a t w e are really here for, w h i c h is how

did these 95 individual people come to me e t their death?

      We are not interested in who is responsible, we

are interested in how those people        died, so we will do

that after our break and then you can retire.

                       (Short adjournment)


      Now I am going to go through and remind you basically

of the people who you are going to be considering and

as I have already told you, you have to consider your

verdict in respect of each and every one so you are going

to finish up with a wad of inquests, 95 of them.

      What I am going to give you - I have already

explained this to you - I am going to give you pre-typed

ones with all the bits which are not controversial, so

to speak, and indeed the rest may not be controversial

either but matters which I thought I could help you with

and I am also going to give you blank forms so if you

don't want to use the typed versions you are free to do

whatever is more convenient for you.

      Do not insert the date when you are dealing with

these and don't sign them until after I have heard the

verdict, okay, and the conclusion and then I will tell

you what we do, how we are going to set about that when

the time comes.
                                                            34




     Remember you are dealing with 95 individual

Inquests, individual people.    You apply your mind in respect

of each one of those persons and if you are considering

the possibility of unlawfully killed you work your way

through the people in respect of whom I have said that

you may consider the issue and some you may find take

longer than others.    It is up to you.   I am not giving

you any advice on that, you do whatever you want and

however you want it.
      At the end of the day you are bringing in a verdict

in respect of one of these people who died, not in

respect of anybody else, so each one has to be considered

individually, though of course you may find that some

because of their locations, you may be able to says

"Well yes, there is a similarity there" but you still

have to think of each one.
      These are the blank ones.    I will put those there

now and in addition to the Inquisitions which I will be

handing to you, I gave you a schedule which lists the

names, the ages, the times of certifications, the doctors

who certified and the date on which the interim Inquests

were held when you heard the evidence in respect of those

and we circulated that list to all the lawyers so you

all know what it is that the jury have got.

      Right, I am not going to take you through the detail

of what we call the summaries as to where the person was

taken and you know who was involved because you have heard
                                                             35




that and I don't think it is necessary for me to repeat

it but it was all part of the evidence relating to that

individual.

       My objective is simply to remind you of the names,

the medical cause of death, addresses and occupations

and matters of that sort, indeed the dates of birth.

       Mr. King, if I may just look at you for one moment.

We have done our very best to get these things right but

of course it is possible, despite every endeavour, that

there is a mistake.

       Now if when I go through it either you, your

instructing solicitors or indeed the particular family

hear that there is an error then I would be grateful if

somebody got up there and then and drew it to my attention

because correcting mistakes, it may not seem very important

but I know from experience it is very very important to

families that the names and details are right, so if you

can   help me on that.   As I say I have done my best but

I am conscious when you are dealing with 95 deceased

errors can creep in.

      The order in which I am going to take them is the

order in which you heard them in April/May time.

      The first case we dealt with then was Colin Wafer.
He was a young man who was born on the 5th January 1970
at Liverpool. He was a Bank Clerk. He lived at
                         in Liverpool and he died of
1(a) traumatic asphyxia.

      The second case is another young man, Stephen
Francis O'Neill. He was born on the 16th July 1971
in Douglas. He was a student. He lived at               |,
                \ Merseyside.  His cause of death was the
same, 1(a) traumatic asphyxia.
      The third person we heard about was Simon Bell.
He was born on the 15th August 1971 at Liverpool.
He was a Y.T.S. Trainee of
Liverpool. He died of traumatic asphyxia.

      The next gentleman was Roy Harry Hamilton. He was
born on the 22nd May 1955 in Liverpool. He was a Railway
Technician of                           Liverpool and he
died of 1(a) traumatic aspnyxia.
      The next person was Christopher Edwards. He was
born in Bebbington on the 11th May 1959. He was a
Steel Worker of                            ~~1 South
Wirral. His cause of death was 1(a) traumatic asphyxia.

      The next was James Gary Aspinall. He was born on
the 13th March 1971 at Liverpool. He was a Clerk by
occupation of                              Liverpool.
His cause of death was 1(a) traumatic asphyxia.




                        D e r r i c k Geo r g e Go d w i n
      Derrick George G o d w i n was born at C irencester on the
 24th October, 1964.       He was an accounts clerk and lived at
                                            Gloucestershire.   The
 cause of d e a t h was 1(a) traumatic asphyxia.

      Colin A n d r e w H ugh W i l l i a m Sefton was born on the 25th
 of March. 1 9 6 6 , at Liverpool.           he was a security officer of
                  Skelmersdale.            His cause of d eath was 1(a)
 traumatic asphyxia.

      David Hawley was born on the 26th of January, 1950 at
Liverpool.          He was a d i e sel fitter of     _
                                     Merseyside. His cause of death
was 1 ( a ) t r a u m a t i c asphyxia.

          Martin Kenneth Wil d was born on the 15th July, 1959 at
 Stockport.              He was a p r i nting wo r k e r of
                                  Cheshire.        His cause of d eath was
 1 ( a ) t r a u m a t i c asphyxia.

        Gerard Bernard P a t r i c k Baron was born on the 2 5 th J une,
1921 at P r e s t o n . H e was a retired postal wo r k e r of C D
                                             Lancashire.    The cause
of d e a t h in his case was 1(a) traumatic asphyxia;        2
b i c uspid aortic valve.      Ischaemic h eart disease.

     Adam Edward Sp e a r r i t t was born on the           13th of June,
1974 at Liverpool.         He was a schoolboy.              He was the son of
Edward S p e a r r itt. a taxi driver, and Janet            Elizabeth
Spearritt, of
Cheshire.       The c ause of d eath in the case            ot A d a m was 1(a)
traumatic asphyxia.

     David W i l l i a m Birtle was born on the 6th of May, 1966,
at West B r o m w i c h . H e was a h eavy 2 Pods vehi c l e d r iver of

S t a f f o r d s h i r e and the cause of his d eath was 1 ( a ) t r a u m a t i c
asphyxia.

      Stephen Francis H a r rison was born on the 6th of April,
1958 at H u y t o n with Roby, Liverpool.  H e was a driver by
oc cupation of                             , Liverpool.    The
cause of d eath in his case was l(a^ r espiratory failure, due
to (b) traumatic pulmonary contusions.       2 Fractured left rib
wit h pneumothorax.

       Gary H a r r i s o n was born on the 1st of J a n u a r y, 1962 at
 Liverpool.       He was a driver of
__________________            Liverpool.        The c ause of d e a t h was
 1(a) traumatic asphyxia.           2 M y o c a r d i a l ischaemia, coronary
 artery atheroma.

     Gary Collins was born on the 7th August.                    1966 at
Liverpool.   He was a quality c ontroller of
                Liverpool.     His cause of d e a t h was 1(a)
traumatic asphyxia.  2 T r aumatic subdural haemorrhage.

     Peter M c D onnell was bor n on the 9th February, 1968 at
Liverpool.     He was a bricklayer and painter of
               Liverpool.    The cause of his death was 1(a)
traumatic asphyxia.

     Henry Charles Rogers was born on the 14th of February,
1972 at Hertford in Hertfordshire.                  He was a schoolboy of
                                                     Chester.   The cause
of his d e a t h was l ( a ; t r a u m a t i c asphyxia.

     Gary Philip Jones was born on the 18th December. 1970
at Liverpool.   He was a student o f ____________________
               Merseyside.   The cause of death was 1(a)
traumatic asphyxia. 2 Inhalation of stomach contents.

     John McBrien was born on the 15th February, 1971 at
Bromborough.  He w as a student of
                   Clwyd.   Th e cause of his death was l(.a)
traumatic asphyxia.

      Stephen Paul Copoc was born on the 1st of August, 1968
a t Tivprnnnl.   Ho was a landscape g a r dener of
                            The cause of d eath was H.a;
inhalation of stomach contents due to (b) crush asphyxia.

     Francis Jose ph McAl l i s t e r was born on the 1 0 th of
October. 1 9 61 at Liverpool.        He was a fireman of
              Liverpool.    The cause of his d e a t h was 1(a)
crush asphyxia.

        Stuart Paul W i l l i a m Thompson was born on the 16th of
September. 1971 at L i v e r p o o l.    He was an a p p r e n t i c e joiner,
                                     Liverpool.   The cause of his
ae a t n was n,a; crush asphyxia.

     Will i a m Roy P e m b e r t o n was born on the 18th of J a n u a r y,
1966 at Liverpool.          He was a student of I
                    Liverpool.           The cause of his d eath was
1(a) c rush asphyxia.

       Tracey E l izabeth Cox was born on the 4th of August,
1 9 65, at Wa l t o n and W e y b r i d g e in Surrey. She w as a student
of                                                            Wiltshire.
The cause or her d e a t h was H.a; c rush asphyxia.

     David Leonard Thomas was b o rn on the 14t h May, 1965, at
Birkenhead.   He was a joiner of
          Birkenhead.  The cause of his d e a t h was 1(a) crush
asphyxia.
     Peter Andrew H a r r i s o n was born on the 4th of May, 1973
at Liverpool.    He was a schoolboy, the son of J ohn H a r rison
an HGV d river and P a t ricia Margaret Harrison, an auxiliary
nurse of|                                   Liverpool.   The cause
of his d eath was lVaJ crush asphyxia.

     Paul Clark was born on the 12th March, 1971 at
Holbrook, Derby.      He was an a p prentice e lectrician of
                               Derbyshire.      The cause of his
death was l(.a) i n halation o£ stomach contents due to (b)
crush asphyxia.

     David George Rimmer was born on the 15th S e p t e m b e r ,
1950 at O r m s k irk.
                  .L rvt lHe
                           ie was
                              w a o aa osales
                                         a i c w imanager
                                                   iia u a g c i vof
                                                                   l  •
                   Lancashire.        The cause of his cieatn was iva)
traumatic asphyxia.

      Kevin Tyrrell was born on the 19th of June, 1973 at
Liverpool.    He was a schoolboy, son of F r a n c is T y rrell, a
PSV driver, and M a r garet R o s emary T y r r ell, of   1
                                                Cheshire.   Th e cause
ot d eath tor Kevin is l(.a) i nhalation of stomach contents
and 2 crush asphyxia.




                Carl Brown was born
                                                                                                   40




               Carl Brown was born on 21st March, 1^71         a t- T ai oli
         Greater M a n c h ester.  He was a student,f of— |
                                                          _________________
                           Greater Manchester, and the cause of his
       . a eatn was (la) inhalation of stomach contents; (2) crush
    IS I asphyxia.

               Arthur Horrocks was born on 19th J a nuary. 1948. at
         Liverpool.       He was an insurance agent of
        _
        ___
          ___
            ___
              ___
                ___
                  ___
                    ___
                      ___
                        ___
                          ___
                            ___
                              ___
                                ___
                                  ___
                                    __Liverpool, and the uauat; ui ni
                                      _
                                      ___
                                        ___
                                          ___
                                            ___
                                              __   f   ww* ^   Mkiu   Vltw   V*UUWW   Vi.   lixu

         d eath w a s : ( l a ) inhalation of stomach contents; (2) crush
         asphyxia.

               Sarah Louise Hicks was born on 10th Anril. 1970. at
         Teesside N o r t h . She was a student of
                              [ Middlesex.  The cause of her death was
         (,1a; traumatic a s p h y x i a ,

              Victoria Jane Hicks was born on 20th July, 1973, at
         Bedford.   She was a schoolgirl, daughter of Trevor Hicks,
         a managing director, and Jennifer Hir.ks. t-prlmir ian , n o w a
         student, of                                         r
         Middlesex.

                  Paul Anthony Hewitson was born on 18th Sep t em b e r,
         1962,      at L i v e r p o o l , l^e was a general builder of C D
                                              Liverpool.  The cause of his death
         was     u a ; traumatic asphyxia

                   I forgot to read Victoria's cause of death w hich was
         (la)      traumatic asphyxia.

                And r e w Mark Brookes as born on 1 0 th December. 1962.
         at B r o m s g r ove.  He was a car worker of
                          Bromsgrove and the cause of his death w a s ( l a )
         traumatic asphyxia.

             Inger Shah was born on 13th October. 1950. in
        Denmark.  She w as a secretary of
                      ■London.   Her maiden name was Agerup and the
        cause or ner death was (la) traumatic asphyxia.

             Gordon Rodney Horn was born on 26th March, 1969, at
        Liverpool.      He was of no known occupation and lived a t | |
                                              Liverpool. The cause of his
        aeatn w a s ( l a ; t r a u m a t i c asphyxia

                 Thomas Howard was born on 24th May, 1949, at
        L i v e r p o o l . He w a s a r.hpmical process worker of
                                             in Cheshire, and the cause of
        his death was (,1a,) crush asphyxia.

             Christine Anne Jones as born on 3rd November, 1961,
        at Lancaster.  She was a senior r a d i o g r a p h e r . w i fp nf
        Stephen Jones, a radiographer,




H
                                                                    41




Preston, and her maiden n ame was Alderson.           The cause of
death was (la) traumatic asphyxia.

          David John Benson was born on 20th Nov e mber, 1966. at
L i v e r p o o l . He was a sales represe n t a t i v e of
                  in Warrington. The cause of his d e a t h was (la)
traumatic asphyxia.

     Joseph Clark was born on 26th February, 1960, at
Kirkby.   He was a fork lift truck driver of
                   Kirkby, and he died of (la) traumatic
asphyxia.

         Peter Reuben Thompson ....     (i n t e r ruption from the
J u r y ) W h i c h one is out of sequence?      I think I will carry
on wit h the order I have got it at the m o m e n t and we will
have a look at that before I let you go just to make sure
of what the reason for that is.         I have got a feeling that
one is out of order - Mr. Howard.

        Peter Reuben Thompson was born on 27th April, 1958
 at W h i s t o n . He was an e n g ineer of
____________ Wigan, and the cause of his d eath was (la)
 traumatic asphyxia.

     Thomas          Steven Fox was born on 14th J u ne. 1967. a
Birkenhead.            He was a prod u c t i o n wo r k e r of
                                 Merseyside, and the cause of his death
w a s ( l a ; t r a u m a t i c asphyxia.

         Colin M ark Ashcroft was born on 8th June. 1969. ^n
C o l c h e s t e r . He was a garde n e r of
                     Warrington, and the c ause of his d eath was
traumatic asphyxia.

     Ian David Whelan was born on 1 1 t h March, 1970, at
Warrington.  He was a junior clerk o f [
         Warrington, and the cause of his d eath was (la)
traumatic asphyxia.

      David Steven Brown was born on 29th ^entemher.
at W r e x h a m . H e w a s a mach i n e opera t o r of
                           ^       Wrexham, and the cause ot his death
was ( l a ; t r a u m a t i c a s p h y x i a .

     Vincent Michael Fitzsimmons was born on 30th January,
1955, at Liverpool.      He was a moulding technician o f I
                                                        Wigan, and the
cause ot his d e a t h was ( l a ; t r a u m a t i c asphyxia.

         Anthony Peter Kelly was born on 12th August, 1959. at
Birkenhead.      He was u n e m ployed of
                                 Merseyside, and the cause ot his
d e a t h was (la) traumatic asphyxia.
     Jon Paul Gilhooley was born on 25th October, 1978, at
Merseyside.  He was a schoolboy, son of Ronald Gilhooley,
a building worker, and J a c q u e l i n e Marv G i l h o o ley, a
support worker, of                                                 J_
                                                           Merseyside,
and the cause of his d eath w a s ( l a ) t r a u m a t i c asphyxia.

     Henry Thomas Burke was born on 23rd M arr.h. 193?. at
Liverpool.  He was a roofing c o ntractor of
              in Liverpool.  The cause of his d eath was
(la; traumatic asphyxia.

        Christopher Barry D e vonside was born on 1st April,
1 9 7 1 , at B e b i n eton in W irral.   He was a college student of
                                    f.n Liverpool, and the cause of
m s death was (la; traumatic asphyxia.

     Jonathon Owens was born on 19th March, 1971, at St.
Helens, M e r s e yside.  He was a clerical officer of
                  Chester, and the cause of his d eath was (la)
traumatic asphyxia.

        James Robert Hennessy was born on 24 t h September.
1 9 5 9 . in L i v e r p o o l. He was a p l a s t erer of
__________________________________________ South wirral, and the
cause of his death w a s ( l a ; t r a u m a t i c asphyxia.

     David W i l l i a m Mather was born on 17th October, 1 969.
at Liverpool.         He was a Post Office coun t e r clerk of
                                     Liverpool, and the cause of his
death w a s ( l a ; t r a u m a t i c asphyxia

      James Philip Delaney was born on 10th October, 1 9 69,
at Wirral.   He was a c a r assembly wo r k e r of
                          in South Wirral and the cause of
his d eath was (la) traumatic asphyxia.

        John Alfred Anderson was born on 2nd June. 1926. at
Liverpool.          He w a s a security officer of
                            Liverpool 10, and the cause of his death
w a s ( l a ) s h o c k and haemorrhage, due to (b) traumatic
transection of the aorta, (2) traumatic asphyxia.

     Christopher James Tray n o r was born on 18th J a n n a r y,
1963, at B i r k e n h ead.           He was a joiner of
                        I Birkenhead and the cause of his d eath was
(la) t r a u m a t i c a s p h y x i a .

      Martin Kevin Traynor was born on 20th May, 1972, at
Birkenhead.        He was an a p prentice joiner, son of J ames
Traynor, a g a r d e n e r / h a n d y m a n , and Joan Traynor, of
                ~                           Birkenhead.   The cause of his
d eath w a s ( l a ) t r a u m a t i c a s p h y x i a .
                                                               43




      Philip John Steele was born on 24th May, 1973.    He
was a schoolboy, son of Leslie Maurice Steele, self
employed, and Dolores P h i lomena Steele, an office clerk,
of                                 Merseyside, and the cause
of m s a eatn was (la; traumatic asphyxia.

     Marian Hazel McCabe was born on 13th February, 1968,
at Strood in Kent.   She was a factory worker of ~
                    Sssex.  The cause of her death was (la)
traumatic asphyxia.

     Steven Jo s e p h Robinson was born on 11th August. 1 9 7 1 ,
in Liverpool.    He was an auto electrician of
                           Liverpool, and the cause of his
death was (la; crush asphyxia.




                                  Thomas Anth o n y Howard
                                                                         44
              Thomas Anthony Howard was born on the 28th February 1975
         in Liverpool. He was a schoolboy, son of Thomas Howard, a
         chemical process worker.and Linda Joan Howard,
                                               Cheshire. The cause of
         m s aeatn was la. traumatic asphyxia. This is the one we
       . have got a mistake in the order and I will sort it out before
    B f 1 let y°u go* There is a Thomas Howard and Thomas Anthony
         Howard, father and son, and we have got them out of order.
         We will just press on.

            Graham John Roberts was born on 5th May 1964 at
       Liverpool. He was a Gas Board engineer of               1
                             Wirral. The cause of his death was la.
       crush asphyxia.

            Kester Roger Marcus Ball was born on 2nd August 1972 at
       Ormskirk in Lancashire. He was a schoolboy, the son of Roger
       Charles Ball, a banker, and Brenda Jean Ball, of
                                          St. Albans, Herts. The
       cause of his death was la. traumatic asphyxia.

            Eric George Hughes was born on 28th October 1946 in
       Liverpool. He was a sales executive of
                             Cheshire. The cause of his death was
       la. crush asphyxia.

            Raymond Thomas Chapman was born on the 2Q+h .Tnnp   i q ^r
       Birkenhead. He was a machine setter o f ____________
                Birkenhead. The cause of his death was la.
       traumatic asphyxia.

            Lee Nicol was born on 3rd January 1975 in Liverpool. He
       was the son of Donald Alfred Nicol, a forklift truck driver,
       and Patricia Frances Nicol, a school escort (handicapped
       children), of                             Merseyside. The
       cause of his death was la. cerebral anoxia, b. traumatic
       asphyxia, 2. acute bronchitis and bronchopneumonia.

            Paul Brian Murray was born on the 12th April 1975 at
       Stoke-on-Trent. He was a schoolboy, son of Anthony John
       Murray, a telephone engineer, and Edna Catherine Murray, a
       sub-postmistress (part-time), of
                       Staffordshire. xne cause or aeatn in the
       case ot Paul was la. crush asphyxia.

            Brian Christopher Matthews was born on the 19th October
       1950 at Liverpool . He was a financial consultant of
                             Liverpool. The cause of death was la.
       inhalation of stomach contents and b. crush asphyxia.

            Graham John Wright was born on the 31st July 1971 at
       Liverpool . He was an insurance clerk of
               Liverpool, and the cause of his death was la. crush
       asphyxia.




H
                                                                    ■ 45

            Michael David Kelly was born on the 1st Marnh 1951 at
       Liverpool. He was a warehouseman of
             Liverpool, and the cause of his death was la. crush
       asphyxia.

             Carl Darren Hewitt was born on the 21st May 1971 at
    B I Leicester. He was an apprentice cabinetmaker of
                     Leicester. The cause of his death was la.
        inhalation of vomit and traumatic asphyxia.

            Nicholas Michael Hewitt was l?orn on 5th Marnh 197~3
       Leicester. He was a schoolboy of
       Leicester, and the cause of his deatn was la. traumaticT
       asphyxia.

            Peter Francis Tootle was born on 2nd February I9fi«
       Liverpool . He was a labourer of
               Liverpool. The cause of his death was la. traumatic
       asphyxia.

            Nicholas Peter Joynes was born on the 20th September
       1961 at Liverpool. He was an industrial engineer of
                              Liverpool, and the cause of his death
       was la. traumatic asphyxia.

           Kevin Daniel Williams was born   on 27th May 1973 at
      Southport. He was a schoolboy, the    son of Alan Howard, a
      welder, and Ann Elizabeth Williams,   stepson of James Stephen
      Williams, an engineer, of
      Merseyside, The cause of his death    was la. traumatic
      asphyxia.

           Philip Hammond was born on 8th December 1974 at
      Liverpool. He was a schoolboy, son of Philip Hammond, a Post
      Office executive, and Hilda May Hammond, a senior sister at
      Walton Hospital, of                             Liverpool.
      The cause of his deatn was xa. respiratory failure due to b.
      traumatic pulmonary contusions, 2. fractured rib and
      pulmonary lacerations with haemorrhage.

           Patrick John Thompson was born on the 4th September 1953
      at Liverpool. He was a railway guard of !              |
                              Liverpool. The cause of his death was
FI    la. traumatic asphyxia.

           Eric Hankin was born on the 26th October 1955 at.
      Liverpool. He was a male nurse of
      Liverpool, and the cause of his deatn was la. traumatic
      asphyxia, 2. inhalation of blood from traumatic epistaxia.

           Gary Christopher Church was born on the 31st December
      1969 at Liverpool. He was a joiner of
                Liverpool. The cause of his aeatn was la.
      traumatic asphyxia.




H
                                                                      46

            Joseph Daniel McCarthy was born on the 11th February
       1968 in London. He was a student of
       London, and the cause of his death was la. traumatic asphyxia
       and 2. traumatic subdural haemorrhage.

             Paula Ann Smith was born on the 27th June 1962 at
    3 | Liverpool. She was of no known occupation of[
                            Liverpool, and the cause of her death was
        la. traumatic asphyxia.

            Paul William Carlile was born on the 8th August 1969 at
       Liverpool . He was a plasterer of
               Liverpool, and the cause ot m s death was la.
       traumatic asphyxia.

            Carl David Lewis was born on the 4th May 1970 at
       Liverpool. He was a labourer of
               Liverpool. The cause of m s death was cardio
       respiratory arrest due to b. cerebral oedema due to c.
       traumatic asphyxia.

            Peter Andrew Burkett was born on the 16th February 1965
       at Birkenhead. He was an insurance clerk of
                        Birkenhead. The cause of his death was la
       traumatic asphyxia.

            Richard Jones was born on 5th October 1963 at Liverpool.
       He was an office worker of
       Liverpool, and the cause of his death was la traumatic
       asphyxia.

            Barry Glover was born on 30th March 1962 at Burv.
       Lancashire. He was a greengrocer of
      ________________ J Lancashire, and the cause of his death was
      traumatic asphyxia.

            Alan Johnston was born on the 6th March 1960 in
       Liverpool. He was a senior accounts assistant of
                              Liverpool, and the cause of his death
       was la. traumatic asphyxia.

            Carl William Rimmer was born on the 21st February 1968
       at Liverpool. He was a video technician of
                            Liverpool. The cause of death was la.
       traumatic asphyxia.

            Alan McGlone was born on the 13th Septemher 1960 at
       Liverpool. He was a factory worker of
                         i                  Liverpool. The cause of his
       traumatic asphyxia.

            Keith McGrath was born on 18th September 1971 at
       Liverpool. He was an apprentice painter of I        _         I,
       Liverpool. The cause of his death was la. traumatic
       asphyxia.




H
     Ian Thomas Glover was born on 10th January 1969 at
Liverpool   He was a street paver of
          Liverpool. The cause of his death was la.
traumatic asphyxia.




                                       /Paul David Brady.
                                                             48




      Paul David Brady was born on the 23rd August 1967
at Bootle. He was a Refrigeration Engineer of
                Liverpool. The cause of his deatn was
1(a) cardio-respiratory arrest? (b) cerebral oedema from
hypoxia and (c) traumatic asphyxia.

      Barry Sidney Bennett was born on the 26th April 1962
at Anfield in Liverpool. He was a Seaman of
         Liverpool and the cause of his death was na j
traumatic asphyxia.

      Kevin Tyrrell was the lad who I did not have the

right form for.    I will just re-read him because I have not

been given the original so it is difficult for me to check

it.

      It is Kevin Tyrrell, date of birth 19th June 1973
at Liverpool. He was a schoolboy, son of Francis Tyrrell
a P.S.V. Driver and Margaret Rosemary Tyrrell of
                                          Cheshire.
The cause of death was 1(a) inhalation of stomach contents?
2 crush asphyxia.

      The one we had out of sequence was in fact Thomas Howard.

I will re-read him.    I want to read these two again so

that I am quite sure I have got them right because I may

have got confused with the names.

      It is Thomas Howard, date of birth 24th May 1949
at Liverpool, a Chemical Process Worker of
                    Cheshire.

      Thomas Anthony Howard, 28th February 1975 at Liverpool
A schoolboy. Son of Thomas Howard a Chemical Process
Worker and Linda Joan Howard of
                    Cheshire.

      Apparently I made one other    error when I was reading

Philip John Steele's I did not give his place of birth as

being Southport.

      MR. KING: Sir, could I just clarify Colin Andrew
Sefton, who was the eighth person you mentioned. There had
been one query from behind me as to the year of birth.
The year of birth is 1966.
      THE CORONER: What we have got on the form and if
I have misread it I am sorry, 25th March 1966. That is
correct, is it, at Liverpool?

     MR. KING:    Thank you sir.

      THE CORONER: My mentor tells me that I have made
another mistake with Thomas Howard. I have left out his
cause of death, 1(a) crush asphyxia.

     Now that is in fact all the people whom you are

going to be dealing with.    Can I pass them to you?

(Forms handed to the jury)
      What we are going to do now is I am simply going

to re-remind you of the core definition, legal definition,

because you will remember that I have given you long

explanations and elaborations of these to try and make

it easier.   I don't intend to do all that again because

I expect that    you will have it in mind but I think I do

need to re-remind you of the centre part and I also need

to remind you of the fact that there are certain rules

which you have to, 36B which I read to you and there is

another one as well, Rule 42.

      36B is the rule which requires that you must not

add any riders, who, when, where and how and nothing else

and the other rule, Rule 42, is the rule which provides

that the Inquisition must not appear to determine by

name anybody who may have criminal liability, nor must

it determine civil liability, so that is those two rules.

You will remember that, won't you.

      The three verdicts which you are considering are

unlawfully killed.    That has got to be beyond reasonable
I   r\                                                                           50
C\
    \
             A

                  doubt.    Accidental death or misadventure which if you are

                  considering it has to be on the balance of probability

                  and the open verdict is when on the evidence which you
             B    have heard you are unable to reach a conclusion.     You

                  must reach a verdict for each and everyone of the deceased.

                           You must consider the order in which you consider

                  them.     You   have got to start with the unlawfully killed

             Cl   because that is the highest standard of proof and then

                  you work your way down.
                           Once you have satisfied yourself on a verdict that

                  is it as far as that particular person is concerned.

                           Lord Justice Watkins set out the principal conditions

                  which you have to consider and that is:

                           "1. You have to be satisfied beyond reasonable
                           doubt when you are considering unlawfully
                           killed that the person whose conduct you
                           are considering had a duty to have regard to
                           the health and welfare of the deceased.

                           2. That in the circumstances there was a
                           failure to do what should have been done for
                           the health and welfare of the deceased.

                           3. That that failure amounted to a substantial
                           cause of death.
                           4. That the failure amounted to recklessness.

                           5. Recklessness means that there was an obvious
                           and serious risk to the health and welfare of
                           the deceased and that the person whose conduct
                           is being considered having regard to his duty
                           was (a) indifferent to such a risk or (b)
                           recognising that risk to be present deliberately
                           chose to run that risk by doing nothing about
                           it.




         H
       6. It must be emphasised, however, that a failure to
       appreciate that there was such a risk would not, by
       itself, be sufficient to amount to recklessness.

       7. You can only return a verdict of unlawfully killed
       if you can a t tribute these ingredients to a single
       individual whose conduct is being called in question;
       such an individual should on no account be named or
       otherwise identified."

       I just want to repeat one other matter wit h regard                     to

accidental death and that is you should remember what I told

you,   that it straddles        the whole spectrum from where you

say,   "Well,    nobody can be blamed,"           to the position where in

fact you may feel that there was negligence,                   but it covers

the whole of that range and must be borne in mind.                       In

e xactly the same way you must not,               of course,   name anybody

because you would be a p pearing to d e termine civil               liability

if you were      to do that.

       Is it reasonably clear to you?

       When you go out,        once you are out you are out,           but that

does not mean to say you are on your own.                  If you find that

need more directions or that something is not clear to you,

you bang on the door and the Jury O f f i c e r will bring you

b ac k and you can then        tell me what it is that is concerning

you and I will either deal wit h it there and then if I can

or if I have to r e s e a r c h it I will r e s e a r c h it and deal with

it.

       Do not consult       the Jury Officer or anybody          else.        All

c o m m u n i c a t i o n s amongst yourselves,   of course.     Y o u can     talk

as muc h as you like.           All other communi c a t i o n s only     in
Court,   in public wit h everybody who wishes     to be here, here,

and to me.

       Now the next thing we want to do is to swear in the

Jury Officers,    and I am very fortunate in that the Crown

Court has kindly allowed two of their people who are

e xperienced in lo oking after juries      to come and look after

you.

                  (The Jury Bailiffs were s w o r n )

       N o w the next thing we need to do is to give you the

exhibits.      These are   the complete   set of the exhibits.      We

have not - you remember I said we were going to try and give

you the original photographs?        It has proved a jolly

difficult task, but if you find tnat you really need a

better quality one then bang on the door,        come back in, and'

we will find you that p articular one.        Certainly   if you

think you need the best quality you can get,        then so be it.

The other thing we need      to do is to show you h o w to use the

video equipment.

       While we are waiting for the video equipment,       this does

not concern the jury so m uch but it is of interest        to

everybody else,    I have no idea - and you have as muc h time

as you need,    I am not putting you under any time press u r e -

h o w long the jury is going to be.       It is a matter for you

to decide where you secrete yourselves,        so to speak,     so that
if the jury does come back either for directions or to bring

in their verdicts you are available.


        (The Jury were shown how to operate the v i d e o )

      Is that clear to you?

      Right,   ladies and gentlemen,   it is over to you.

                  (The Jury retired at 12.33 p m )

     MR. KING:   Speaking from ignorance totally, I noted
you did not address the jury on the need for them to reach a
unanimous verdict.   I don't know whether that is something
you would normally do.

     THE CORONER:       I did not do it deliberately because if
they do not come back within a certain number of hours I
will bring them back and say they can r each a m a j ority
verdict, but I did not want to put it into their heads that
there was anything other than a unanimous verdict.         Perhaps
I should have men t i o n e d it, but my intention was to do it
the other way round.

     MR. MANNING:    Just before I and anybody else goes to
secrete themselves, sir, may I enquire this, with respect:
clearly the jury has a long del i b e r a t i o n and a lot to think
about.   T here may come a time this afternoon when an
inquiry may need to be made as to whether there is any
reasonable prospect of their being able to deliver that
verdict today or whether it would be then necessary for them
to have to remain overnight.    Could you give us some
indication at what time you might think of making that
inquiry?

        THE CORONER:   The answer is at about four o'cl o c k that
I w ould wish to make the inquiry.    I think it would be
p r e mature to make it any earlier than that.   I have no
idea, but I suspect with Inquests of these lengths, they may
well want more time than that.       If they do say they are
nowhere near, and in fact when I get them back I will
probably talk about the unanimous verdict then, but if they
say they are nowhere near I will tell them they can go on
until 4.30 and then they are off to their hotel for the
night.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, on the question of unanimity, or
otherwise, of verdicts, you mentioned earlier that you would
at some stage wish to give them a major i t y direction. Do
we take it from what you have just said that having regard
to the length that these Inquests h ave been going on for,
you would not wish to give them that direction today?

       THE CORONER:    I would not wish to give them that
d i rection today.    I think that would be inappropriate.  I
have it in mind that if I were to give them that direction,
if they have n ' t come back, of course, it would be around
tomorrow lunch time when I would have felt that they had had
a complete day, but even then I would ascertain ho w they
were doing, so to speak.

      MR. ISAACS:   Just to h e l p those who have arrangements
to make, if they  should go to a hotel tonight, what time
from tomorrow are you likely to r e q u i r e their attendance to
deliver a verdict and, therefore, our attendance?

     THE CORONER: I would have thought 9.30.                 We want
them obviously to have plenty of time to think              about it, so
to speak.

     MR. ISAACS:     Certainly my understanding, of course,             is
that they do not c o n tinue to consider their verdicts, at
least formally, whilst they are away from this building.
What they actually do, of course, is another matter.

        THE CORONER:     Yes.

        MR.   ISAACS:   They will         then be here from half past
nine?

      THE CORONER:   That is right.   W ould you be happier,
Mr. King, if I got them back and told them they should reach
a unanimous verdict?    I do not think it is necessary, but I
am more than happy to do it if you would feel easier in your
mind.

     MR. KING:   Sir, the jury has no w gone out.   I think
it probably is not appropriate to bring them back in so
quickly.   I raised it, sir, just in c ase - and I did it
with great diffidence - it may have slipped your mind, if it
had been part of your practice so to do, but I am well
aware, sir, that the practice in the Coroner's Court is very
much the practice of the individual Coroner.

        THE CORONER:   Yes.   I did c o n sider the issue of
m a j ority verdicts and I do not think I can really apply my
mind as to whether I should tell them anything about
u n a nimity at this stage.   I am very sorry, of course, that
everybody has got to hang around but it is unavoidable.       I
cannot do anything about it.      The last thing I want to do
is to try and put them under any pressure.         I think it
would be very, very w rong to do that.

                                (A d j o u r n m e n t )
           (The Jury Returned to Court at 2.06 p . m .)

      THE CORONER:           I u n derstand you have a need for a

m a gnifying glass?         (The Jury was provided w i t h a

magnifying g l a s s )      Is there anything else that you need

whilst you are here?           I know we could have passed it in to

you through the door but I prefer           to do it so that it is

visible.


      A ME M B E R OF THE JURY:       Has it got to be unanimous?

      THE CORONER:          Your q u e stion is has it got to be a

unanimous decision and the answer           to that is yes,      it has.

I did not mention it because I was going to tell you about

alternatives       later,   but at the moment    the position is that

I want a unanimous decision if it is at all possible,                and

you should a p p r o a c h your task on that basis.


      A MEM B E R OF THE JURY:        If we c annot get a verdict on

the first one or the second one, does the last one have                  to

be unanimous?


      THE CORONER:          They have all got to be unanimous,

whichever one you happen to be thinking about.                 Is that

clear?     Okay,   off you go then.


                   (The Jury Retired at 2.10 p . m . )

     THE CORONER:      I am sorry to have dragged everybody
in for what is a trivial thing but I prefer that I do not
pass a n y thing into the Jury without it being done openly
and in public.

     MR. KING:        Can I say, sir, it is entirely proper and
indeed exper i e n c e shows if you do not follow that practice
on only trivial matters u ltimately trouble can deve l o p
                                                                56




w hich one would not want, and certainly from those I
represent it is p referred that everything is done in the
open, sir.

     THE CORONER:     I am relieved,       thank you.   We can all
adjourn again.

                    (The Court A d j o u r n e d )
                    (The jury returned at 4.10 p m )




     TH E CORONER:   I have asked you to come back in because
I want to make an inquiry to find out what we need to do.
Is there any prospect that you are likely         to reach a verdict
within, say, the next hou r or so?       No. In that case if
you   would be kind   en o u g h to carry on    until, say, 4.30, and
we will then make    a r r a ngements for a     vehicle to be here and
it will convey you to a suitable location where I hope you
will have a reasonable evening.          Once you have left here,
you should cease thinking about the matter - certainly no
formal deliberations.       Take the even i n g off.   W a t c h TV.
Have a meal.    Do whatever suits you.         You have got to stay
together.    You must not mix with anybody else.             That is
why the Jury Bailiffs are h ere in order to deal wit h           that.
I would like you back for 9.30 tomorrow.           Will that be
satisfactory?

      As soon as you are back you can             get b a c k into your room
and    then you just      press on until we are ready to think
again.        I hope you have remembered your toothbrushes, w hich
I men t i o n e d to you!   I suggest you carry on for about
another quar t e r of an hour.      The c o a c h will not be here
until then.        We have provisionally a r r anged it for 4.30, but
once it is here there is no reason why you should no t go.
You have had a long, hard day.

     Is there anything any of you feel I have omit t e d to say
to the jury?

      MR. KING:   Sir,      there is an adm i n i s t r a t i v e ma t t e r I
w ould like to raise.

      THE CORONER:        W ith or without      the jury?

      MR.   KING:    It   would be better w i t h o u t the jury.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, all right.   All I was c o ncerned
about was that you did not want me to add any further
directions to what I have said to the jury with regard to
this evening.

     MR.    KING:    Not at all,     sir.

     THE CORONER:    Very well, if you w ould leave us. I do
not see any reason why you should come back into court
tomorrow morning.   I think you might as well go straight
into your room and start.   We will say a 9.30 start.

     T here is one other thing I have just remembered.       In
order to avoid n o b o d y else being able to leave the building,
I will not accept a verdict or, indeed, do anything else,
b etween the hours of one and two.  T hat is so people can
have lunch.

                    (The    jury   retired at 4.15 p m )

     MR. KING:     Sir, infact it was more than pure
administration   but I did not want to give any clue to             the
jury that it might be otherwise.

      Sir, it is just a concern which has been e x pressed to
me by my clients as to the approach of the jury to a
unanimous verdict.                   As you know, sir, they have three
possible verdicts:                  unlawful killing, accident/misadventure,
open verdict.             Sir, you very properly d i r ected them that
they should first consi d e r unlawful killing, then move on to
accid e n t / m i s a d v e n t u r e and then in the last resort, open
verdict.          Sir, it is the matter of their being unanimous
b efore moving on w hich is c o ncerning my clients to this
extent, that if they are, for example, debating hotly
between themselves shall we say u n l awful killing, they
should not simply give up on that because they are split and
move on to the next verdict.                   In fact they should be
striving for unanimity on the first verdict and only if they
reach a point that they cannot, and n ever will reach
un animity on the first verdict, that they would move on to
consider the next.                   Sir, if you under s t a n d what I am
saying.

      THE CORONER:         I follow what you are saying entirely.

     MR. KING:   And that there was a - a word you know
well, sir - perception that it might have been c o n veyed to
the jury that because they have cot to be unanimous on a
verdict, that if they are in a p o s ition whereby they are
just arguing about, say, unlawful killing, that they can
just give up on that and move on to the second verdict.
Sir, I mention that n o w for your consideration.        The
importance is that they should c o n s i d e r unlawful killing
first and strive for a unanimous vie w before moving on.




         THE CORONER:         I must admit
     THE CORONER:    I must admit I thought that I had made
that clear.  I admit I did not give them a specific
instruction about the n eed for unanimity until they came
back in the afternoon.

      MR. KING:           It was because of the absence of the link
b etween the d i rection on u n animity and the way they
approached their verdicts that the perhaps lack of clarity
- not ne c e s s a r i l y to the Jury, sir, but to those behind me
- has arisen.          I mention it to you, sir, for your
consideration.

     THE CORONER:      Does anybody want    to make any comment?

       MR. ISAACS:    Sir, I think I can echo the remarks
that you were just making.    Certainly for my part I
thought you made it very clear indeed that they had to
consider the first possible verdict, then move on to the
second, then move on to the third, only moving on to the
second and then on to third when they had come to the
c onclusion that the first was no longer an option that
they felt was open to them, but if those instructing my
learned friend feel unhappy about it then no doubt you
will consider that and consider whether you need to say
anything else, though I must say it is a mat t e r entirely
for you as to whether you feel that any further direction
is n e cessary because of any c o n fusion in the minds of
those who instruct my learned friend.

     MR. PAYNE:      Sir, may I just intervene to be helpful?
I would suggest that it w ould not be approp r i a t e that any
further d i r ection should be given tonight in any event,
since there is ten minutes further del i b e r a t i o n and then
the Jury are going to go away until 9.30 tomorrow morning.
My impression is the same as Mr. Isaacs, that your
direction was correct, if I may say so, and I would
suggest that the most a ppropriate thing to do w o u l d be to
have a look at the transcript when it is a v a ilable and to
reconsider it in the light of what actually appears in the
transcript, rather than relying on impressions w h i c h may
have been gained around the room.

       MR. HALE:   I see a point, and I don't think it
favours anybody, it could go either way, and that is that
if they were never able to reach a unanimous verdict on
unlawful killing they w ould never move on to the next, so
therefore there must come a time when one w ould say to
them, "Don't hang on forever, a majority on the first,
w h ichever way", and if it were the m a j ority were in favour
of not finding unlawful killing then, of course, they
would move on to the next.    That is the only point that
occurs to me.
     THE CORONER:    Yes.  I think, Mr. King, I will think
about the point that you h ave made because I am very
anxious not to fall on a perc e p t i o n point at the last
moment, so to speak.   On the other hand ....

       MR. KING:      That is why, sir, I have m e n t i o n e d it to
you,   for your c o n s ideration in ....

     THE CORONER:   I think Mr. Payne's point is a wise
one.  Let's wait and see what is in the transcript.  We
will have plenty of time tomorrow.  If I think that it
needs amplification or amendment we can just get them back
in, it is no problem.  Are you content w i t h that?

        MR. KING:      I am, sir.  Sir, the point was simply
that very properly you gave them the dir e c t i o n as to the
order in w h i c h they should consider their verdicts at a
different time from when you answered their question,
wh i c h came m u c h later, as to whet h e r or not their verdict
had to be unanimous, and it was me r e l y the concern as to
the point at w h i c h they would mov e on to the second
verdict ....

      THE CORONER:     You see the thing that worries me,
w hich is the point in a sense w h i c h Mr. Hale has made, and
this is why I need to consider it, is it is not for me to
tell them h o w they do their deliberations, because in
contrast to a normal, say, criminal trial w here it is
either yes or no, they have got options in this instance
and in the end it is right, supposing that they were split
- I have got no idea - but say they were split six to five
on option one, what are they to do?        Are they to come back
and say, "We cannot reach a verdict at all", or do they
say, "Well, let's look whet h e r we can look at option two
and see whet h e r we can r each u n animity on that".  So I am
anxious not to give them --- they h ave got to sort it out
amongst themselves as to what is what, but I will
certainly think about what you said and if I think it
needs amplification, I will be more than h appy to do it.

      MR. KING:     Sir, could I just put the point again
very simply?     It is simply this, that given that you have
very properly invited them to strive - not strive, but the
only verdict you can receive is a unanimous verdict at
this stage, that they should be invited when they are
considering the first verdict to strive for that unan imity
and that they should not simply m ove on to the second
verdict merely because on first consid e r a t i o n there are
differing views w h i c h have yet to be thrashed out between
themselves, because in my submission that would be an
improper a p p roach but it w ould be an easy trap to fall
into, because of course, putting it very simply, the
u nlawful killing verdict is obviously the m ore difficult
one to think through.
                                                                       61




     THE CORONER:    I agree, yes.  Mr. King, I take it you
are quite content if I think about it overnight and we
deal w ith it in the morning?  They are not coming back
today anyway.

     MR. KING:      I think, sir, it is r e alistic to think
that they are not going to come b ack at 9.30 tomorrow
morning w i t h their verdict.

      THE CORONER:       Yes,    indeed.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, may I just add that the situation
where alternative verdicts are left to the jury does arise
in criminal trials?

      THE CORONER:       Does,    it?   T hank you.

     MR. PAYNE:       Yes.  Certainly there can be a series of
counts on w h i c h the jury can return one verdict or
another.

      THE CORONER:       Yes,    of course.

     MR. PAYNE:   So this situation is not unfa m i l i a r to
the criminal procedure and it is, in fact, covered in
various paragraphs in A r c hbold w h i c h perhaps I might make
available to you over the adjournment?

      THE CORONER:         If you would be kind enough that would
be a c o n s i derable h e l p to me.   T h a n k you very m u c h indeed.
I think we hav e got to be back here at 9.30.              I d on't know
whether I will have the transcript by 9.30 but once I have
m ade up my mind if I do want to talk to them any further I
will convey it to you.          T hank you all very m u c h indeed.

               (The Inquests w ere adjourned until
                     the following m o r n i n g )
