  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)
                                                  63
       INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

              STADIUM DISASTER

           ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sex, BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                      At

                The Town Hall,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

                5th March, 1991




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Que£n Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                    INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




WALTER WILLIAM WILSON JACKSON

     By THE CORONER
     Cross-Examined by MR. HALE
     Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS
     Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING
     Cross-Examined by MR. KING
     Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE
     Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN
     Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL
     Further Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS
     Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE
     Further by THE CORONER


JOHN LIAM BOYLE (Statement read)
            SIXTY THIRD DAY*S PROCEEDINGS

               TUESDAY, 5th MARCH, 1991


             (In the absence of the Jury)

     THE CORONER:   Good morning.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, it is I who requested you to sit
in the absence of the Jury.    I have mentioned it to most
of my learned friends.   It is on the question of the
evidence of Mr. Jackson which is going to be heard today
and your kind indication yesterday that it was your
intention to restrict questioning of Mr. Jackson to
topics which were capable of being relevant to any issue
which the Jury has to decide and not to allow the
questioning to go beyond that.    Certainly we readily
accept that ruling.

     In the light of that we have taken the opportunity
over the adjournment to remind ourselves of what topics
Mr. Jackson has touched upon on previous occasions and it
certainly appears to us that they boil down to two
topics.   The first topic which is capable of being
relevant to an issue which the Jury has to decide is the
significance of his approval of the Operational Order.
The second topic which is capable of being relevant is
the significance of his attendance at the ground on the
day in question.

     I am not saying that either of those is in fact
relevant because we think they are very, very marginal as
to whether they have got any relevance or not, but we
recognise they are capable of being relevant so we intend
to confine our questioning to those topics.   If it was
intended to go beyond those topics then our suggestion
would be that the ground ought to be laid by showing in
what respect any other questioning is relevant, or
capable of being relevant, to any issue which the Jury
has to decide.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.   What I was trying to indicate
yesterday was that because he formally approved,
according to Mr. Mole, the Operational Order, it would be
perfectly possible to go through the whole gamut of the
structure, the function, goodness knows what in relation
to the Operational Order and I didn*t see any advantage
in doing that.

     My intention is three-fold:  one, to establish with
him that he agrees substantially with what Mr. Mole
described as to his role and function in relation to the
Operation Order.   Two, to ascertain from him his role at
the stadium prior to the disaster, which I think I
understand but it might be worth making sure that the
Jury understand it.   Three, his observations, if any,
as, indeed, any other person who happened to be present
at the time and four, his attendance at the...   What he
did once he realised that something had happened, to a
limited extent.   In other words, a relatively brief
description of what he did, where he went, what he said,
what was said to him, and that's it.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, we accept those guidelines.
Thank you.

     THE CORONER:   Does anybody want to say anything
else on that?   I think that is reasonably clear.

     MR. ISAACS:   We are still staying with the quarter
past three cut-off point?

     THE CORONER:   Yes.   When I say quarter past three,
what I mean by quarter past three is around quarter past
three.   I am not pinning it to the second, but I am
quite clear in my mind why I have picked that time and I
am not deviating from it.

     Are we ready to go?

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, while the Jury is coming in, I
hope it is common ground that it would be appropriate for
me to go last with this witness?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, whether it is common ground or
not I was going to suggest it.

              (The Jury came into court)

         WALTER WILLIAM WILSON JACKSON Sworn

                   Bv THE CORONER:

I think I am right, you are Walter William Wilson
Jackson? - A. I am, sir.

You are presently, and, indeed, you were at the time^
Assistant chief Constable in the South Yorkshire Police?
- A. That is right.

At that time you  were Assistant Chief Constable,
Operations? - A.   Yes. Due to the retirement of
Mr. Watson I have now moved to Management Services.

I don't know how   many Chief Constables there are but
there are several in this county? - A. There are three
Assistant Chief Constables, sir.
                                         W. W. W. JACKSON


I would be right in thinking that you would not claim to
have any personal direct experience of policing semi­
finals at Hillsborough? - A. That is correct.

Of course, as Assistant Chief Constable Operations,
operational matters would be reported up to you,
particularly major events? - A. That is correct.

Mr. Mole described your role in relation to the semi­
final in various ways but the first point he made was
that you had a role in ratifying any Operational Order? -
A. I did, sir.

The impression I got from Mr. Mole was that the Commander
whoever it might be whose duty it was to run a particular
event, was responsible for organising and drafting what
he considered to be necessary in order to enable him to
do the job?   Is that correct? - A. That is correct, sir.

Once that had been sorted out, possibly by internal
discussions, and possibly even with you, the Order which
he then signed would be referred to you? - A. That is
correct, sir.

You would at that point be able to indicate, if you so
felt fit, there was some serious error in it which you
didn't like or there was something which needed changing
and you would refer it back to the Divisional Officer? -
A. That is correct, sir.

He also gave us to understand that that in fact,
certainly as far as he was concerned, did not really
happen because by the time it was signed it had been
agreed? - A. Yes, I was satisfied with it.




       Q. The other role he described
                                             W. W. W. JACKSON



The other role that he described for you was the fact
that because it was such a major endeavour, his
Division would not have had the manpower to run it on
his own and that additional forces would have to be
brought in from other Divisions? - A. That is correct,
sir.  He would identify the manpower required to the
additional manpower required to me and through the
Operations Division I would raise that manpower for him
or any other additional manpower such as, for example,
I was asked for additional horses and dogs and I made
arrangements for that manpower to be raised as well.

So what you are saying is that your role is both intra­
force or intra-divisional to raise manpower and also
inter-forces, you are the communication link to other
Forces to raise whatever is necessary? - A. That is
correct, sir.

Presumably let us imagine that Mr. Mole says, "I need
1,000 men to do this job.  I have got 400 and you have
got to find me 600 more".  One of your functions would
be that if you could not raise those people for
whatever reason you would have to say to him, "I am
sorry I cannot do it" and you have either got to cancel
your control of the match or do it in some other way.
Would that be right? - A. Yes, how I would do it is
that I would raise the manpower throughout the Force
and if it was necessary I would go out of Force if we
were going to run the event which I did with the
mounted and the dogs.

You have various options for actually producing the
numbers? - A. Yes, I have.

Would I be right in thinking that although you approve
it in overall terms you are not concerned with the
specifics as to who is in any particular serial, where
they are posted or anything of that nature? - A. That
is correct, sir.   The procedure is that the Divisional
Commander will appoint a planning team, which he did on
this occasion.   It was the same planning team as we had
the year before to get details of the plan together.

We also heard from him that there were a number of
changes made.  In particular I think the traffic
aspects were split off and were put under Chief
Superintendent Nesbit, is that right? - A. That is
right.  That was a policy decision, sir, inasmuch as if
Operations dealt with that, the Traffic Department
dealt with that, it would ease any pressure on the
Commander of the match.
                                               W. W. W. JACKSON


I think finally on this point we know from what other
people have told us that there was a reduction in
manpower, a certain reduction in manpower.  Was that
again assessed and decided on by the planning team and
the Divisional Commander or was that in fact one of
your responsibilities? - A. That was decided by the
planning team and the Commander but I was aware of it.
I was aware it was in the peripheral areas.  I was also
aware that the serials which are normally ten were
reduced to eight so that their overall effectiveness
was not reduced.  The fact of the matter was that the
previous year a number of Officers were under-used and
that was the best way of dealing with it.

This part of the task was yours because you happened to
be the Assistant Chief Constable Operations, that is
right, is it not? - A. That is correct.

Am I right in thinking that somebody of your rank or
higher is on duty each day to cover the South Yorkshire
conurbation or County? - A. Yes, during the week, if I
was on duty, I would be on cover the five days of the
week to deal with operational matters but at the
weekend each of the three ACCs and the Deputy took the
weekend in turn so that it would be once every four
w ee ks .

This is a cover role as opposed to - you are available
in case of need, would that be right? - A. That is
right.  If I could give you an example, sir.  If there
was a firearms incident, for example, then authority to
issue the firearms would be down to an Assistant Chief
Constable so we would require that kind of cover to
make those sort of policy decisions.

As it happens I take it that it was fortuitous that you
happened to be the on call ACC on 15th April 1989? - A.
I was, sir.

Was it planned or just the way that the rota went? - A.
No, it was not planned, sir.  It just happened to fall
that it was my weekend on cover.

On the day you were in fact at Hillsborough? - A. I
was.

Perhaps I just ought to ask you this;  were you in
uniform that day or were you in what we call civvies? -
A. No, I was in civvies that day.

Would I be right in thinking you were there because you
wanted to watcfi. the match with your bleeper or whatever
but you were not there because you were - or perhaps
                                              W. W. W. JACKSON


you were - taking control of supervising the ground? -
A. I would not be involved in supervising the ground
because there was already a Commander and to do that,
of course, would cause confusion because he would
actually brief the Officers concerned.  He would know
the nitty gritty of the operation and I would not.   The
reason I went to the match, it was a big match, and it
was my habit at weekend, for example, on the open day
at Finningley I would always go up and speak to the
Operational Commander.

I suppose in the event it could have happened that at
say half past two some terrible disaster - this was
pretty bad but another one - could have happened
somewhere else in South Yorkshire and you might have
had to leave to go to that? - A. Yes, absolutely.

I think you have already mentioned it was your normal
practise at big events to go and speak to the Commander
and did you do that on this occasion? - A. Yes, I did.
I went to the Control Room just shortly after two
o'clock and spoke to Mr. Duckenfield. Actually when I
arrived in the Control Room he was just coming up the
terraces having been to see the referee with Mr.
Murray.

Was there any exchange   of conversation at that point? -
A. Just a general chat   about the game. The crowd
looked in good spirits   and so we just had a general
conversation about the   operation.

I just want to back track for a moment because there is
something I forgot to ask you.  I want to go back to
the order.  Were you the ACC Ops in 1988 and 1987 as
well? - A. Yes, I was.

As far as you were concerned was the order which was
being put up to you substantially similar to the
previous orders? - A. Very similar although we improved
it each time.   For example, in 1987 we did not separate
the traffic.  In 1988 we did.   In 1989 we made a number
of alterations.   One was to the Kop end where we had a
contingency plan for Liverpool supporters who may get
in at the wrong end.   We arranged through the Club for
AA signs for traffic.   This had not been done the year
before.  We also arranged that the escorts from the
train in the D Division side who were arranging escorts
from the train to the match, that the coaches would be
placed strategically at Leppings Lane and Penistone
Road with the extra Officers available.   I think there
may have been one or two other minor alterations that
we made but edch time we sought to improve the order.
Substantially it followed the pattern, that is what I
am trying to get at? - A. It followed the actual
guidelines if I can perhaps explain them for the Jury
which was IIMAC and that means that we got the
information, we got the intention, the method, the
administration and the communication.  I instructed
that all orders should be prepared in that way so that
we should not forget anything and those were ACPO
guidelines.

We will now go back to the match and I am sorry but I
should have thought of that earlier.  So you had a chat
with him at about two o'clock and at that point neither
you nor he had anything that particularly caused you
concern? - A. That is correct, sir.

Did you at   that time notice anything at all about the
stadium which struck you as worthy of comment or
anything? - A. We did talk very briefly.   I noted that
in the Kop end the Nottingham Forrest fans, I think the
stand might have been about nearly two thirds full
there.  The North Stand was filling up, the West Stand
filling up   but there was still plenty of room on the
terraces.    I did not find that really unusual.   I
suppose the unusual thing was the fact that the Notts
fans were in very early.




                        Q. You then left.
                                       W. W. W. JACKSON
                                                          I



You then left? - A. Yes.

Because you had no function in that Control Room, that
is what you are telling me? - A. That is correct.

I think you then made your way to the Directors' lobby?
- A. Yes.

I don't know where that is - somewhere in the South
Stand, I take it? - A. It is underneath the middle of
the South Stand.

And you met Mr. Mackrell, I believe, is that right? -
A. Yes, I did.

You had some conversation with him? - A. Yes, I did.

Did you mention to him the disparity, can you remember?
- A. Yes, I mentioned it briefly and said, "I see most
of the Notts, fans are in but there are still some to
come in the other side", but it was merely a comment I
made that might be useful.

It was an off the cuff remark? - A. An off the cuff
remark, yes.

Then you spent sometime in there perhaps, chatting to
various other people who might have been about? - A. I
did not actually see anybody in there but I just had a
browse about, team sheets were up etc., and then I went
up to the Directors' Box.

Which is where you were going to watch the match from?
- A. That is correct, yes.

Do you know by chance what time you actually got there?
Can you remember, approximately? - A. I am not sure.  I
think I said it was about 25-to, or maybe 20-to.  I
can't remember - about that time.

I think you also said that you were the first one
there? - A. That is right, yes.

Having sat down - I assume you sat down? - A. Yes.

What happened then? - A. I just merely made myself
comfortable and just generally looked around the
Ground, until the Box started filling up and the game
kicked off.

During this period, from say 20-to, until kick-off -
did you see kick-off, let's check that first of all? -
A. Yes, I did.
                                       W. W. W. JACKSON
                                                         I



Did you by chance see the players come out prior to
kick-off?  Can you recollect that? - A. Yes.  I have a
feeling, I can't remember for sure, but I am sure I
did.  I am sure that the players came out before for a
kick-around and then came out later.

Until kick-off then had anything attracted you in the
Ground, spectator wise? - A. No, nothing in particular.

Which bit of the Ground were you looking at mainly? -
A. I was mainly looking at the stand opposite, which is
the North Stand, and certainly at kick-off time there
were some spaces in the North Stand, but very little.
Anybody who has been to a football match knows that is
not in the least bit unusual.

You are telling me that your attention was not
attracted to Leppings Lane terraces? - A. Not in
particular.

Kick-off took place, so up to there nothing had alarmed
you, would that be right? - A. That is right.

What happened after that, as far as you were concerned
and as far as you observed or saw or did? - A. I was
watching the flow of the game and the ball went up to
the Leppings Lane end.  I saw a number of fans coming
out onto the pitch and I watched this for some
considerable time, and I think I recollect a Police
Officer - I think it was a Police Officer or
Policewoman - who was directing the fans along the
terrace.

You mean the terrace? - A. Sorry, on the perimeter
track, and then I noticed more people coming out and at
that stage I thought I should go and see Mr.
Duckenfield in the Control Room, to see what the
problem was.

Is it in the centre, the Directors' Box? - A. Yes, it
is.

Behind the Press Box, is it - do you know where the
Press Box is? - A. No, I can't remember where the Press
Box is.

Okay, but it is near the centre, you are saying? - A.
Yes, it is near the centre.

You could see that something was happening? - A. Yes.

Were you at that stage, when you were still in the
South Stand, able to distinguish what it was that was
happening? - A. No, I wasn't able to distinguish what
                                                               10

                                              W. W. W. JACKSON


       it actually was.  Running through ray mind, I think the
       Police are geared into a public order situation and I
       wondered whether there had been a problem actually in
       the terraces which had necessitated taking some people
       out.
B
    Q. It would be fair to say that until this point you had
       not seen any computer print-outs, you had not heard any
       radio messages, is that right? - A. That is correct,
       ye s .

    Q. And you did not have a video in front of you to see
       what was going on outside Leppings Lane? - A. No, I did
       not.

    Q. So you got up? - A. Yes.

    Q. And you decided to go to the Control Box? - A. I did.

    Q. Do you know whether the match was still in progress
       when you left the Directors' Box? - A. I have tried to
       think back on that, and I said it to Mr. Taylor's
       Inquiry, I don't think the match had actually stopped
D      when I left but I recollect, thinking back, that it
       stopped when I got to the Control Box.

    Q. You got to the Control Box.  Did you see it stop? Did
       you see how it stopped - can you remember that? - A. I
       can't remember that.

    Q. You may have seen it on a video since, so it is
       possibly difficult. - A. Yes, I have seen it on the
       video since.

    Q. What I am interested in is whether you recollect seeing
       it being stopped, on the day? - A. I don't actually
       recollect that because when I went to the Box I spoke
       to Mr. Duckenfield and we were then concentrating on
       the fans who had come out on to the Ground.

    Q. So you went to the Control Box and you climbed up the
       stairs, I take it? - A. I did.

    Q. Had you met anybody en route? Obviously there were
       people about but had you met anybody, any senior
       Officer or anything like that? - A. I don't recollect
       meeting anybody until I got into the Box, or speaking
       to anybody, and Mr. Duckenfield was the first person
       that I spoke to.

    Q. I take it you made enquiries as to what was going on? -
       A. I did.




H
                                       W. W. W. JACKSON


Just describe to me what was going on, what happened at
that point? - A. I got into the Control Box and it was
extremely busy at that particular time.  A number of
people had come over onto the pitch itself, and I spoke
to Mr. Duckenfield about the people on the pitch, and I
think I was under the impression that it may possibly
have been a pitch invasion.  Mr. Murray was sent down
by Mr. Duckenfield to have a closer look at the
situation.

You remained in the Box at that stage? - A. When Mr.
Murray had left to do that, I left the Box shortly
after that, went to the pitch and I spoke to Mr.
Greenwood on the pitch.

By then, of course, the match had ceased? - A. Oh, yes.

Where did you meet Superintendent Greenwood? - A. I met
him near to the south side of the terraces.

Was he adjacent to the fencing, on the perimeter track,
by the goal? - A. He was opposite the perimeter
fencing.

Did you observe what if anything he was doing at that
point? - A. What I said to him, I asked him what had
happened and he said he was dealing with a situation
that had arisen whereby there were some injuries.  I
could see that a lot of Police Officers were round the
various fences; there seemed to be Police Officers
coming from the back of the terraces, and obviously Mr.
Greenwood was anxious to get on and deal with the
situation.  I could then see that there were a number
of people who had fallen to the ground, and quite
clearly I was concerned at this stage we had the
development of a serious incident.

I went back to the Control Box because communications
were there, and on arrival back at the Control Box I
was made aware that a fleet of ambulances had been sent
for.  At that stage I realised we were into a serious
incident.  On looking down onto the pitch, more fans
had come out and Police Officers were busily involved
in a rescue attempt; messages were flowing in to the
Control Room; Mr. Duckenfield at that stage was
instructing that the tannoy be used for people to keep
calm and clear the pitch.

Shortly after that I was asked to confirm what we call
"Operation Support", and I know that was roughly about
3.10 p.m.  For the Jury, "Operation Support" is a
system of raising extra manpower for either a public
order or a major incident, and it was quite clear when
I looked down onto the pitch that is what we were
                                       W. W. w, JACKSON


dealing with.   A fleet of ambulances had been called,
the fans were involved with Police Officers in a rescue
attempt, and Mr. Duckenfield and I then implemented the
major incident.   I had made arrangements earlier on
which made that much easier, in that in the planning we
had fixed up a system in the Force Control Room where
we had a VHF radio and a UHF radio.   The VHF radio
dealt with traffic matters; the UHF radio was tuned
into the actual football match; there was a Chief
Inspector in the Control Room there, so when the fleet
of ambulances were called and Operation Support was
called they were aware immediately we were into a major
incident, and I am satisfied that assisted and helped
tremendously in the rescue of the fans.




             /Q. It sounds to me
                                                             13

                                      W.W.W. JACKSON



Q. It sounds to me from what you are saying that you were
   on the pitch when the fleet of ambulances were being
   summoned.  Is that right? - A. I think that was right
   because I recollect when I came back to the Control
   Box that I was informed that a fleet of ambulances
   had been called.  I was either informed or the call came
   through at about that time.

Q. Do you recollect what time that was? - A. Well I know
   that the fleet of ambulances were called at I think
   3.07.

Q. If I said to you that on the tape it said 3.07 and 45
   seconds, would you accept that? - A. I would accept
   that sir, yes.

Q. Between 3.07 and 3.08 if we say that that would be right,
   wouldn't it? - A. Yes, I would accept that.

Q. When you went up to the Control Box met Mr. Duckenfield,
   Mr. Murray was sent off to find out what was going on,
   you followed him, I take it that you did not take operational
   control of the match at that stage? - A. No, the procedure
   in a major incident plan is that the Chief Superintendent
   or his Deputy on the Division who is responsible for
   that area, takes control as Site Commander.  My responsi­
   bility given at that particular time or the developing
   period that there is a major disaster is much wider
   than that in dealing with policy matters and also making
   sure I am available not only to deal with issues that may
   emanate from that incident but anything else that happens
   elsewhere in the Force.

Q. And in fact as it happens the Chief Superintendent was
   already the Site Commander so you did not make any change?
   - A. That is right, Mr. Duckenfield slotted into that
   role.

Q. And that is what you would have expected him to do and
   you saw no reason for making any changes? - A. I did
   not see any reason for making any change.  He was
   familiar with the incident, had briefed the Officers,
   so for me to make a change at that stage, I think, would
   have been folly.

Q. You had come back up. You had at that time
   discovered that the ambulances had been summonedt About
   10-past or thereabouts I think you confirmed operation
   support.   In fact it had been requested a few moments
   earlier.   Is that right? - A. Yes, I think operation
   support had been requested earlier and I think it was
   by Mr. Duckenfield, but the Force policy is before
   the Force Control Room activate that they must have the
   authority of ?
                an Assistant Chief Constable.
                                                               14

                                       W.W.W. JACKSON



Q. Because this is an overall Force matter rather than a
   Division? - A. This is a matter for me to decide and
   of course the Force Control Room came back to the
   Control Room in the ground asking for confirmation.
   I gave that confirmation.

Q. So at that point you must have been in the Control Room
   because it was the only way you were able to communicate?
   - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. Did you stay there or did you leave again? - A. Yes, I
   stayed mainly there at that stage. As things were
   developing I wanted to make sure that certain things
   were in place.   I know that Mr. Duckenfield was doing
   a superb job in the Control Room in terms of his handling
   of it. At 3.12 for example I think that was the time
   we made sure that there was a sterile area which was very
   early on given that we had a major disaster on our hands
   because I think if the jury look at other disasters
   they will see in this particular case we dealt with it
   very quickly and efficiently, because there usually
   is a trauma ....

Q. I will stop you because I don't want to go into the
   rescue aspects. - A. But 3.12 p.m. we ensured that there
   was a sterile area so that the ambulances could come
   and get the injured straight off to hospital.

Q. Did you go down on to the ground again? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. Was that after this 3.12 or about that time, do you know?
   When did you go back on to the pitch? When did you
   leave the Control Room sorry? - A. I went on to the
   pitch a bit later and spoke to - this was some time later
   - I spoke to Mr. Nesbit on the pitch, Chief Superintendent
   Nesbit.

Q. Apart from seeing Mr. Greenwood that first time did you
   have any further contact with him up to about 3.15.
   You may well have seen him later on in the afternoon
   but I am not too concerned about that? - A. Well I could
   see on the pitch that Mr. Greenwood was extremely busy
   and he was joined by Mr. Nesbit of course in the rescue
   attempt.
Q. You have mentioned it but I think we will just make
   quite sure that we understand it. When you were observing
   you could see Police Officers helping with the rescue but
   I think it is also fair and I think you did say, but
   I want to make sure that you agree, that there were
   numerous fans who were also very active in their
   endeavours to help? - A. Yes, I mentioned it at^
   Mr. Taylor's Inquiry. Those fans did a superb job with
                                                          15

                                      W.W.W. JACKSON



   our Police Officers and the senior Officers who were
   dealing with the rescue attempt.  All of them, as far
   as I am concerned, did a first class job.

Q. Now just one final matter on the ground.  When you went
   up the steps to the Control Box the first time did you
   notice or hear fans calling out and trying to attract
   the attention of people within the Control Box or indeed
   yourself for that matter? - A. No, I didn't.

Q. And one other thing which I have remembered.  You
   mentioned that Mr. Murray was sent off in the first
   instance to find out what was going on.  Did he ever
   come back as far as you know? - A. He eventually came
   back about 3.25 p.m. when I was in the Control Box
   because he had been dealing with the situation, the
   rescue situation at Leppings Lane.

Q. So he went off shortly after you first entered? - A.
   That is right.

Q. Then returned at some later point having remained
   presumably somewhere on the pitch? - A. Yes, he got
   involved in the rescue at Leppings Lane and then came
   back about, I think it was roughly about 3.25.




                f Cross-Examined by MR. HALE
                                           w .   W. W. JACKSON


             Cross-Examined by MR. HALE:

Mr. Jackson, it is stating the obvious, really, but when
you set out that day obviously you did not know what was
going to happen? - A. That is correct, sir.

You had plans to cover all sorts of eventualities -
public order and safety? - A. Yes.

The learned Coroner has mentioned to you that you might
also have had problems elsewhere.   You might have been
called away from the match to something somewhere else? -
A. That is correct.

The whole point of these Inquests is there is a cut-off
point, and that is perfectly proper and right for the
purposes of the Inquests at 3.15.   An assumption that if
the Police had acted properly, if everything had gone
right and the fans had been got in properly packed and no
pressure and so on, that that match would have gone off
uneventfully and there would have been no trouble
whatever? - A. Yes.

Now is that likely, in your experience?   Does your
responsibility extend right until the end of the match
and until the fans have gone home?

     THE CORONER:   I don't think I have understood the
question, Mr. Hale.

     MR. HALE:   So far as your plans were concerned you
didn't have to plan merely up to the point when the fans
were seated, or standing, comfortably packed and no
problems? - A. Oh, no.

Did your responsibility continue after that? - A. Yes.
The responsibility for the Commander at the match is
until the match is finished and all the traffic has gone.

Given what is now known about the conditions on that day,
the hot day, the alcohol content of some people and so
on, would it have been well possible that even if there
had not been a disaster at 3.15, that something else
might have happened later on?

     THE CORONER:   Don't answer this yet.       Finish the
question, Mr. Hale.

     MR. HALE:    What I am saying is that as far as the
concentration of your forces was concerned did you still
have to maintain men to make sure there were no public
order problems between rival fans or pitch invasions and
all that sort .of thing?
                                            W. W. W. JACKSON


     THE CORONER:      Well, can I rephrase the question?

     MR. HALE:      Yes,   sir.

     THE CORONER:    I think what Mr.   Hale is asking, or
at least what I   think we will allow,  is this:  isit
correct that in the planning for a match, the plan has
got to cover pre-match, inter-match and post-match
events? - A. Yes, there are three phases to deal with the
match.

The second thing is is it right that the allocation of
manpower, which we know from other people was
substantial, would have had to be maintained until the
match had been concluded, by which I mean phase 3 had
come to an end? -A. Yes, that's right.   In fact one of
the policy decisions we made regarding the semi-finals,
if I could talk about an ordinary match.   When we talk
about phase 1, which is outside;  phase 2, some Officers
go inside and then phase 3 is the end of the match.    In
the semi-final we kept the phases where they were so that
everybody would be familiar, there would be no movement
and it would be much safer as far as we were concerned to
do that.

      MR. HALE:   What I am really concerned with,
Mr. Jackson, is the dilution of your forces was in two
ways, not only in area because if you had known you would
have had every single man at Leppings Lane end, wouldn't
you, outside the turnstiles?    If you had know what was
going to happen? - A. Well, that's right, if I had known
that.    The plan was based on the information available.

Yes.    All I am saying is you didn't know that and
therefore you didn t know if there was going to be
trouble at the Spion Kop end or outside in Middlewood
Road or anywhere, so your forces were diluted in area of
ground?    That's right?   They had to be in many, many
different places? - A. Yes.    I would not use the word
"diluted".    The plan was prepared on the information
available and so where there were Officers, say, further
out, they were there to deal with a particular situation
and to help with the overall plan.

I am perhaps being a little clumsy about it, but
nevertheless the point is if you got - how many men did
you have altogether? - A. Well, I know that altogether on
the three aspects, that is, the traffic, the match itself
and D Division dealing with the city area and the
escorts, there was over 1,000 men.   I think it was
1,033.

I think we have heard there were something like 200 in
Leppings Lane? - A. That would be about right.
                                         W. W. W. JACKSON


The point is you could not put more men in Leppings Lane
because you had all sorts of other things to think about
and all sorts of other possibilities, is that right? - A.
I can only answer the question by saying that the amount
of resources put at Leppings Lane were those necessary,
based on the information to run the Operational Plan.

Because you had other men elsewhere for other purposes? -
A. That is correct.

All I am saying is that in addition to spreading your men
in area of ground, you also had...   You didn't have a
knock-off time at three o'clock, did you? - A. No.

You had to look to the possibility of other things
happening up to about five o'clock, say? - A. That is
absolutely right, sir.    Anybody who has been to a
football match knows that you can get incidents quite
late on.   At some stages we had disturbances - not at
this match, but in previous matches - in shopping centres
at the end of the match, so we have got to be prepared
for those eventualities.

            Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS;

Mr. Jackson, can I first of all put your involvement in
this matter in some form of perspective.   As I
understand the position it is this, correct me if I am
wrong:  you are an Assistant Chief Constable for
Operations and as such a plan such as this is submitted
to you but your input so far as this plan is concerned is
very limited? - A. That is correct, sir.

Indeed, am I right in saying that so far as the plans for
1987, 1988 and 1989 are concerned, you made no
alterations to the plans that were submitted to you? - A.
That is correct.

Without wishing in any way to be rude, to a very large
degree you acted in that respect as a rubber stamp? -A.
No, sir.   The development of the plan follows liaison
with myself and the Division and my Chief Superintendent,
Operations, so it is inevitable when the plan is
completed that it will be right and that is because we
have liaison as we develop the thing.    For example, if
Mr. Duckenfield spots a problem he would ring me and say,
"What do you think about this?"   We would develop that
during the period of preparing the plan.

First of all, that never happened in 1989, did it? - A.
In 1989 I was contacted by my Chief Superintendent,
Operations, for additional resources.   That is, the
mounted and the dog section.
                                         w .   W. W. JACKSON


That was Mr. Mole? - A. No.   That was Mr. Duckenfield.
We are talking about 1989.

Yes, I know that, but Mr. Mole, of course, was involved
right at the outset? -A. Yes.

He had set up the planning team? - A. Right.

Mr. Duckenfield took over once the planning team had been
established? - A. Yes, I see what you mean.   That would
be correct.

So far as the previous year was concerned, was there any
amendment made to the plan that you objected to? - A. No,
there was no amendment.

Similarly with 1987? - A. That is correct.

So far as your attendance at the game is concerned, that
was largely because you wished to see the game, the
match? - A. Well, I think two-fold.   One, it was the
major event of the day and secondly, if I was there and
in the Directors' box then I would be watching the game.

I think you were a guest of the club? - A. Yes, I was.

Therefore you had, up to the time when difficulties
arose, no operational involvement at all? - A. That is
correct.

So far as Mr. Duckenfield is concerned he was at the time
a highly thought of Officer? - A. Yes, indeed.

He had been appointed only a very short time before to
the position of Divisional Commander for that area? - A.
That is correct.

Although he had experience of policing football games in
the past, he had no recent experience of policing the
Sheffield Wednesday ground? - A. No, only for that period
since he had been been promoted.

A matter of days? - A. I think it was a matter of three
weeks.

Twenty-one days? - A. That is correct.

There had been two games during that period? - A. That is
correct.

Both of them featuring teams which were without a great
deal of away support? - A. That is correct.
                                           W. W. W. JACKSON


Although he had had some experience of policing Bramall
Lane, that is a ground which is quite different in its
layout from Sheffield Wednesday's ground? - A. Yes, I
think it is.

What was important, and   no doubt was going through your
mind at the time of his   appointment, was that he would
have with him a team of   Officers who were very
experienced in policing   Hillsborough, is that right? - A.
That is correct.

Also those Officers had in fact, were you aware, been
handpicked by Mr. Mole to carry out the jobs which they
were to do on the day? - A. Yes, I was.

No doubt you were, in your own mind, happy that insofar
as Mr. Duckenfield lacked experience of Hillsborough, he
would be assisted, if necessary, by this handpicked team?
- A . Yes, and of course I was aware, as you have quite
rightly said, that Mr. Duckenfield was an extremely
competent and well thought of Officer.

I am obliged.  You notice some problems when people start
coming over the perimeter fences.   You go to the Control
Room.  Would it be right to say that as you entered the
Control Room it was clear that activity within the
Control Room was very intense indeed? -A. Yes, sir.

All in the Control Room appeared to be working hard? - A.
That is correct.

There was a very high noise level from outside? - A. Yes,
there was.

Indeed there was a high noise level inside from radio
communication? - A. There was.

It goes without saying, having regard to what was
happening by the perimeter fence, that there was a good
deal of tension? - A. Yes.

I don't know if you recall this, but do you recall stones
being thrown or coins at the Control Box whilst you were
there? - A. Yes, I think I do.

During the time you were there and seeing Mr. Duckenfield
involved in what was going on, you did not feel it was
necessary to take over command of the rest of the day s
operations? - A. No.   Mr. Duckenfield slotted in to
being the site Commander in terms of the aftermath and my
job was a wider remit than that.

Had you felt though he was not dealing with the matter
expeditiously you would have done something about it? -
                                         W. W. W. JACKSON


A. I certainly would.   Perhaps I should mention at this
stage I have worked with Mr. Duckenfield before on two
particularly nasty situations.   Those were hostage
situations involving firearms and Mr. Duckenfield was the
negotiators and because of the firearms incidents, I was
the Officer in charge of those.   He was an extremely
competent negotiator and good Officer.   I was perfectly
confident in his command role in that situation.

It would take an exceptional event, in your view, to faze
him?   Do you know what I mean by that? - A. I am not
sure what you mean.   Do you mean take him away from the
job?

No.   Perhaps I should not have used the colloquialism.
It is not a fair question.   I shall leave it.   When you
went into the Control Box you asked what was going on and
the response was that it was not entirely clear? - A.
That is correct.




      Q. Mr. McRobbie
                                              W. W. W. JACKSON


Mr. McRobbie had already gone down to see what was
happening? - A. Yes.

Then Mr. Murray was sent down, as it were, to get such
further information as was available? - A. That is
correct.

But it was clear to you that further conversation on
those lines would only get in the way of the
investigation and the steps that were being taken to
try and remedy the situation? - A. That is absolutely
right.  I think we have painted the scene in the
Control Box which was extremely busy. The
concentration for the Commander and indeed everybody is
dealing with the situation as it develops.

     MR. ISAACS:   Thank you very much indeed, Mr.
Jackson.

     THE CORONER: We are going to all get up now and
have a cup of coffee. Mr. Jackson, we usually pause at
relatively regular intervals for everybody's sake,
including yours, for about quarter of an hour. Please
remember you remain in the witness box technically
during the break and so do not discuss the evidence if
you would.

                   (Short Adjournment)

             Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING

Can I take you straight to the moment when you went to
the Control Box for the first time? I wonder if you
can recollect so far as Superintendent Murray is
concerned whether just as you entered the Control Box
he was entering either at that moment or immediately
after you? - A. On the first occasion?

On the first occasion? - A. No, when I arrived at the
Control Box I saw Mr. Murray and Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield coming up the terraces and they came in
together. They had been to see the referee. That is
when I first arrived.

I am sorry, you are absolutely right. My question was
rotten. You did go the first time and that was round
about two o'clock time? - A. Right.

You had gone, of course, immediately after three
o'clock and that is the time I am talking about? - A.
Yes.
A
                                                                   '23

                                                     W. W. W. JACKSON


     Q. Rephrasing it then, when you went, having left the
        directors’ box after kick-off and when you perceived
        there was a need for you to find out what was
B       happening, can you remember at that time whether Mr.
        Murray was actually in the box or whether he followed
        you into the Control Box then? - A. I think I followed
        Mr. Murray into the box.

     Q. Was it clear to you at that time that Mr. Murray had in
        fact come back from the pitch himself to try to
        ascertain what was going on? - A. Yes, that was the
        gist of the conversation that he had gone down to
        assist in stopping the match but I think Mr. Greenwood
        had got there first.

     Q. When, therefore, you said that Mr. Murray came back in
        around 3.25 or thereabouts, not seeking to be precise,
        that was in fact the second time he had gone down to
        the pitch? - A. No, Mr. Murray was sent down to the
        pitch on the occasion when we were talking about.   When
        I followed Mr. Murray into the box Mr. Duckenfield, and
        I think I have got it right sequentially, was sent down
        to the pitch to find out what the problem was and to
        assist.  He went down and came back I think about 3.25
        pm.

     Q. I think we are together.  Just let us look at it.   You
        have said Mr. Duckenfield and I know you mean Mr.
        Murray went down to the pitch? - A. I am sorry, Mr.
        Murray.

     Q. At or about the time that you got to the Control Box
        after three o'clock Mr. Murray had already been down to
        the pitch to try and stop the match and to see what was
        happening and you then went down a second time at Mr.
        Duckenfield's behest coming back at around 3.25? - A.
        That is correct, sir.

     Q. When you were in the Control Box, that Control Box you
        have described was at fever pitch and it was a hive of
        activity trying to do everything that they possibly
        could? - A. It was indeed, sir.

             MR. MANNING:   Thank you very much.

                       Cross-Examined bv MR. KING

     Q. Mr. Jackson, my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs, on behalf
        of Mr. Duckenfield put it to you just before the break
        that you were really only a rubber stamp on the
        operational plan which was presented to you through Mr.
        Mole in 1988 ind, of course, Mr. Mole had been the
        instigator of it in 1989.    You disagreed with that,




H|
                                               W. W. W. JACKSON


did you not? - A. Yes, I did inasmuch as being just a
rubber stamp. My job is to read through the
Operational Order to see whether I envisaged any
problems.  The point I was making really, and would
like to elaborate a little bit, is that we have a
planning team.  That planning team was under Chief
Superintendent Beale on the Division who is a most
experienced Officer and prepared the plan last year.
What happens in general terms is that the plan has been
prepared and matters arise.  If it is a policy matter I
would be contacted.  Consequently the plan inevitably
is basically right when it comes to me.

Of course, you were not in a position to judge whether
or not the plan was appropriate for the layout of the
ground yourself, were you? That was not within your
knowledge? - A. No, that would be a local matter.

Because you were not even familiar with the ground
really, were you? - A. Not really, no.

How many times had you been there to the ground before
the Semi Final? - A. Probably about four or five, maybe
six occasions.

On an earlier occasion in another place did you not say
three or four times? - A. Well, say four or five.  I am
not quite sure.

Could it have been as little as three or four times? -
A. I think it is more likely to be four or five times.

In that case, have a look at page 67 of your transcript
to Lord Justice Taylor?

     THE CORONER:  Is it an issue?   He has   said he is
not familiar with the ground.

     MR. KING:   Very good, sir.   I will move on.

In fact, your own ability to pass a judgment on the
plan would be as to whether or not its format followed
what you regarded as a proper format? - A. That is
basically correct.

I can ask you questions about that.   Making clear, so
that you know, that there are a number of criticisms
about the plan in relation to the layout which I will
not put to you now and, as the learned Coroner knows,
as have been put to other witnesses at great length but
in so dealing with it through you I am not in any way
on behalf of niy clients resiling from those criticisms.
You, in fact, had circulated, had you not, to the
                                                               ^5
                                                  W. W. W. JACKSON


   Officers beneath you two documents, something called
   the standing instructions for the policing of football
   matches and something called the ACPO guide to policing
   football? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. I wonder if just the extracts which I had prepared for
   another witness could be put to Mr. Jackson?  It is
   C.513 and the other is C.514? - A. Yes.

Q. These are just extracts, are they not, Mr. Jackson,
   from much larger documents? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. The give very clear guidance to the policing of
   football matches? - A. Yes.

Q. Indeed, I think the Standing Instruction, C.514, you
   circulated with a covering memorandum, did you not, in
   about 1986? - A. I did.

Q. The covering memorandum indicated that this had been
   drawn up in the light of what Lord Justice Popplewell
   had recommended? - A. That is correct.

Q. I do not think I need to go through that memorandum.
   Lord Justice Popplewell, of course, had been the Lord
   Justice investigating the Bradford fire disaster? - A.
   That is correct.

Q. The guide to policing football, the second document, is
   dated October 1987? - A. That is correct.

Q. Both these documents in their full form you would
   expect to be in the possession of whoever was in charge
   of policing the Semi Final in 1988 or 1989? - A. Yes,
   they would be on the Division.

Q. It would be very important, would it not, for anybody
   in control of the match to look at them before the
   game? - A. I would expect, because of the arrangements
   I made, that the Officers would be familiar with these
   documents.  I cannot say whether they would actually
   read them before the gam e. They may or they may n o t .

Q. You would expect them either to be familiar with them
   or to make themselves familiar with them? - A. Yes.

Q. That is important,   is it not? - A. Yes, it is.

Q. You yourself would be judging the appropriateness of
   the plan which was presented to you either in 1988 or
   1989 by reference to the various matters set out in the
   standing instructions and the guide to policing
   football, would you not? - A. Yes.
                                             W. W. W. JACKSON



Would you just have a little look at first of all the
standing instructions, C.514, and the second page of my
extract? - A. I am sorry, where is that again?

C.514? - A. Yes.

On the second page of the extract which has page 40 at
the top it is dealing with stewards? - A. Yes.

Of course, it is dealing with the duties of stewards,
for example, controlling or directing members of the
public who are entering or leaving the ground? - A.
Yes.

That is not what I want to ask you about.  Do you see
above the three subparagraphs at the bottom of the page
a paragraph beginning:

    "Stewards should be distributed throughout the
    ground in accordance with a detailed pre­
    arranged schedule agreed between the police and
    management."

A. Yes.

We can see a similar provision, if people want to
remind themselves, in the guide to policing football,
C.513, the third page of my extract at paragraph 3/4? -
A. Yes.

Were you aware as to whether or not there was a
detailed pre-arranged schedule as to the distribution
of stewards agreed between Police and management for
the purposes of the 1989 Semi Final? - A. That would be
a local matter.

Did you satisfy yourself as to whether there was one? -
A. No, I did not personally but the Divisional
Commander would make the necessary arrangements at a
local level.

If I asked you the question, was there such a schedule,
what would your answer be? - A. I know there was not a
legal document framed in that respect.

There was not a pre-arranged schedule in writing agreed
between Police and management for the purposes of the
1989 Semi Final, was there? - A. Let me tell you about
the arrangements for stewarding.  After the Bradford
fire I updated the Standing Instructions.  I had two
meetings throughout the year (1) mid-season with all
the Divisional Commanders, and (2) a pre-season meeting
                                             W. W. W. JACKSON


with the Clubs.  We stressed the importance of safety
and dealing with stewards and the document was produced
by the Club which outlined their responsibility.  I do
not think it was necessary to have a written document.

This Standing Instruction came and was distributed with
your imprimatur, with your approval, was it not? - A.
That is correct.

It was stressing the importance of it? - A. Yes.

Is your evidence that you did not even ask yourself the
question in 1989 whether there was a detailed pre­
arranged schedule as regards the distribution of
stewards agreed between Police and management? - A. I
knew that all the work we did in liaison with the
Clubs.  For example, pre-season our Officers went and
gave lectures in relation to the emergency procedure.
We had all of the emergency services there to deal with
evacuation and so there was close liaison in relation
to the Club.  The Club had a chief steward, the Club
had a safety officer, and so the liaison was such that
any arrangements would be made on a local basis.   These
are guidelines which were made at the time.  The local
arrangements - we worked so closely with the Club that
local arrangements in terms of how the stewards would
be directed are absolutely first class.

Mr. Jackson, it is not a difficult question.  What I
want to know is that given that you were judging the
plan and you did not know the layout, for example, but
you went through the plan to look at serials and so
forth, whether you simply asked yourself the question -
yes or no - whether there was a detailed pre-arranged
schedule agreed between Police and management as to the
distribution of stewards.  Did you ask yourself the
question? - A. Yes.  I asked myself the question as to
whether the Club and the Police would liaise closely in
determining the arrangements for the stewards and from
my previous experience, from my liaison with the Clubs,
I was well satisfied that this was done.

But there was not a schedule, was there? - A. I do not
know whether there was a schedule or not but what I was
satisfied with is that we had worked so closely with
the Clubs in training the stewards, making sure that
they were aware of what their job was, we gave them
lectures, we produced videos.   As I say, the Club had a
safety officer who was keen, a chief steward who was an
ex-police superintendent, the liaison was such that the
question I addressed my mind to is, would the stewards
be aware of thseir responsibilities and know full well
what their job was?   I was satisfied about that.
                                            W. W. W. JACKSON



The purpose of a schedule, of course, would be to
ensure there was no confusion between Police and Club
as to who had what particular stewarding on the day.
That would be the purpose of a schedule, would it
not? - A. That could be a purpose.  There is a slight
danger in a schedule and that is that the overall
safety at a football match is both the Club's - the
Police are there ostensibly in a public order situation
but if you start dividing off responsibilities there
can be a tendency that safety is not everybody's but an
individual's.

The reason I ask you these questions is because you
were in a position to look at the plan and see what is
provided for.   If you do have confusion as to whose
role is what, you can have a situation when nobody is
fulfilling a function which somebody ought to be
fulfilling.   Do you understand that? - A. I was
satisfied, as I have said before, from our liaison with
the Club that the proper arrangements would be made.

In the light of that answer let me just put to you just
one example of potential for confusion.  That is the
stewarding in the context of controlling or directing
members of the public who have to go on to the Leppings
Lane terrace.  That is where the disaster occurred.
You yourself were asked a number of questions, were you
not, at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry as to what you
understood? - A. Yes.

Who would have that responsibility, yes? - A. That is
correct.

I do not want to take you through them all because I am
mindful of the learned Coroner's indications but it is
an important point as to the potential for confusion.
Is it not right to say, and if necessary I can show you
the passages, that your evidence to Lord Justice Taylor
was that you expected the Club stewards to be on the
West Leppings Lane terraces? - A. Yes, I think there
was some confusion in relation to that.  I would not
expect and I think I clarified it you will see there
with Lord Justice Taylor.  I would not expect the
stewards to be in the middle of the terrace.  Neither
would I expect a Policeman to be in the middle of the
terrace because they would not be fulfilling any
particular purpose and so there was a deal of confusion
there.
                                       W. W. W. JACKSON


I don't want to get into this argument because I am
mindful of the learned Coroner, but it is important as
regards whether there was confusion or not.   I am not
now talking about the precise position of whoever it is
who takes on the job of stewarding, I am only directing
my question to who had the job of stewarding on the
day, and it is right to say that your evidence to Lord
Justice Taylor was that you expected that the
stewarding of the West Terraces, that is the job laid
down in the standing instructions of controlling and
directing members of the public onto those terraces,
was a job for the club stewards, however they chose to
carry it out? - A. Yes.  I think the stewards in the
concourse had a responsibility for directing the fans
to the terraces.  Likewise the Police Officers on that
concourse, as they would do if they were outside on
duty and a member of the public approached them, would
direct them to the terrace.

Were you personally aware that the Safety Certificate
which we have heard of, which was being put forward as
the so-called schedule I have referred to, clearly had
no provision for club stewards to play any role in the
controlling and directing of members of the public onto
the West Terraces?  Were you aware of that? - A. Do you
mean for the league matches?

For any match?  - A. League matches were dealt with
differently and I think Mr. Mole explained ....

I know that.  Were you aware that the Safety
Certificate quite baldly in its provisions indicated
quite openly and on its face that there were to be no
club stewards with a responsibility for controlling and
directing people onto the West Terraces? - A. Did it
actually say that?

We have seen it yesterday, you can see it if you want
to have a look at it - have you ever seen it, the
Safety Certificate? - A. Yes, it is sometime since I
have seen the Safety Certificate.

I will move on if I may because I think I have
investigated with you the depth of your knowledge on
the matter, Mr. Jackson.  Can I take you to the
immediate time before the semi-final, the appointment
of Mr. Duckenfield? - A. Yes.

Were you in any way yourself party to the decision to
move Mr. Mole and to bring in Mr. Duckenfield, as
regards the overall control on the day of the '89 semi­
final? - A. That is the Chief Constable's
responsibility but the command team or the Chief
                                         W. W. W. JACKSON
                                                          I




Officers are in full discussion with the Chief
Constable, so the answer to that is yes.

So you   knew it was happening? - A. Yes, I did.

You knew or I am sure you believed that Mr. Mole was a
very experienced man at the job of policing semi-finals
at Hillsborough? - A. Yes, he is.

He apparently - this is what has been put forward - had
had a successful semi-final in '87 and '88? - A. That
is correct.

Did it never give you pause for thought, if you knew of
this transfer, that it would be really taking an
unnecessary chance with experience to bring in a new
man so close to the game? - A. No.

Did it never enter your head to suggest that Mr. Mole
might be brought over just for the day, the semi-final
day? - A. Mr. Duckenfield was an extremely competent
Police Officer who had experience of policing Sheffield
United Football Ground.  He had been a Chief Inspector
whilst at Hammerton Road and also he had considerable
experience in public order matters during the miners'
dispute.  It is normal practice to move a Chief Officer
to a division to deal with any issue.  If I could give
you an example of that, if I was a Chief Superintendent
on "A" Division, and went to "B" Division tomorrow,
then a serious incident could occur there, a major
incident, a catastrophe, and as a Commander I would
have to deal with that, although I may not have any
knowledge of the area.

Let me move on to something else, Mr. Jackson.  What
time did you arrive at the Ground at the '89 semi­
final? - A. Just shortly after 2 o'clock.

Where did you originally go? - A. I went to the Control
Room.

Where did you go from the Control Room? - A. I went to
the foyer of the Board Room and then up to the
Directors' Box.

And you spent sometime in the vicinity of the Board
Room? - A. Not in the Board Room, in the foyer.

You were a guest at the Club, weren't you? - A. I was a
guest of the Club inasmuch as I was in the Directors'
Box and had a ticket from them.

Did the Club provide you with any   hospitality? - A.
They didn't.
                                       W.   w .   W. JACKSON


They didn't provide you with lunch? - A. They didn't.

I am told the Board Room sells alcohol.  Is that right?
- A. I think the only time I have been in the Board
Room was about 3.30 p.m. that day, when I went to see
the Board of Directors regarding the incident.

Is it right that the Club Board Room, to your
knowledge, provides drink to the Directors and their
guests? - A. I think it must do, yes.

Why do you say that you think it must do? - A. Well,
usually you get drinks in board rooms.

I don't know, I have never been to a board room. - A.
Well, I have not either.

Were you yourself offered any alcoholic drink by the
Directors or those acting on their behalf, seeing that
you were their guest? - A. I don't like your
intimation, Mr. King, and absolutely not.  I was on
weekend cover during that day and I think the best way
to resolve that would be to bring the Board members to
the Inquest.  I was on duty even though I was only on
weekend cover and I didn't have a drink that day.

Mr. Jackson, you have to understand that I have no
personal knowledge about anything, I merely put
questions.  I put it to you simply and you can answer
the question yes or no and then I will move on to
something totally different:  did you yourself have any
alcoholic drink while at the Hillsborough Football Club
in 1989? - A. I most certainly did not.

So be it.   I will move on to something else. You took
your position in the Directors' Box, didn't you? - A.
Yes, I did.

I think you said it was about 20-25-past-2? - A. I
think I said it may have been about 25-to-3.

I am sorry, it is probably my fault - 25-to? - A. I am
not sure but I think that was the time roughly.

I don't want to cause confusion over it - 2.30 to 2.40?
- A. Yes.

I have forgotten completely, the Directors' Box is in
which Stand? - A. It is in the South Stand, about the
middle.

I think the Jury have had an opportunity to visit the
Ground so they are probably aware of where it is.  Do
you know where the Press Box is in relation to the
           f
                                       W. W. W. JACKSON
                                                          t
                 f


Directors' Box? - A. I have said to the Coroner I can't
    if you tell me where it is I would probably
remember.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   If you are sitting in the Press
Box looking at the pitch, the box immediately on your
right, absolutely adjacent, is the Directors' Box, so
exactly the same level, side by side.

     MR. KING:       I am obliged:

I only say that, Mr. Jackson, because we have heard
evidence from a Mr. Curry who was in the Press Box.
The Jury will remember his evidence, I won't rehearse
it to you, but I wanted to ascertain the vicinity of
your position to that of the Press Box, and it seemed
to be alongside, basically? - A. Yes, I would accept
that.

Is your evidence that from the moment you were in the
Directors' Box to the moment the game started, you had
noticed nothing untoward at all about the Leppings Lane
Terraces?   Is that your evidence? - A. Nothing in
particular.

That is your evidence? - A. Yes.

Let me just go slightly back in time to when you went
to the Control Box for the first time and you passed a
comment to Mr. Duckenfield about the filling of the
ground, all right? - A. Yes.

That was round about just after 2 o'clock, wasn't it? -
A. Yes.

You yourself, as I understand it, have little or no
experience of policing at football matches, is that
right? - A. No, that is not right.  I was Chief
Superintendent on "E" Division in Greater Manchester
Police and policed Manchester City Football Ground.

So you knew a little? - A. Yes.

Were you aware as regards the 1989 semi-final that the
expectation of those who had planned it - and you were
in the planning, of course - was that the spectators,
and in this context I mean the Liverpool spectators,
would arrive early and there would be a steady flow of
people arriving from, shall we say, 1 o'clock onwards?
Did you understand that was the expectation upon which
the planning was made? - A. Yes, I understood that
there would be possibly an even flow of spectators.
                                          W. W. W. JACKSON


Were you aware that, in fact, a steady flow of
spectators would be absolutely crucial if everybody was
to get through the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end
by kick-off? - A. Yes, I think it was important -
perhaps I could elaborate, if you would allow me on
that - we did make special arrangements in relation to
that.  First of all I wrote to the Chief Officers of
Police of Notts, and Merseyside to circulate in the
widest area the need to get to the match early, so they
could take up their appropriate position.   We also
wrote to the match programmers of Notts, and Merseyside
to get the same message across.  We also went live on
the media, and I think we also did Radio Merseyside, to
make sure that was done, so it was part of the
planning.

Why was it important as you understood it that the fans
should arrive in an even, steady flow from early on?
Why was that important to the planning? - A. I felt it
was important so we could get everybody in the Ground
in plenty of time to save any last minute problems.

What sort of last minute problems? - A. Anything.   The
importance of running a semi-final or any big major
incident is to get people there in time, so that they
can enjoy the match, so that the Police Officers can
have some respite, so that the stewards can have some
respite, and everybody can enjoy the game.  That
basically is it. That is what it is all about.

You may not have been aware of this, were you
personally aware that the 10,100 spectators for the
Leppings Lane standing terraces were to have to go
through just seven turnstiles to get into the Ground? -
A. I was not aware of those arrangements.  Those would
be matters dealt with between the Club and the FA.

But clearly you understood that the early arrival of
fans was important to the planning, you have told us
that? - A. Yes, for the reasons that I have told you.

It was quite clear wasn't it, at 2 o'clock, from what
you observed - sorry, just shortly after 2 o'clock -
that for whatever reason the Liverpool end had not, in
fact, come up to those expectations?  That was obvious,
wasn t it? - A. It was not obvious to me.

I am sorry, it wasn't obvious? - A. No.    You said 2
o'clock?

Yes, shortly after 2 o'clock? - A. Yes, it wasn't
obvious to me.
                                                            34

                                               W. W. W. JACKSON


    Q. I thought you told us that shortly after 2 o'clock
       there were still a number of Liverpool fans to come and
       you observed that? - A. I said the unusual thing was
       the fact that three-quarters of the Notts, fans were
       in.  I think Mr. Mole has told you that on occasions
       about 20 minutes before the match there are a number of
U      people who come and get in quite easily, so I wasn't
       concerned at that time.

    Q. What was the state of the West Terraces at shortly
       after 2 o'clock, as far as the numbers who were there?
       - A. Well, I am going back two years now and I can only
       remember vaguely that I think the West Stand was
       probably about half full and there were quite a number
       of people in the centre of the terraces, but there was
       certainly plenty of space at that time.  I can't give
       you exact numbers.

    Q. You see, we have heard from other Witnesses that they
       had observed from various different vantage points that
       round about this time, shortly after 2 o'clock, it was
       obvious and unusual that in fact so few Liverpool fans
       had arrived.  Wasn't that in fact what you observed? -
       A. That would not be unusual to me having policed
       Manchester City Football Ground.  At 2 o clock it
       certainly would not be unusual.

    Q. You weren't aware then yourself, because you weren't in
       charge of the planning obviously, but you weren't aware
       then of the crucial need as far as the turnstile
       arrangements went at the Leppings Lane end, for a
       goodly number of people to have arrived by 2 o'clock
       even? - A. I am aware, and I may say since, not at the
       time, that the Club reckoned to get 1,000 an hour
       through a turnstile because it was a ticket match.   The
       Green Guide does in fact say 750.




F



                         /Q. I won't pursue that matter

G
                                                             35

                                        W.W.W. JACKSON



Q. I won't pursue that matter any further, Mr. Jackson.

         I want to come back though to you in the Directors'
   Box not having observed anything from that position
   untoward until the game started.  I want to look at that
   piece of evidence.

         Did you not even notice a marked disparity at any
   stage up to kick-off between the state of the centre pens
   at the Leppings Lane end and the side wing end pens?
   - A. I can't remember particularly looking up at that
   end but I have seen the photographs and I accept there
   was space in the wings.  Can I say again this would
   not really be unusual.

Q. Can you understand - you say it is not unusual - can you
   understand then witnesses who do say that in fact it
   was something which struck them as very odd and very
   unusual? - A. Well I can't really answer that question.

Q. So be it, but I want to take it in stages. Are you
   saying that you did observe a disparity between the
   wing pens and the centre pens? - A. No I didn't because
   I was not particularly looking at the terraces.

Q. So in fact your observation of what was normal or
   abnormal can't help us then? - A. No I can't.

Q. That is my fault entirely.  I should have taken it in
   stages as sometimes I do and was once commended by the
   Coroner for doing and I failed to do so here.

          Let me take it in stages so it is absolutely
   clear.   You are saying that sitting in the Directors'
   Box from the    time you arrived at 25-to, 20-to-3 and the
   start of the    game you never observed a disparity, a
   marked disparity between the centre pens and the wing
   pens? - A. No, I didn't.

Q. And your explanation for that was that you weren't really
   looking at that end.   Is that your explanation? - A.
   That is right, I was facing the North Stand and it is
   something I did not notice.

Q. When you said then that you saw people coming out on to
   the perimeter track you gave this comment to us this
   morning:  "Police are geared into a public order
   situation".    What did you mean by that? - A. Well I
   think the Police are at football matches probably as
   anybody here knows ostensibly to deal with public order
   situations and there is a tendency for that to run through
   certainly my mind that that is a situation that might
   have occurred.
                                                                36


                                          W.W.W. JACKSON



Q. Is your answer as frank and as open as this, Mr. Jackson,
   that the effect of the briefings and instructions to
   Police Officers is that their immediate reaction when they
   see people for example climbing out of a pen or over a
   fence is to think about public disorder first, that is
   their immediate reaction because it has been drummed
   into them in instructions and briefings? - A. Well you.
   will see in the Order we include a safety aspect in the
   Operational Order.

Q.    Very good.  Can I stop you there.  I don't want to be
     unfair to you. Could I just hand you the Operational
     Order please?   (Handed) Mr. Jackson, you are familiar
     with this Operational Order because you in fact approved
     it, didn't you? - A. Yes.

Q. You didn't just rubber stamp it, you looked through it?
   - A. I did.

Q. Could you direct my attention to the safety provisions
   please? - A. Yes, there are safety provisions all the
   way throughout the Order.

Q.   Could you just point some out to   me? - A. Well perhaps
     can I tell you about them?

Q. I am sorry.  Yes, of course. - A. It is in the "INTENTION"
   of course where we kick off at 2.1:

           "It is the intention of the Police to allow
           this match to take place and to ensure public
           order and safety both inside and outside
           the football ground etc."

Q. Yes, I understand that.  Could you point to me some
   provisions specifically directed to public safety? - A.
   Well public order is synonymous with safety and throughout
   the order you will see in the various Serials the Officers
   are asked to ensure public order is taken care of; that
   there are no weapons; that people who are drunk aren't
   allowed access.  There is a bit in the Order about Serials
   that are required to deal with the evacuation side. All
   of those are matters of safety which go hand-in-hand with
   public order and certainly if I could just finish and
   say in my meetings, which was a mid-season meeting and
   pre-season meeting with match Commanders and Clubs, I
   always preached the safety aspect.

Q. Mr. Jackson, I want to stick if I may a bit more, shortly
   though, with the Operational Order.  You have given a
   very good rehearsal of provisions which direct themselves
   to public disorder.  I just want you to give me an example
                                                               37


                                          W.W.W. JACKSON



     of an express - not an inferential - but an express
     provision directed to public safety? - A. Well we don't
     actually say that specifically.  I mean I think anybody
     who reads this Order they will see that there is safety
     throughout the Order, because if we deal with public
     order, if we deal with offensive weapons and if we deal
     with trying to avoid non-ticket holders coming into
     the match, if we try to avoid drunken people coming in,
     that is all part and parcel of the safety.

           If I take you to the Safety Certificate itself
     then the Safety Certificate identifies the number of
     people in specific parts of the ground, so the Police
     are entitled to accept that that is what will happen
     and consequently there is a whole manner of safety
     aspects in the Order and included in the Safety
     Certificate.

Q. Well I won't take the matter any further with you.  The
   jury can assess that for themselves. They have got the
   Operational Order in front of them, but it was your
   evidence, and it is why I picked you up on it, that the
   Police were geared into a public order situation which
   was your explanation, it appeared, for believing it was
   a public order problem which was happening at the Leppings
   Lane end when you were observing people coming out? - A.
   What I was saying is two things.  One, that the Police
   are there ostensibly to deal with public order
   situations.

Q. What do you mean "the Police are there ostensibly to deal
   with public order situations"? - A. What I mean by that
   that is why the Police are there in the first place.

Q. Aren't they there for public safety reasons also in the
   first place? - A. I am saying initially if there weren't
   any public  order problems then it is highly unlikely
   that the Police would be there in the first instance.

q   . Given they  are there shouldn't public safety be on a
      completely  same level if not a higher level as public
      order consideration? - A. Yes.

Q. Given that can you offer any real explanation for why
   public order is given such a high profile in the
   operational plan and public safety little or no
   reference.  Can you give any explanation for that
   really? - A. I don't agree with you on that. What I
   have said before is that the Order is interspersed
   throughout with public safety measures.    If you would
   like me to go through it again?   If we deal with people
   who are drunk; if we prevent people who have got offensive
   weapons; if wfe prevent non-ticket holders coming into
   the ground then those are safety measures.   The Safety
                                     W.W.W. JACKSON        »



Certificate itself identifies the crowd that are allowed
in in specific areas and therefore it is an all ticket
match so the Police are entitled to believe that that is
another safety measure.

Sorry entitled to believe, what are they entitled to
believe the Police? - A. They are entitled to believe
at an all ticket match that people will come and take
their seats or go to various terraces so there won't
be overcrowding.

I see, they are entitled to believe there won't be
overcrowding, are they? - A. Yes.

Why are they so entitled to believe that as far as
the Leppings Lane terraces are concerned? - A. Well
Leppings Lane terrace is what we would term as a
discrete area where there is a number of fans allowed
in and like the Kop, and I think Brian Mole has explained
this, is that they would fill to their own level.

Mr. Jackson, I won't with you go through all the criticisms
I have of it because I am mindful of the learned Coroner's
instructions to me as well as anybody else but just one
simple point:  the Kop does not have radial fences, does
it? - A. No, it doesn't.

And you can confirm, can't you, given your apparent
insistence that the Operational Order did cover public
safety,  you can confirm there is no specific direction
anywhere drawing to the attention of anybody, Serial
or otherwise, that they should monitor the pens, the
Leppings Lane end for signs of overcrowding.  There is
nothing in that at all, is there, in writing? - A.
There has never been an Operational Order to that
effect other than the fact that Police Officers if they
identify a problem will deal with it.

So in other words it is left on a relatively casual
system that if they see something they will do something
about it? - A. It is not "casual".  It is a fact that
Police Officers are trained and they will deal with an
incident if they see a problem, but the monitoring of
the density of the crowd I would suggest is extremely
difficult.

We know all that, Mr. Jackson, but   for training,
training must include briefing and   instructions.  You
can't just imagine instructions or   imagine briefing,
you need briefing and instructions   for training purposes,
don't you? - A. Yes.

Can I move oii to something else. When you reached the
Police Control Box the first time after you had seen
                                                              39


                                       W.W.W. JACKSON



   something happening which was concerning you, I was
   just a little confused from what you told my learned
   friend Mr. Manning, I understood you to say when you
   arrived at the Control Box Mr. Duckenfield was there?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Who else was there? - A. I think Mr. Murray was there.
   I think if I remember correctly I followed Mr. Murray
   into the Box.

Q. The Sergeant Controller was there? - A. Yes.

Q. The video operator? - A. Yes, I think the video operator
   was there as well.

Q. And you told us this morning before my learned friend
   Mr. Manning questioned you that Mr. Murray, in your
   presence, I assumed, was sent down by Mr. Duckenfield
   to have a look at the situation? - A. That is correct.

Q. How were you able to confirm to Mr. Manning that Mr. Murray
   had already been down there to have a look at the
   situation, how were you able to tell us that was true?
   - A. Well I think it was a conversation in the Control
   Box that he had already been down.

Q. I see, conversation between whom and whom? - A. I think
   Mr. Duckenfield must have told me that.

Q. Mr. Duckenfield had a conversation with you? - A. I
   think so. What you have got to remember on that parti­
   cular day is we were all extremely busy. Now I don't
   know whether I have picked that up since or at the time,
   I can only assume that somebody said it.

Q. Do you have a real accurate recollection of what went on
   in the Control Box? - A. Not completely accurate.

Q. Or is it just totally confused in your mind? - A. No,
   it is not "totally confused" at all.

Q. Well let me ask you some questions then if it is not
   totally confused.  As regards Mr. Duckenfield, what
   did he say had happened? - A. I asked Mr. Duckenfield
   what had happened and he was unclear at the time other
   than there were a number of fans that had come out on
   to the pitch and he was unsure what the position was
   at that stage.

Q. This would be just before or just after the game had
   stopped? - A. Yes.

Q. So we know that is 6-minutes-past-3? - A. Correct.
                                    W.W.W. JACKSON



Was Mr. Duckenfield aware from what he said to you that
there were injuries? - A. I don't think he was at that
stage.
So your impression was at 6-minutes-past-3 Mr. Duckenfield
was not aware that there were injuries? - A. Yes, can I
say I am not sure.

Did Mr. Duckenfield tell you about his having ordered
the opening of concertina gates allowing into the groun
a vast number of spectators shortly before kick-off?
- A. No, I don't recollect him telling me at that time.

It is not a matter of recollecting, if he told you it
would go right into your head and you would remember it
wouldn't you? - A. Well he didn't.

      THE CORONER:  Mr. King, I will allow these two
questions and no more on this.  It has no bearing
whatsoever on how these deceased people died with
regard to that issue and I am not going to get distracted
into it.  I have no objection to you asking those two
questions but we are not going to go into any further
detail on it.




                        MR. KING:   Sir, in the light
     MR. KING:   Sir, in the light of that, and mindful
that I should not say anything to prejudice any decision,
could I address you in the absence of the Jury?

        (The Jury and the witness left court)

     MR. KING:   Sir, I don't know - it is a matter for
you entirely, I have no objection - you know, of course,
Mr. Duckenfield is present.   I have no objection to his
being in but I don't know whether you do, sir.

     THE CORONER:     Yes, I had overlooked
Mr. Duckenfield.     I think he is entitled to be here.

     MR. ISAACS:     He is certainly entitled to be here.

     MR. KING:   Can I say I have not raised that at all.
I draw it to your attention so that you know.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.   I think if we ask
Mr. Duckenfield to leave we have to ask everybody else to
go as well.

     MR. KING:      Of course.   Only that you are fully
aware, sir.

     Sir, one of the issues apparently being raised
through the witness we have just heard is the efficient
response of the Control Box to the developing situation.
That was very much emphasised in the evidence we have
just heard from Mr. Jackson.    Clearly one of the issues
for the Jury to resolve will be the reaction of
Mr. Duckenfield to the various circumstances which
presented themselves to him. We can go back in time but,
sir, you know the circumstances I am referring to, the
build-up in Leppings Lane, the build-up at the
turnstiles, the need to open the gates, what happened
thereafter.

     Mr. Duckenfield will, I have no doubt, be put in the
witness box to give evidence in support of what is
obviously a case being put forward on his behalf, that it
was efficient, everything was done which could be done,
no criticisms could be levelled at him.

     Sir, the credibility of Mr. Duckenfield on those
answers is all important.   It is fundamental.   Now you
know, sir, that the evidence is clear that
Mr. Duckenfield, on the evidence we have just heard from
Mr. Jackson, did not draw to anybody's attention who came
in to find out what was going on that he had^ordered the
gates to be opened admitting so many people in a way
which was not the normal way into the ground.
     You also know, sir, that not only that, he
volunteered an explanation which was quite false.    1^
would put that anyway, even if you don't accept it, sir,
quite false.   Namely, that the fans had in some way
stormed the gates or broken down the gates.   It was a
falsehood and it was a fundamental falsehood and I have
to say it openly on behalf of those I represent that it
reflects upon the integrity, the credibility and the
competence of Mr. Duckenfield.   To omit that evidence
from the assessment of the Jury is to omit a powerful
piece of evidence which has to be put into the balance
when they weigh, which they will have to do in the jury
room, the credibility, the integrity, the competence and
efficiency of Mr* Duckenfield.   That is why I submit,
sir, I am entitled to ask the next question which I
wanted, but I give you notice of it, as to, "At some
stage what did Mr. Duckenfield give you as an explanation
as to the entry of people into the ground otherwise than
through the turnstiles?" or words to that effect.

     Sir, that is my submission to you, but obviously I
will obey your ruling.

     THE CORONER:    Does anybody want to address me on
this point at all?

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I assume you will not need to
call on me having regard to the way it has been put by my
learned friend, and that you will abide by the decision
you took originally.   If you wish me to put
observations, to make submissions to you on the point,
then I will.   However, it seems to me that everything my
learned friend has said goes wholly against the way we
have conducted these Inquests up to now.

     THE CORONER:    Anybody else?   Were you going to say
something?

     MR. ISAACS:   I was only going to say something, if
you wished me to say something.

     THE CORONER:    Perhaps you would, just briefly.

     MR. ISAACS:    Sir, as to first of all the present
witness's position.    As I understand the evidence he has
given, he has said, "I went up there at or about five/six
minutes past three.    When I went I effectively asked
what was going on as at that time.    I did not make the
enquiry as to what had happened to cause the situation
which was then unfolding before us."    That is very
important because if he is actually saying, "I asked for
an explanation as to what had happened some ten, fifteen,
twenty minutes before, and no explanation is given," then
there may be some force in what my learned friend is
saying.   However, that is not what this witness has
said.   In answer to you, sir, he said, "I was asking
what was happening and the response that came back was
some degree of lack of clarity as to what was going on
and therefore people were sent down."

     The point that my learned friend now seeks to make
with this witness, "Well, were you not told how this had
arisen?" is, in my submission, a very unfair point and
for that reason he should not be allowed to deal with the
matter in the way he suggests.

     Moving on to the second point he makes that he
wishes at some stage to elicit the fact, as he puts it,
the allegation that Mr. Duckenfield did not give a
truthful account of what had happened earlier, but gave
an account which suggested that the fans had burst into
the ground, first of all I say this: we have had no
evidence from any witness, and as I understand it you are
not intending to call any evidence from any person who
might say that such a remark was made by Mr. Duckenfield,
for example, Mr. Kirton, who would be the only person who
could give such evidence.    No-one else, as I understand
the evidence from the Taylor Inquiry, was prepared to say
in terms what had been said.    We are not going to have
that evidence, as I understand it.    More importantly, it
comes at a time way after the cut-off point that you have
already decided.   For my learned friend to say that
depending upon Mr. Duckenfield's answer to that
allegation the Jury can take one view or another view of
him, takes the duties and the role of this Jury way
outside which you had already decided should be their
proper function.   Indeed, it is likely to confuse the
Jury because then we go into questions of why
Mr. Duckenfield may or may not have said that which it is
alleged he said without the necessary framework of fact,
from, for example, Mr. Kirton, to give the Jury any idea
what was or was not said.

     It produces an allegation out of nowhere which^
Mr. Duckenfield then is in the very difficult position of
having to meet.

     Sir, in those circumstances, and I understand my
learned friend Mr. Payne has something to say about this
matter, this is a road which we should not go down.   It
is likely to create so many red herrings and to be likely
to confuse the Jury to a substantial degree away from the
main issues in the case, that really it is, as I say, a
road we should not go down.

     MR. PAYNE:    Sir, the only point that occurred to me
was the timing of this incident that is being
investigated at the moment.   This is six minutes past
three.

     Now directing ourselves to what the question is in
the Inquests, namely how did these people come to their
deaths, then it is plain, if I may be allowed to say so
on the evidence, that the concertina gate had been opened
by that time about fourteen minutes previously and a
large number of people had in fact come in at that time.

      What in fact was said in the Control Box at six
minutes past three is not likely, in my submission, to
have much bearing on the question of how the disaster
occurred within the - I think it is now safe to say on
the evidence - within the relatively few minutes after
2.52.

     It was the relevance point that immediately struck
when Mr. King embarked on this line of questioning.
Whether integrity has got anything to do with the
determination of how the disaster occurred seems to me
rather remote.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, Mr. King?

     MR. KING:   Very shortly, sir.   First of all on my
learned friend Mr. Isaacs' point as to a witness having
knowledge, I was going to ask this witness whether he did
have knowledge.   I was not going to suggest to him what
the answer was.   I was going to ask him whether or not
he had heard anything because I have in front of me his
transcript before Lord Justice Taylor, and it is clear
there that he did understand something from what
Mr. Duckenfield had said.   It wasn't that I was trying
to bring in evidence which he did not have knowledge of.
I was treating him as a witness to that fact, which may
or may not be correct because I have not asked the
question yet.

     Sir, to my learned friend Mr. Payne's point that^
because that which we are investigating happened at six
minutes past it has no relevance to what happened before,
sir, with respect, that is far too simplistic.   What
people say afterwards may be a very good clue as to what
happened before, what was going through their minds, what
they did in fact see, what they may or may not have been
trying to cover up, why they wanted to cover it up, what
had in fact been obvious to them which they didn't wish
to admit was obvious to them.   It is a bit simplistic to
say that because we are dealing with a conversation at
six minutes past it has no relevance to what happened
before.   If that were right, sir, then no doubt you
would have cut the evidence off in these Inquests at
three o'clock, which I don't think anybody would have
suggested would have been sensible.

     Sir, I have nothing to add to my further
submissions.

     MR. PAYNE:  Sir, this is quite important really, and
I am venturing on what the body of evidence is, but it
does seem to be fairly safe to say that the reason the
gates were opened was in fact to relieve a dangerous
situation outside the turnstiles, and no-one, so far as I
know, has actually criticised that decision.   There has
been no...   Sir, perhaps I am wrong about that, but it
certainly seems to me on the evidence that we have heard
for several months that no-one is saying it is wrong to
throw open the gates to relieve the potential disaster
outside the turnstiles.

     THE CORONER:   I think Mrs. McBrien...

     MR. KING:   Mrs. McBrien certainly is putting
questions to the effect there was an alternative and
appropriate method which did not require that.

      M R » PAYNE:   Quite, so Mrs. McBrien has suggested
that.      However, certainly the body of evidence is that
it was necessary to open the gates for that reason.
Well, that is a fact in the case.     That is why I made my
point about remoteness because it seems one is really
wandering away from how the disaster happened if one then
gets into questions of integrity, when it seems to be
quite common ground that there was a perfectly valid
reason for having to open the gates.

     MR. KING:   Sir, at some stage the Jury are going to
have to assess the truthfulness or otherwise of
Mr. Duckenfield's evidence - if he gives it, and he may
not - as to what he could see, what was obvious to him,
what the situation was, what he expected and anticipated.
In the light of that evidence - and I have to put it in
this way, and I put it strongly in this way - that he
gave a wholly false account as to the opening of the
gates, namely, that they were broken down by fans in a
public disorder situation and that they had not been
allowed in the ground through his agency, a decision on
his part to allow them in but that they had got in
through their own efforts - breaking down a gate.

     That is a very important piece of evidence when the
Jury come to assess what was going through the mind of
Mr. Duckenfield when he chose to let them in, quite
contrary to what that piece of evidence indicates.   It
does go to the credibility of the account which is put
forward on behalf of Mr. Duckenfield, on behalf of the
Police generally, as to what was obvious, what was
foreseeable, what was to be expected.

     I say, sir, it is an important piece of evidence
which should go into the Jury's balance.   That is all I
have to say, sir.

     MR. ISAACS:   Where is the evidence?    I ask this
question again.   The question can be asked of this
witness as it has been asked, "Did you ask
Mr. Duckenfield when you went into the Box?"    He says,
"I asked him what was happening."   That was in^answer to
you.   "I got the response Mr. Duckenfield wasn t_clear.
We had the tension in the Control Box," and the like.
That really is as far as it goes, other than my learned
friend asked the question, and he has now had an answer,
"Were you told at that time that the gate had been opened
by or on Mr. Duckenfield's order?"    The answer to that
was, "As far as I can recollect, no, that wasn t told to
me at the time."   That is really as far as it should go.

     THE CORONER:   I think I am going to retire for a
few minutes and give myself a moment or two to think
about it.

                 (Short adjournment)
      THE CORONER:  Like everything else there is
something to be said for both sides.   With regard to
what Mr. King said, I can see that the aspects of
credibility are important because the Jury may need to
assess what value, if any, they place upon Mr.
Duckenfield's evidence if when he goes in the witness
box he gives any. We will see about that.    Time will
tell.   In so far as he does give evidence then clearly
his credibility is a factor.   I do not accept that what
Mr. Duckenfield may or may not have said can possibly
affect the credibility of any other witness.

     MR. KING:  I would interpose there, sir, to say
that if I said that I did not mean to say that.

     THE CORONER:  I could not imagine that but I
thought you did say it.  If you did say it I did not
think you could have meant it.

     MR. KING:  I was not reflecting on the credibility
of Mr. Jackson at that stage.

     THE CORONER:   Or Indeed anybody else.

     MR. KING:   Yes.

     THE CORONER:  That is one side of the coin.   The
other side of the coin is that whatever the credibility
or otherwise so far as Mr. Duckenfield is concerned, in
no way can his credibility as such be construed as
having caused or been the how of the deaths of the 95
people whose case we are considering.  More
particularly even if one were to go along entirely with
the view that what he said at some time subsequent to
the event was an untruth can that in itself been
causative in the deaths of the people whom we are
considering.  So those are my two basic propositions.

    The way I think we should tackle it, and also I
agree with Mr. Isaacs, the way the witness had phrased,
he had asked Mr. Duckenfield "What is going on?" at the
time.  It may be that he also asked him, because I do
not know whether we have asked this question, "Did you
ask him what had happened?".

    The way I would like you to tackle it, Mr. King,
and I think it is the fairest and proper way and which
will enable the Jury to make an intelligent assessment
when they come to the evidence, is to ask the witness
whether he made enquiry at that time as to how the
situation had arisen, not what was going on.   In other
words, what had happened earlier, and what response did
he get to that.   Depending, of course, on the reply I
have no objection to you then asking the next question
which is, "At fahat point and by whom were you told that
the gates were opened under Police authority?" and, if
you wish, you can ask a third question, "Were you on
the day given that information by Mr. Duckenfield?"  I
think that that is fair.  It will sort out what this
witness knows and it will be for the Jury to decide
when the time comes what effect, if any, those
responses have on the issue of credibility.

    What I think we have to bear   in mind is that this
is a matter for the Jury to make   the assessment as to
what value, probative value, the   evidence has on the
credibility.  Have I made myself   reasonably clear?

     MR. KING:  So that I can abide faithfully by your
ruling, can I just go through with you what your ruling
is so that I know I have got it right?

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. KING:  You would like me to ask, which I will
do on your ruling, whether at that time, by which I
understand you are referring to his being in the
Control Box at around about six minutes past.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. KING: Whether at that time he made enquiry as
to how the situation had arisen and what response did
he get.  You have also ruled that it would be proper
for me to ask, regardless of the answer to that, "At
what point were you ever told that the concertina gates
were opened on Police authority?".

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. KING:  Then the further question, according to
his response, "Were you on the day given the
information by Mr. Duckenfield?" I was not sure what
would happen on this postulate.  If for example, he
said, "Yes, I was given the information by Mr.
Duckenfield on the day but it was opened with his
authority", am I entitled to enquire whether a
different explanation had been given by Mr. Duckenfield
other that that prior to his giving him that
information?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I think you would be entitled
to ask that.

     MR. ISAACS:   I am sorry about this but that is not
how I understood you to be giving your ruling in the
first instance because as I argued before the short
adjournment one of the difficulties here is this;
there would then be an issue for the Jury as to what
was said, when it was said, who said it, what it meant
and what weighft should be attached to it, and that
really is the key to the difficulties that the Jury
would have.  We would be going down a road where you
would have to say to them at some stage perhaps during
your summing up, "Now there is an issue as to whether
or not Mr. Duckenfield said this" - because it is an
issue I can tell you that very clearly - and if one
looks at what this witness Mr. Jackson can say about
this matter in another place before Lord Justice Taylor
and one looks particularly at pages 61 and 62, one can
see that he only had the very vaguest of recollections
of how this came about.  For this matter to be left as
an issue for the Jury which is really a red herring on
the basis of what Mr. Jackson was able to say, it would
be wholly unfair.

     THE CORONER:   You see, it is equally unfair
because we do not actually know what Mr. Jackson is
going to say.   I have not gone and asked him what his
answers are.   If Mr. Jackson were to say, "At X time I
was told by Mr. Duckenfield that he had authorised the
opening of the gate and at X minus half an hour he had
actually said something different” then to leave the
first answer only gives an equally misleading
impression.   What I do not want to do is that I do not
want to go into the detail of what he said.   I think
the way Mr. King phrased, if you like, the supplemental
question on that postulate was to say, "Were you told
something different?".   That I think is perfectly
adequate and sufficient.

     MR. ISAACS:  I pose the question, sir, why is it
necessary to ask that question at all having regard to
the time you had said that we were going to stop
investigating this matter and as to whether the
question itself is prejudicial? No other witness has
been asked this matter, "Did Mr. Duckenfield ever say
anything other or different to you than this?".

     THE CORONER:  It is only fair to say that this is
the first witness who could possibly have been asked
that question.

     MR. ISAACS: Mr. Mole could have been asked it.
He arrived at the ground, as we know, at five o'clock
and had discussions with Mr. Duckenfield.

     THE CORONER:  He could have been but I think there
is a difference in time.

      MR. ISAACS:   Mr. Marshall could have been asked
it.

     THE CORONER:   He was not and I think to my mind
this is in fact the first practical witness who could
have been asked this question.   As I say, my initial
view was that ’we were not going to go into this matter
because I did not think it was relevant and I did not
think it was helpful but I do see the point that when
it comes to credibility, let us face it, we had several
other witnesses whom we questioned quite strongly to
establish their credibility and the quality, if you
like, of their evidence.  I think it is right that we
should do that. What I am anxious about is that the
question is not put or the matter is not put in such a
way that the prejudicial effect outweighs its
relevance.  I think that if we do it in the way I have
suggested then we are steering a course down the centre
which is fair to Mr. King and his clients and fair to
you and your client.  It will be up to the Jury to
decide what value and what significance they put on
this. Maybe they get nowhere because we do not
actually know what Mr. Jackson is going to say but let
us wait and see.  I think that that is the way I want
to do it.

     MR. ISAACS:    Very well, sir.

     MR. KING:   Sir, so that it can be made clear, I
will abide as always by your rulings and I do. My
learned friend, of course, has risen to his feet to
indicate why you should not even go as far as you are
going.  Having abided by your ruling I do not want it
thought that I resile at all from my initial
submissions.   I would, of course, have preferred and
would want to have gone the whole way.

     THE CORONER:    And further.

     MR. KING: And further.   I will abide by your
ruling because you are, to put it bluntly, in charge in
this place.

     THE CORONER:  Thank you.  I quite understand that,
Mr. King.  I am not asking you to back down as to what
you would have wanted to but, as I say, my feeling is
that this is the fair way of dealing with it.

     MR. KING:     So be it, sir.

     MR. ISAACS:  My concern, sir, was not with your
ruling because you gave us three questions but then my
learned friend added a question and that was my
concern, that we should not go on to deal with the one
that my learned friend added but you have now made a
ruling as to that and, of course, I will abide by your
ruling as well.

     THE CORONER:   It was on a postulate because we do
not know precisely.   In fact, Mr. King will not ask it
if it is not appropriate.   Let us have the Jury in and
let us deal with it and then shall we break for lunch
after that.  M?r. King, can you just give m& an idea of
                                                                 $1
                                                   W. W. W. JACItSON


     how long you are likely to be after that.   As long as
     you like but I just want to know.

          MR. KING:  Lunch is always a good time to ponder
     and think and usually results in far less than one
     expects.  I do not think there are many more matters I
     would want to develop but there are one or two.

           (The Jury and the Witness returned to Cour t )

Q.       MR. KING:  Mr. Jackson, just before the break your
     evidence was when you were in the Control Box, having
     got there either at the time of or just after the game
     had stopped at six minutes past three or thereabouts,
     Mr. Duckenfield did not tell you about his decision
     which he had made to open various concertina gates and
     allow in a large number of people? - A. Yes.

Q. That is what you were telling us? - A. That is correct.

Q. Can I ask you this;  did you at that time - that is
   still round about six minutes past three - make enquiry
   when you were in the Control Box as to how the
   situation had arisen? - A. Things at that time were
   pretty frenetic as you can gather and what I did,
   having looked down to the pitch, seen a lot of people
   who had gone on to the pitch I went down to see what
   actually had happened.  I then spoke to Superintendent
   Greenwood.  We then became totally absorbed in the
   whole incident because there was a lot of things that
   we needed to do.  So I did not make any further
   enquiries at that stage. It would be normal practice
   when we wrapped up an incident at the end to look at it
   and try and find out all the nitty gritty details.

Q. So your answer is in effect that at six minutes past
   three or thereabouts in the Police Control Box you did
   not make enquiry at that time as to how the situation
   had arisen? - A. I did not make any further enquiries,
   no.

Q. My next question is this;  did you at some stage after
   six minutes past three learn what in fact had happened,
   that is to say, that a number of concertina exit gates
   had been opened before kick-off on Police authority to
   allow in a large number of people into the ground? - A.
   Yes, I did.  It was something I told the Chief
   Constable about.



                   r
                                                           52

                                            W. W. W. JACKSON


Q. When did you learn this? - A. I think roughly the time
   was about 4 o'clock-ish, just after 4 o'clock-ish, when
   I asked for Mr. marshall to come to the Control Box,
   because at that time we had completed the rescue and we
   spoke about it, and Mr. Marshall told me, and Mr.
   Duckenfield, at that time what had taken place, the
   full circumstances.

Q. Sorry, you learnt the information from Mr. Marshall? -
   A. Well, Mr. Marshall, and Mr. Duckenfield was in the
   Control Box at the time.

Q. I understand that but you actually learnt the
   information from the lips of Mr. Marshall? - A. I think
   they were both telling me what the full circumstances
   were.

Q. I want to make this absolutely clear because it is
   depending on your answer what I now ask you, are you
   saying - at 4.15 you say? - A. I think that was the
   time.  I would have to look back at my transcript.

Q. Are you saying at that time - let me take it in stages
   - you learnt from Mr. Marshall that the concertina
   gates had been opened on Police authority to allow a
   large number of people in? - A. That is correct.

Q. Did you learn from Mr. Marshall - just deal precisely
   with that question - on whose authority the gates had
   been opened? - A. I can't remember whether Mr.
   Duckenfield actually said at that time, "I opened the
   gates at that particular time".

Q.   I am going to move on to Mr. Duckenfield in a moment. I
     want to concentrate on what you learnt from Mr.
     Marshall.   From Mr. Marshall you learnt that the gates
     had been opened on Police authority? - A. Yes.

Q. Did Mr. Marshall give you any information as to whose
   authority had been given? - A. I don't think that Mr.
   Marshall said at that time.  I think he said that "I",
   that is he, had authorised the gates to be opened.

Q. Sorry, who had authorised the gates to be opened? - A.
   Mr. Marshall, I think.

Q. You mean you were saying that Mr. Marshall was saying
   that he, Mr. Marshall, had authorised the gates to be
   opened? - A. That is right.

Q.   When did you learn, if at all, that Mr. Duckenfield had
     given the authority to open the gates? - A. I think I
     learned that when we were discussing it a bit later on.
                 f
                                       W. W. W.
                                             ^ JACKSON
                                                  --   %


Who was discussing it a bit later on, with whom? - A.
Mr. Marshall, myself and Mr. Duckenfield.

Where was this discussion taking place? - A. I think
the discussion took place when we had finished at the
scene, on the way to the Police Station.

So we are talking about roughly what time? - A. I think
that would be sometime after 5 o'clock.

So were you on the day therefore given information by*
Mr. Duckenfield now I am talking about, first that the
concertina gates had been opened on Police authority to
allow this large number of people in? - A. Yes, there
was a general discussion and Mr. Duckenfield explained
that.

In the light of that I ask you this question, prior to
that, in which you were learning that the gates had
been opened on Police authority by Mr. Duckenfield, to
allow this large number of people in, had you ever been
given a different explanation as to how the gates had
come to be opened by Mr. Duckenfield? - A. No.  There
was a conversation which took place when I think it was
Mr. Kelly came into the Control Box, which I have
explained to Lord Chief Justice Taylor.  I am not sure
what all the conversation was but somebody had said
that the gates were stormed, and of course in a way
that would be right because I think there were two
gates stormed.

Let me take it in stages.  You say this was a
conversation taking place where? - A. I think that
conversation took place when Mr. Kelly of the FA came
into the Control Box.  It was raised at Lord Chief
Justice Taylor's Inquiry.  I couldn't remember what the
conversation was.

Where was Mr. Duckenfield at this time? - A. Mr.
Duckenfield was in the Control Box.

What was it that you understood somebody was saying? -
A. Something to the effect that the gates had been
stormed.  Can I say at that time the Control Box was
extremely busy and my main concern was in dealing with
the people who were injured.  I did not take much
notice of the conversation.

Just let me ask you one further question.  Can you help
us on who that somebody was? - A. Well I think it was
Mr. Duckenfield.  I think Mr. Duckenfield was
explaining to Mr. Kelly what had happened.
                                          W. W. W. JACKSON


Final question:  did Mr. Duckenfield in that discussion
in your presence say that he had authorised the gates
to be opened, in that discussion? - A. I don't know.

You don't know? - A. I don't know.

So be it.

     MR. KING:    Sir, that would be a convenient
moment.

     THE CORONER:   Lunch until 2 o'clock.     The same
rule as before about the Witness.

                 (Luncheon Adjournment)
                                                             55


                                      W.W.W. JACKSON



Q. Mr. Jackson, I hope I have only got a few more questions.
   You have however painted a picture of the rescue operation
   and what was going on in the Control Box at 6-minutes-past-3
   of efficiency and everything going well.  That is the
   picture you painted? - A. Yes.

Q. I am mindful, and I put it to you so you know, of an
   instruction which the Coroner has given which is not
   for advocates to go into the detail of the rescue
   operation in any depth because it has been ruled to
   be not relevant to this Inquest, but I must ask you one
   or two things and I will be very brief in the light of
   those answers.

         One, it is right, isn't it, that there was a message
   through Mr. Duckenfield from the Control Box calling up
   all available Officers.  Did you hear that message? -
   A. I think that was called by Mr. Duckenfield just prior
   to when I got there.

Q. Did you hear it? - A. I don't think so.

Q. Because I want to ask you about it actually mentioning
   in that message a pitch invasion? - A. Yes.

Q. You would agree with that? - A. Yes, we are going back
   two years. Have you got the log of the incident that
   I could refresh my memory?

Q. I can't help you on that and I can only put to you that
   the message ___ A. I would think that is correct.

Q. At 6-minutes-past-3 you would agree with me that
   Mr. Duckenfield did not seem to be aware that there
   had been any injuries, you told me that this morning?
   - A. Yes.

Q. It is right to say that you didn't hear any orders
   going out from the Control Box when you were there
   at 6-minutes-past-3 organising Officers as to what
   they should do at the perimeter track or going down
   the tunnel to rescue people, you heard no such command
   orders being given did you? - A. No, but let me say
   this:   the circumstances were such that Mr. Greenwood
   was there and Mr. Murray had been sent down and there
   were a number of other senior Officers involved in the
   rescue.

          I think you will appreciate and I think it has
    been said earlier on, there was a lot of noise and
    therefore the rescue was better dealt with at ground
    level than by those sort of directions from
    Mr. Duckenfield.
                                    W.W.W. JACKSON



      Mr. Duckenfield and I, of course, were implementing
the major incident plan so you have got two aspects
here going at this stage.  One, you have got the major
incident plan being implemented and that is very very
important because I explained earlier on that we would
have a sterile area outside.  That means the ambulances
could get to the hospital as quickly as possible and
the other part is that the rescue was being led at that
time by Mr. Greenwood.

You are not suggesting, are you, that when you got down
on the pitch side where Mr. Greenwood was that you
heard Mr. Greenwood organising Officers, for example
to go round to the tunnel from the back, to take people
out from the back.  You did not hear any such orders
being given, did you? - A. No, I didn't.

It would be right to say, wouldn't it, and I put it to
you that when you arrived when Mr. Greenwood was there,
when you went down from the Control Box at 6—minutes—past-
it was just confusion when you got there at the side
outside the pens?

      MR. RUSSELL:  Perhaps we can establish where the
meeting took place because I think the evidence so far
from this witness is that the meeting took place outside
or in the vicinity of Gate 3 itself.  I think that is
a matter that I will be able to clear up in due course
if it is not done so by my learned friend.

      MR. KING: Where was it you met Mr. Greenwood?
- A. If Mr. Greenwood said that is where I met him that
is where I met him.

Sorry, I don't think Mr. Greenwood hasspoken to us
yet, Mr.   Jackson. We have not   heard from Mr. Greenwood.
- A. I recollect it was at the    south side that Ispoke
to Mr. Greenwood.

The south side of what? - A. Of Leppings Lane pens on
the pitch.

Were you on the pitch or on the perimeter   track?   - A.
Sorry, I was on the pitch.

Did you ever get as far as the perimeter track? - A. No
I didn't.

Did you ever get as far therefore as the perimeter
fence? - A. No, I didn't.

So you can't help us as to exactly what was going on at
the perimeter? fence? - A. Well I could see what was
going on.   The gates were open and Police Officers were
round the gate and were bringing people out.
                                                           57


                                         W.W.W. JACKSON



Q. Did you see other Officers just standing there totally
   inactive as if frozen? - A. Yes, I have explained that
   to Lord Justice Taylor that there were a number of
   Officers stood back, but the circumstances were such
   that the gates were as you know small in size and you
   could only get so many Police Officers in there so you
   would really confuse the issue if all the Police Officers
   got in there at the same time.

Q. That is of course approaching the problem from the front.
   You have already answered my question about you did not
   hear any orders for Officers to go down the tunnel from
   the back.  Can I ask you this:   the Tannoy system, while
   you were there on the pitch did you hear the Tannoy being
   used? - A. I didn't hear it being used on the pitch bearing
   in mind the noise, but what I can say is that in the Control
   Room Mr. Duckenfield was instructing the Officer to tell
   people to keep calm and clear the pitch.

Q. Did you hear that message ever being broadcast? - A. I
   heard it being said in the Control Room.

Q. I understand that answer, did you ever hear it being
   broadcast? - A. I saw the Officer broadcasting it.

Q.   Did you     hear it? - A. Well I could not     hear itoutside.

Q.    Did you    ever hear a Tannoy message for     example asking
     fans on the Leppings Lane terrace to move back out of
     the tunnel by use of Tannoy? - A. I cannot recollect
     that.

Q. What you do recollect is some time later, and I suggest
   it must have been at least 13-minutes-past-3, probably
   a bit later, arriving round the pens where Chief
   Superintendent Nesbit was.   Do you remember that? - A.
   Yes, I think he arrived there about 12 or 13-minutes-past-3.

Q.   And isn't it     right when he arrived he took charge and
     organised a chain of Officers to get people out of the
     pens which had not been there before? - A. Two things:
     he would take charge because he was the Chief Superintendent;
     no doubt speak to Mr. Greenwood and Mr. Greenwood was quite
     actively involved in the rescue prior to that.

Q.   Prior to the arrival of Mr. Nesbit did you see any
     organisation of a chain of Officers to get people out
     of the pens by way of a chain? - A. No, there wasn't a
     chain but Mr. Greenwood was very active.

Q. Just as a matter of fact this major disaster plan was
   put into operation at what time do you say? - A. I can't
   remember the dxact time, that should be on the log.
                                    W.W.W.   JACKSON
                                       ... . '
                                             i             *



I only say that because I thought you gave us a time
of 10-minutes-past-3? - A. Yes, you have reminded me.
10-past-3 the plan was put into operation.

I think to be fair to you, I don't want to mislead you,
the earliest time it has ever been suggested is
6-minutes-past-3, that is the earliest time? - A. That
would be when Mr. Duckenfield called operation support,
Rio 6 and Rio 7.

So in this apparently efficient rescue attempt it was
not until 10-minutes-past-3 that the major disaster
plan was put into operation? - A. Yes, the major
disaster plan was put into operation before then and
the reason for that was I had made special arrangements
with the Force Control Room for a Chief Inspector, I
think it was a Sergeant and a Constable, to have a
radio there which had VHF and UHF linked into the match
so when the ambulances were called, the fleet of
ambulances were called at 3.07, a Chief Inspector
automatically took up the major incident plan and we
confirmed that.  We also made sure, and I think you
will see on the log at 3.12 that there was a sterile
area which again I have repeated was very very important
in the speed of taking those injured to hospital.

I don't want to argue whether it was speedy or not in
relation to when people were injured or met their
deaths, I just want to get times.

      It certainly is the case that before you entered
the Police Control Box, the time the match had either
just been stopped or just before it had been stopped,
no major disaster plan had been put into operation
at that stage.  That is right, isn't it? - A. No, I
think ....

That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, I wanted to just
explain.

That is all right, you can explain, but I just wanted
to have a clear answer to my question.   That is right?
- A. That is correct. What I was going to say, bear
in mind we are into a developing situation.    Now obviously
we have first of all got to realise that we have got a
major disaster on our hands.   You know, is it half a
dozen people that are injured or is the incident in
a different scale?  Now all of that takes a little
bit of time.

I don't want to bandy the evidence with you as to when
things could have been realised, Mr. Jackson, because
you are not the right person for me to deal with that.
                                                               59


A                                         W.W.W. JACKSON   .



            Just finally on that, just as a matter of fact
      because you are going on about the calling of ambulances,
      you can confirm, can't you, that as regards requests for
      help of doctors and nurses in the crowd, that was not
B     until about 29-minutes-past-3? - A. Yes, I think that
      was a bit later, I am not sure of the time.

    Q. As regards - it is the final point before the learned
       Coroner no doubt shuts me up - there was not a request
       for cutting gear, for the Fire Brigade to be made until
       13-minutes-past-3? — A. Whether that was the exact time
       or not, that is the time on the log. There can be a
       delay between the Officer writing up the log and the
C      actual call, but I would accept that is the time on the
       log.
             MR. KING:  I won't go into the alleged efficiency
       of the rescue operation any further Mr. Jackson.  Thank
       you very much.



D




E




F




G

                    r
                         Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE




H
                                          w .   W. W. JACKSON


           Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

Can I just refer you very briefly to two documents that
have been mentioned?   First of all there is the ACPO
Guide, "Policing at Football Stadia".   Is it right that
that is a guide that is for general circulation to all
Police Forces in the country? -A. Yes, it is.

By its very nature it cannot deal with the specific
features of individual grounds around the country, it has
to be in very general terms? - A. That is correct.

Turning in a similar vein to the Standing Instructions.
There are a number of grounds in South Yorkshire? - A.
Yes.

Is it fair to say the Standing Instructions are equally
intended to be as a guide? - A. That is correct.    The
reason I did those are two-fold;   one to up-date because
of the Popplewell recommendations at the Bradford fire
and secondly to bring about some uniformity in the
county.    However, I do, and I tell all Divisional
Commanders, that they are flexible because you need to
look at each different ground which may be slightly
different.

That is very helpful.   It is just that answers to
questions put by my learned friend Mr. King seemed to be
suggesting that you should have had an in-depth knowledge
of the particular features of particular grounds and how
they ought to be policed.   You would not expect to have
that knowledge, would you? - A. No.   That would be the
local Commander.   It would be impossible for me to keep
up to date on all that data because it can be changing on
a regular basis.

So you rely on a senior Officer who is the local
Commander, who we know in relation to Sheffield Wednesday
immediately before the disaster was Mr. Mole and then
subsequently Mr. Duckenfield? - A. That is correct, sir.

One example of where your Standing Instructions were
altered in relation to Sheffield Wednesday, we know there
is a standard form Operational Order appended to them but
that does not, of course, include any details about the
filling of pens at league matches? - A. That is correct.

That is something that was brought in by a local
Commander to deal with particular local features? - A.
That is correct.

It was also put to you rather obliquely that there is a
danger unless fthe Police and the club liaise closely,
                                            W. W. W. JACKSON


that there will be confusion as to the role of stewards?
- A. Yes.

Would it be fair to say that you would expect your local
Commander to know where stewards are on the day? - A.
Yes.

If I told you that Mr. Mole has told us that he expected
to see, and did see, stewards positioned in accordance
with the Schedule to the Safety Certificate, that would
accord with your expectations   of what he should do   asthe
local Commander? - A. That is correct.

It was also mentioned briefly   that the stewards would be
briefed by Inspectors on the day and that would be       a way
that they would know where the stewards were positioned,
that that would be one of their prime intentions in
briefing the stewards?   Is that fair? - A. That is fair.

So if we had evidence from Chief Inspector Creaser that
on the day of the semi-final he overheard the briefing
given by Inspector White to the stewards at the Leppings
Lane end, and that he himself knew exactly where those
stewards were going to be deployed, that would not
surprise you because that is what you would have
expected? - A. Yes, I would have expected that.

Just lastly, just so we can wrap up any attempt to
suggest there may have been confusion, can I show you
this document?

       MR. BEECHEY:    That is C.516.

     MR. CATCHPOLEs   This is a Sheffield Wednesday
internal communication.   We see that one of the people
to whom it is circulated, and it is underlined, is
Inspector Sewell.   It is in the box at the top on the
left hand side.   It says, "To:  Inspector Sewell." - A.
Right.

At the end on the very last page we see, I believe it is
Inspector Sewell's writing,  Spoken with Sharon Lane..."
who is an employee of the club suggesting amendments.
This is, as we can...

       THE CORONER:    Whose did you say the handwriting
was?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    It is Inspector Sewell's
handwriting, sir.   It comes from the Police bundle of the
Taylor Inquiry.

       THE CORONjER:   You are putting this to the witness?
                                          W. W. W. JACKSON


     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Do you recognise the handwriting at
all? - A. Well, I don't know...   I would accept it.

You would accept it? - A. Yes.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   We see this is the instructions for
match day staff and the memo at the front asking for any
amendments or additions which could be recommended to all
the people to whom it is circulated. - A. Yes.

Indeed, if you look through it very briefly you will see
that it accords with the Safety Certificate in that it
deals really with gatemen and turnstile operators and
stewards working in the stand.    However, it is clear,
from that document at least, that the Liaison Officer
Inspector Sewell, would have had knowledge of what
stewards were briefed and what instructions they had been
given? - A. Yes, that is correct.

So no chance of any confusion as far as you are
concerned? - A. That is correct.

Just to be one hundred percent certain of that, there is
actually in the Standing Instructions that Police
Officers, if they have any fears at all about matters
giving rise to public safety at sports stadia, have to
bring that to the attention of the Superintendent who may
then bring it to the attention of the Officer Working
Party so that action can be taken? - A. That is correct.

As far as you are aware, no such action was ever
necessary at Sheffield Wednesday? - A. That is correct.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Mr. Jackson, as you were present at the semi-final and as
you were of higher rank than Mr. Duckenfield and he was
inexperienced at being Commander at a semi-final, did you
feel it was necessary to go and make checks from 2.00 pm
onwards, to go and have a look around the ground? - A.
No, I was quite satisfied that Mr. Duckenfield could
handle a semi-final match.

So you just left it entirely to Mr. Duckenfield and you
just went there to watch the match?   Am I right? - A.
No.   I was on weekend cover.   What I have said is that
it was my practice generally to go to the most major
incident on the weekend so I went there and popped into
the Control Box just to see that Mr. Duckenfield was OK.

So you didn't ,find the necessity to go out in Leppings
Lane or Penisione Road or anywhere like that? - A. I
                                         W. W. W. JACKSON


think this would cause a great deal of confusion because
Mr. Duckenfield was the Commander on the day.   Had I
decided to do anything then I think it would have caused
confusion for all the other people under his command.
They would then begin to wonder who was running the
match.

If he found there were difficulties, as they were indeed
in the Leppings Lane area, would he be able to ask you
for assistance that day? - A. Yes.   If Mr. Duckenfield
wanted me that day he knew exactly where I was.

How would he get in contact with you? - A. There are two
ways.   One, I had a bleeper with me and the other was by
tannoying the stand.   A third way was by sending
somebody from the perimeter track up to the Directors'
box to see me.

If he had a difficulty in make a major decision, if he
felt uncertain, he could have come to you for advice? -
A. Yes.

Did he in fact ask you for any assistance when he made
the two major decisions, the one to close Leppings Lane
and the other one to open the exit gates? - A. No.




         MR. ISAACS:    Sir, with respect, I don't
A
                                                                 ‘6 4

                                                    W. W. W. JACKSON


            MR. ISAACS: With respect, sir, I do not think
       there is any evidence to show that Mr. Duckenfield made
       the decision to close Leppings Lane.  As I understand
B      it, that is Mr. Marshall's province and he made that
       decision.

            THE CORONER:   You are quite right.

            MRS. McBRIEN:  I am sorry if I have got it wrong.
       It was Mr. Marshall's request I believe.

            THE CORONER:  It does not matter, Mrs. McBrien.
       The answer is the same whoever it was.

    Q. You were not asked by Mr. Duckenfield to help him make
       up his mind on major decisions that day? - A. No, sir.

    Q. So that day from your position you were not aware that
       the turnstile area was congested and that orderly
       queues were not being formed there that day.  You knew
       nothing about that Leppings Lane end? - A. Not until we
D      discussed it some time later.

    Q. You did not have a radio then so that you could hear
       messages being transmitted? - A. No, I did not have a
       radio with me.

    Q. You said you accepted the Operational Order but you did
       say that improvements were made each year, if I
       remember rightly, and so are you saying there is room
       for improvement usually to the Operational Order? - A.
       We always have a debriefing right down to a fairly low
       level, to Sergeant level, and the Sergeants encourage
       the Officers on the ground to submit a debriefing form.
       That is looked through by the local Commander to see if
       there is any improvement that can be made.  That is
       done in all major operations.

    Q. It appears nobody noticed a defect in the monitoring of
       the terrace.  Am I right? - A. I am not sure what you
       are talking about there.

    Q. As I see it, there did not seem to be adequate
       monitoring of the Leppings Lane terrace?

           THE CORONER:  No, Mrs. McBrien.  First of all, we
      are not going to over all the ground again and secondly
      this Officer has already told us several times that he
      had no direct practical experience of the detail of the
      operation at Sheffield Wednesday and so that is not a
      proper question.  The next question.




H
A
                                                                        '65

                                                           W. W. W. JACKSON


              MRS. McBRIEN: Does that mean, sir, I am not to
         ask any question related to the access points on the
         terrace?
B
                THE CORONER:    That is quite correct.    You are not
         to.

              MRS. McBRIEN:      I have got quite a bit relating to
         that I am afraid.

    Q. On page 65 in the Taylor Inquiry, it is Mr. Collins'
       examination of you, Mr. Jackson, it says that fans were
       actually asked to come late to the match? - A. I am
       sorry?

    Q. Fans were actually asked to come late to the match.
       Would you like to turn to page... - A. I am sorry, I
       just cannot hear what you are saying.

    Q. Fans were asked to come late to the match? - A. Fans, I
       am with you, yes.
D
    Q. On page 65? - A. I remember that, yes.

    Q. It is just to the side of letter D? - A. I can explain
       that.

    Q. I would like you to read it if you would please?

                THE CORONER:    Wait a minute.   Letter D did you
         say?

                MRS. MCBRIEN:    Yes.

              THE CORONER:  Just read me what it says, just the
         first two or three words?

              MRS. McBRIEN:      "Can I go back, Mr. Jackson, to our
         Tab 11".

              MR. KING:  It is the first day of evidence and,
         sir, it would be Day 9.

              THE CORONER:      We have two page 65s.    Yes, I have
         found it.

              MRS. McBRIEN:      Would you mind reading that, Mr.
         Jackson?

    Q.        THE CORONER:  All right, just read it to yourself
         first? - A. Which paragraph, sir?
                                                                      fc6
                                                         W. W. W. JACKSON


    Q. Letter D where it says, "Can I go back, Mr. Jackson, to
       our Tab 11"? - A. Yes, I have read that.

B   Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: Would you mind reading that aloud
         please? - A. It says:

             "Can I go back, Mr. Jackson, to Tab 11. We
             were looking at 9.3.      Can I ask you to look at
             9.5 because since you wrote it or are
             responsible for it, you will know its meaning
             and we have had some, I think, discussion about
             what it actually meant.      What it says is:   'At
             this time previous intelligence inquiries will
             have b e e n ...expected and their mode of travel.
             Once known...and arrival at the designated
             parking areas at a time shortly preceding kick-
             off.   This strategy of delayed arrival of
             visitors reduces the       time for pre-match
             disorder problems'.        Have you got that?"

    Q. Thank you very much.  I understand that to mean that
D      fans were actually encouraged to come late, later,
       late-ish? - A. That is not correct, sir.   In fact, I
       explained at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry the reason
       that was written is that   once we had the intelligence
       and information, whatever the match was, if itwas a
       match C category or a B category, then we could
       determine the proper time of arrival of the fans.   You
       will note in the Semi Final the time was, I think it
       was twelve o'clock for the fans, and the letters I
       wrote asked the Chief Officers of Police of Notts,
       Merseyside, the people who prepare the match orders, to
       get the fans there early for the Semi Final so that we
       could get them sitting in to enjoy the match.

              MR. PAYNE:  I know that Mrs. McBrien would not
         want to be leaving part of the picture only with the
         Jury and really all she has done so far is just to read
         out a question which was being put by Counsel.
         Actually if one reads on one can see the answer that
         Mr. Jackson gave which is very much along the lines of
         what he is saying now but so that the Jury can get the
         full picture perhaps that ought to be done, down to the
         end of the page.

              THE CORONER:  It is substantially what you have
         said but by all means read your reply, "Have you got
         that?".

              MR. PAYNE:  He read out a chunk of information and
         he said, "Have you got that?" and Mr. Jackson said,
         "Yes, I have".r Perhaps he would be just allowed to
         read the next question and answer please.




H
                                               W. W. W. JACKSON



    THE WITNESS:    The answer was:

    "No, certainly that is not what I am intimating
    and I am quite sure our Divisional Officers who
    are responsible..."

      THE CORONER: No, read the question as well the
next question, "Now to the lay reader..."? - A. It
says:

    "Now, to the lay reader or to the ordinary
    reader of that, it suggests that what you are
    encouraging is that people should arrive at the
    ground as late as possible to avoid disorder
    before the match. - A. No, certainly that is
    not what I am intimating and I am quite sure
    our Divisional Officers who are responsible for
    policing football matches understand what that
    means, and what it does mean is, depending on
    the numbers you have and the intelligence you
    have, you should gear your time to allow them
    to go in in sufficient time without hanging
    about outside."

     MRS. McBRIEN: Thank you.   I may get this wrong
and I think, sir, if you would not mind about the
coaches arriving one hour before kick-off.  I have not
got it in front of me but I would like to ask this
Officer that question, if he was aware, not the
ruling...

     THE CORONER: The Traffic    Commissioners guide.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes, Idid put it right the last
time I asked it but I have not got it with me now.

     THE CORONER:     Shall Iask it for you?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Please, yes, if you would not mind.

    THE CORONER:  What Mrs. McBrien is wanting, the
Traffic Commissioners had issued a guidance document
suggesting that coaches were not to arrive prior to one
hour before kick-off.  Were you aware of that at that
time? - A. I am aware of the Traffic Commissioners
guidance.  It is in fact guidance.  We are in fact
dealing with a Semi Final match and so consequently my
letters extend that time quite considerably.
                                                           68    „
                                             W. W. W. JACKSON


          THE CORONER:    I got it right, didn't I?

          MRS. McBRIEN:   Oh, yes, thank you:

Q. Another matter relating to the time, on the ticket I
   believe it says that spectators should take up their
   positions 15 minutes before kick-off, so they are not
   really being encouraged to come and sit down one hour
   before kick-off, are they?

          THE CORONER:   I think that is a detail and I
     don't think this is an appropriate question to ask.    He
     has given you an answer as to what he did in this
     particular match.

Q*        MRS. McBRIEN:   Did you find, Mr. Jackson, that it
     was important to find out exactly what had happened
     when you saw people going over the perimeter fence?
     Did you feel yourself that you needed to know what
     exactly had caused it? - A. I got involved in the
     developing situation, as I have said, when I reached
     the Control Box, saw the people on the pitch, went
     down, spoke to Mr. Greenwood, and then got back up
     there.  There was a developing situation which was then
     leading to the disaster which unfolded, and as far as I
     was concerned my immediate job was then to make sure
     that Mr. Duckenfield was performing his task as site
     Commander, to make sure that the rescue was going on,
     on the pitch, to make sure that the casualty bureau was
     set up, to make sure that the Detective Chief
     Superintendent who would be running both the casualty
     bureau and the temporary mortuary was available, all of
     those things took up my attention and that was my prime
     job at that time.  Actually what happened was secondary
     at that stage because the prime job was rescuing those
     people in Leppings Lane and the terraces and on the
     pitch, and getting them off to hospital.

Q.   Normally if there is an accident on the road do Police
     Officers just concern themselves with dealing with the
     injured people, or do they find out what caused the
     injuries to the people? - A. Their primary task is
     saving life and the cause is always secondary.

Q. But it is important, isn't it, in the event of an
   accident on the road, to find out what happened? - A.
   Only secondary.   The primary task is to save life and
   the cause can be dealt with at some time later.

Q.    When you went to near the perimeter fence you were not
     aware of what had caused it, so surely other people
     there too wojild be feeling that way, they wouldn t know
     either?    It bould cause confusion for the fans, the
     Police Officers, for everybody concerned, couldn't it,
                                        W. w. W. JACKSON


unless somebody gave out a message to say what had
happened and why it had happened? - A. I think you will
find that Mr. Greenwood was dealing with the situation
at that level.  The noise in a football ground in those
circumstances, you have got to listen to it to realise
it would be very difficult for people receiving
messages.  In fact, I think that was the case on the
day, so I think the rescue attempt was being dealt with
at ground level, which was in my view the best wav to
do it.

But the senior Officers, the Ground Commander inside or
outside, they would be passing messages via their
radios, wouldn't they, and they would also be able to
hear messages that were passed from the Control Room,
wouldn't they? - A. Yes.

50 is it possible that people there, Police Officers,
would have heard the message to open the gates and even
51t • • • •

     THE CORONER:   He can't possibly say what somebody
else might or might not have heard.  We have heard from
a lot of Officers already what they heard.  He can't
tell you, he didn't hear it, he didn't have a radio.
You must try another question.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I thought with his expert
knowledge, sir, that he ....

     THE CORONER:   It is no use asking his expert
knowledge as to whether somebody would have heard
something.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   So I can't....

     THE CORONER:    And also --- no, I have already
told you what I say.   Carry on, next question.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Because people had not heard a
message, they had no access to knowing what was going
on, they could think it was a pitch invasion, couldn t
they, and not the overcrowding, if nobody told them
what it was? They could think wrongly and react
wrongly to the situation that was developing? - A. I
think the circumstances were that whilst the rescue was
going on people were aware of what job they actually
had to do.

What I am saying though, if Police Officers thought
that fans had done something wrong, that they had come
into that Ground in an unruly way, then they would be
reacting in a different way to if there was different
circumstances, wouldn't they? - A. I think people were
                                       W. W. W. JACKSON


well aware of what was going on. We had an ambulance
on the pitch; people were being rescued; the fans and
Police Officers were involved in taking people from
Leppings Lane to ambulances etcetera, so I am quite
happy about that.

But in your experience there did you feel that a lot of
Police Officers did actually think it was a pitch
invasion? - A. I think in the initial stage there may
have been some confusion, very shortly, as to what
actually had transpired.  It was only when the
situation started developing we realised what we had on
our hands, and if it would be helpful what I tried to
say before is if you look at other disasters and
compare this one with it, the Police acted remarkably
quick in realising what had happened and then dealing
with the injured and getting them off to hospital.

I am just thinking if a message would have gone out
that gates had been opened, the Police may have
conditioned themselves to thinking, "Oh, we may have
overcrowding there", rather than the other way?

     THE CORONER:   I think that is an interesting
point but I don't think Mr. Jackson is the right man to
deal with it.  I can see what you are getting at, but
that is one of the issues which the Jury will have to
think about when they assess the evidence.  I don't
think we can ask him to express an opinion on that.   I
think that is being fair to you.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes:

do you think because there was a minor pitch invasion
at the semi-final in 1988, that Officers on the
perimeter track were conditioned to thinking, "We must
keep these people back this year", that was in 1989? -
A. I can't really say what was going on in the
Officers' minds other than that the Officers would do
everything they felt possible to relieve the situation.

Mr. Jackson, were you aware that there was a coach in
Leppings Lane with 50 Officers in it? - A. Sorry.

There was a coach in Leppings Lane and there were 50
Officers on the coach, and they were there to deal with
any public order situation that arose.  Were you aware
of that? - A. Yes.  I was aware that was what was going
to happen.

Do you know if those Officers were used that day? - A.
I am sorry, I don't know.
                                        W. W. W. JACKSON


Did you ultimately take control of the situation in the
Stadium that day at some point? - A. In the aftermath?

Yes. - A. The circumstances were that, if you look at
our major incident plan, Mr. Duckenfield automatically
becomes Site Commander and that means he deals with
everything in the area.  My responsibility is a bit
wider than that and that responsibility I have
explained, because if I had got involved as Site
Commander as such, if another incident develops
elsewhere then I would not be available to take the
necessary action there.  I was dealing with other
issues.

But there did come a point, did there, when you did
take over the operation that day? - A. I think
ostensibly you could say that I at that stage, when we
have got a major disaster, would be overall Commander,
dealing with the issues that I have mentioned:   making
sure that we had got a casualty bureau; making sure
that the major incident plan has been implemented;
making sure that the Head of CID is on his way; making
sure that we will eventually deal with the press
because there was a lot of interest there.  In other
words, doing things that the Site Commander did not
have a responsibility for.

Can you remember what time you did take over control?

     THE CORONER:   He did not say he took over
control.  He has told you twice that he did not, except
in this specialised way:

When would you have assumed that role? - A. As soon as
we realised that we had a major disaster on our hands
and there were large scale injuries and a lot of people
who had died.  As soon as that realisation takes place
then my responsibility would be as an overall
Commander; Mr. Duckenfield would remain as Site
Commander dealing with all the general issues that were
taking place.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   You mentioned the media would be
very interested in what was going on.  Now, they don't
tell the truth even when they are told the truth.

     THE CORONER:    No.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    I know I should not say that.

   ^ THE CORONER:    I am not defending the media, I
don't mind a£>out that.  They can look after themselves,
but Mrs. McBrien, it is not relevant, that is the
                                       W. W. W. JACKSON


point.  It does not matter what the media do or say.
Forget the media.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I didn't put that over well at all
- I wish I would have done.  I lost my opportunity.

Did you know that the events that were taking place on
the Leppings Lane Terrace were associated with the
opening of a gate? Did you know that at all, at a
later stage? - A. At a later stage, yes.   When we say
associated with it, I would think that is really a
matter for the Jury to decide because ....

     THE CORONER:   I think the real question, which
you have already answered twice I think, is did you
know anything about what was happening outside at the
gates at the time when you left the Directors' Box? -
A. No, I didn't.

     THE CORONER:   What he knew later I don't think
matters.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   What I really wanted to know was
did you find out at some stage, let's say half-past -3,
just say that was the time, that the events were
related to the opening of a gate? Did somebody tell
you at about that point? - A. I was told by Mr.
Marshall whilst Mr. Duckenfield was in the Control Box
that the gates had been opened.

Yes, and I think you said that was at 4.15, wasn't it?
- A. I think that was roughly about the time.

So until then you knew nothing of who had opened the
gates? - A. That is what I have said, yes.

I thought you said earlier that you heard somebody,
before 4.15, saying that the gates had been stormed? -
A. That is correct.

What time was that, please? - A. I think that was about
3.15.

And I think if I remember rightly you said it was Mr.
Duckenfield who said that? - A. Yes.

Can you explain more fully please what storming the
gates means?

     THE CORONER:    No, Mrs. McBrien, I don't think we
need that.   He told you what he heard, that is all he
can say.   Neyt question.
                                       w. W. W. JACKSON


     MRS. McBRIEN:   So you did not send anybody around
to find out the state of the gate, or ask anybody near
the gate how this had happened? - A. What I did do,
fairly early on I asked that the Detective Chief
Superintendent contact me to do three jobs, to co­
ordinate:  to make sure the casualty bureau was
running, to make sure it was linked to the mortuary,
and also to set up a system of inquiry to find out what
actually happened, and that system was set up.




           /Q. What I was wondering
                                      W.W.W. JACKSON



What I was wondering was if you had sent somebody around
to see how the gate had been broken down or how the
stadium had been invaded ....

      THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien.  Don't answer
that   question.  It gets us nowhere, I am sorry.  It is
a very interesting observation but I think if I was in
a situation where I was dealing with a rescue and had
tobalance that against establishing the detail of the
event I would choose the rescue and that is I think
what you have said, isn't it?

      THE WITNESS:     Yes sir.

      THE CORONER:  And you must accept his answer
on that whether you like it or not.

      MRS. McBRIEN: Would you say that generally Police
Officers ask a lot of questions. That is how they get
all their information?

       THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, no.      Please don't
 answer the question.
       MRS. McBRIEN: Mr. Jackson, I think you said there
 were no Tannoy announcements telling people there were
 injuries or fatalities.  Is that right? - A. Yes, I
 am going back two years and I think what happened is
 Mr. Duckenfield instructed I think it was the Sergeant^
 to ask people to keep calm and clear the pitch.  I don t
 recollect him saying or asking the Sergeant to say that
 there were injuries.

 No, I may be wrong about this, but if a message came
 over a Tannoy and I was a Nottingham Forest fan, I may
 read that altogether wrongly and think:  "Oh the Liverpool
 fans are on the pitch".
       THE CORONER:    No, Mrs. McBrien.   I am sorry.    Next
 question.
       This Officer has got very specialised and limited
 relevant evidence and I made that clear yesterday and
 everybody has abided by it and you must abide by it too.

       MRS. McBRIEN:    Thank you.


               Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

. Mr. Jackson, we know that at about 6-minutes-past-3 the
  match was stopped? - A. Yes.
                                                            75

                                       W.W.W. JACKSON



Q. Did you know at the time that it was Superintendent
   Greenwood who had run on the pitch to stop the match?
   - A. I found out afterwards it was Mr. Greenwood.

Q. Did you know that he had done so on his own initiative
   having appraised the situation? - A. Yes, I was told
   that.

Q. Stopping a match, in particular such a match as an
   F.A. Cup semi-final is a very serious and a very
   unusual step to take? - A. Yes, it is sir.

Q. If at that point Superintendent, if up to that point
   Superintendent Greenwood had been unable to make contact
   with Control before stopping the match, would you agree
   it would be natural for him to wish to report to Control
   or to a superior Officer the seriousness of the position
   that he had found which prompted him to stop the match?
   - A. Yes.

Q. A minute or two after he stopped the match he had an
   encounter with you on the pitch.  Is that right? - A.
   Yes, he did.

Q. The timing of this meeting, if I were to suggest it
   was about 7 or possibly 8-minutes-past-3, would you
   disagree? - A. No, that would be about right.

Q. The location of the meeting, to be certain about this,
   was on the pitch but near the corner flag by the South
   Stand and the South-West Terrace.  Is that right? -
   A. That is basically what I was saying at the south
   side.

Q. I ara sorry if I misunderstood you. First of all how
   long did that meeting take place, was it a matter of seconds
   or a matter of minutes? - A. Oh it was a very very short
   meeting.

Q. You see you have been asked by my learned friend Mr. King
   as to what orders you heard Superintendent Greenwood
   give or not give, but in reality were you by his side
   or within earshot for very long at all? - A. I think
   the meeting was so short.   I mean I know Mr. Greenwood
   very very well; he is considerably experienced at
   Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.   We very quickly
   realised there was some sort of serious incident
   developing and of course he was anxious to get on with
   the job and what I have said earlier on that in the
   circumstances I saw the need to go up to the Control
   Room where we had communications to make sure every­
   thing was being dealt with.
                f
                                                               76

                                        W.W.W. JACKSON



Q. He was keen, was he not, to impress upon you the
   seriousness of the situation?  - A. Yes.

Q. And is it fair to say that the seriousness  of the
   situation was impressed upon you? - A. Yes.

Q. As a result of which you went to the Control Box, as
   you have just told us, and authorised operational
   support? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. You   were asked by the Coroner whether subsequently you
   saw   Superintendent Greenwood? - A. Yes.

Q. And  your answer or words that I noted down is   that you
   saw him being "extremely busy"? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you now have any particular recollection as to what
   he was doing while being extremely busy? - A. We could
   both see from the Control Room that Mr. Greenwood was
   extremely busy in organising matters at the fence.

Q. Now you have been asked about the effect that
   Chief Superintendent Nesbit had when he arrived and
   we can see from photographs or videos that that was
   at about 11 or 12-minutes-past-3.

         Do I understand your perception of his arrival
   was it to displace the work being done by Superintendent
   Greenwood or to support the work being done by
   Superintendent Greenwood? — A. It was merely to support
   the excellent work already being done by Mr. Greenwood.

Q. Do you appreciate the difference I am meaning by the
   words "displaced" or "support"? _ A. Yes, I do.

Q. I wonder if with the benefit of some photographs we
   could assess quite what was being done or what was
   happening at the time Chief Superintendent Nesbit
   arrived or indeed before he arrived, and if I can
   invite first of all Sergeant Griffiths to put up
   C454.

         That, Mr. Jackson, is a photograph taken looking
   into Pen 3 and on the right-hand side of the perimeter
   fence we can see the gate to Pen 3. Can you appreciate
   what that photograph shows? - A. Yes.

Q. Now was one of the tasks that were being orchestrated
   by Mr. Greenwood the evacuation of supporters from
   Pen 3 via the gate in the perimeter fence? - A. Yes.

 Q. And can you make out in that photograph Police Officers,
    two with helmets, two I think without helmets and a
    fifth Officer in the gate seemingly handing out a person
    or a body from that pen? - A. Yes, I can.
                                    W.W.W. JACKSON



Whether or not you choose to call that a chain, but
clearly there is some co-ordinated action between Police
Officers there to evacuate at the time that photograph
was taken a person from the pen? - A. Yes, I have always
been satisfied that Mr. Greenwood did an excellent job
in the rescue attempt and that Mr. Nesbit came along
and supported what was being done.

That was one of the things that were happening at the
front and the time of this photograph, I am sorry before
moving on, is before indeed the match had been stopped
at 4-minutes-past-3 so that would be before you had even
arrived at the Control Box? — A. That is correct.

Can I please invite Sergeant Griffiths to put up C450.
That is a photograph, Mr. Jackson, taken at 8-minutes-past-3
and shows Pens 2 and 3? - A. Yes.

Will you confirm for me at that time Police Officers had
already entered into Pen 2 and we can see them in Pen 2
near the radial fence between Pens 2 and 3?

       THE CORONER:  Mr. Russell, I have to be fair with
 you as well.  If I don't allow Mrs. McBrien to go into
 the detail then I can't really allow you to do it.
 If you want to deal with specifics relating to
 Superintendent Greenwood then I am prepared to accept
 that, but we have gone through these photographs with
 others.  They are apparent to the jury, they are before
 them. They will be able to have a look at them and^work
 out whether people are in the pen or not and I don't
 think we should take Mr. Jackson through this exercise.

       MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, I hear what you say but my only
 reason for doing so at this juncture and this context
 is because it follows in the wake of the cross-examination
 of my learned friend Mr. King, whether anything had been
 done or what was happening before the arrival of Chief
 Superintendent Nesbit.  There is only one more photo­
 graph I want to show so perhaps I can just progress
 quickly to that because that is quite an illustrative
 one.   Sergeant Griffiths, C451.

. Mr. Jackson, I am afraid the format of this one is
  rather smaller but I hope it shows everything that I
  want to cover.
       First of all in the top left-hand corner by the
 radial gate between Pens 2 and 3 there is a Police Officer
 there, is there not? - A. Yes, there is.

                              Q. in the mouth
                                         W. W. W. JACKSON


In the mouth of the tunnel in pens 3 and 4, there are a
number of Police Officers? - A. There are.

Deep in pen 4 on the right hand side there is a Woman
Police Constable? - A. I would accept that.   I cannot
quite make her out from here.

I can show you another photograph where it is a bit
clearer.   I was seeking to do it with one photograph.
I don't think that is disputed.   On the perimeter fence
running in front of pen 3 there are a considerable number
of Police Officers.   You can't see what they are doing.
That, of course, is a matter for others.   My suggestion
to you is that they are in fact assisting fans out of
pen 3? - A. Yes, I accept that.

Finally can I deal with the matter of the chain?   It is
a matter of commonsense that a chain formed by Officers,
or anyone, can only work as well as the ability exists to
feed people along it? - A. That is correct.

If you had a situation in a pen which only allows persons
to be removed one by one, and only then after a struggle
in each case, it does not matter one way or the other
whether you have a chain or not because the process of^
evacuation is a very slow one? - A. That is correct, sir.

You would expect a time to come when the process of
evacuation speeded up and in those circumstances benefit
from a chain? - A. That's right.

The sort of chain doubtless you have seen in photographs
instituted at about nineteen minutes past three? - A.
That is correct.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I know you sat down
almost precipitously.   Was there anything else you
wanted to ask before I let Mr. Payne ask questions?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   No, thank you.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, with your leave I would like to
ask a number of questions arising out of some questions
asked by my learned friend Mr. King about which we had
some debate.

     THE CORONER:    Yes.

        Further Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

Mr. Jackson, first of all in relation to the
conversations you overheard whilst Mr. Kelly was in the
Box? - A. Yes^
                                         W. W. W. JACKSON


First of all, so we can see this in context, it is right
that you were not paying particular attention to the
conversations that were taking place? - A. I certainly
was not at that time.    I have explained that the Control
Room was extremely busy.    My concern - in fact, I really
did not want them there inasmuch as we were very busy in
dealing with the rescue so I did not pay a lot of
attention.

Indeed you told the Coroner earlier that you did not take
much notice of that conversation? - A. That is correct.

Similarly, it was not on|y busy but it was noisy? - A. It
was.

As I understand the position, you wer en ’t sure what the
conversation was? - A. No, I wasn't, other than the fact
it was something to do with the match and what possibly
had happened.   That is the kind of drift I got.

So is the correct impression that you would want to leave
with the Jury this:  that you recall hearing snippets of
the conversation?   Is that the position? - A. Yes,
absolutely.

You could not be sure about the context in which the
snippets you heard were made in? - A. I wasn't sure at
all, sir.

Indeed, at the time you made no note of such snippets of
conversation? - A. No, I didn't.   As I have said before,
we were extremely busy at that particular time and it was
not something which had any significance on me at all.

You said at the outset you thought it was Mr. Duckenfield
who made this remark about storming the gates.   You may
be wrong about that? - A. I could be wrong.

It could have been anybody in the Control Box who was
involved in this discussion? - A. That's correct.

Or, indeed, somebody who was chipping in with their view
as to what may have happened? - A. Yes, it could have
been.

Further, to try and be fair about this, you use the
expression, "Storming the gates."   Are you saying that
that word "Storming" is the actual word you heard, or is
that some gloss you have put on it since? - A. No.   I
thought, and I said at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry, I
thought those were the words said.

As I understand it, you could be wrong about that,
because it was at Lord Justice Taylor s Inquiry that you
                                          W. W. W. JACKSON


were asked about this for the first time? - A. That's
right.

That was how many weeks after this had taken place? - A.
That was some considerable time after the event.

So to be fair to everybody in that Control Room there is
a very great grey area and lots of room for legitimate
error? - A. Well, I think there is, basically because we
were extremely busy at the time, but that was the gist of
it as I thought.

So busy, noisy, could not say for sure who it was, not
really paying much attention because your attention was
directed at other things? - A. That is correct.

I am obliged to you.   The other matter you were asked
about was this:  you were asked about when you were first
made aware that the gate had been opened on the authority
of the Police.  As I understand it, you were first made
aware of that when you had conversations with both
Mr. Marshall and Mr. Duckenfield sometime around four
o'clock? - A. That is correct.

That, as I understand it, was the first real opportunity
that you and they had had to reflect upon what had
happened and to discuss what had happened? - A. That is
correct.

Prior to that time everybody's main concern was to ensure
that the rescue operation went ahead as best as possible?
- A. That is correct.

The effect of what Mr. Marshall was telling you was this,
that he had asked for and given very little alternative
to the opening of the gates? - A. Yes, that was the gist
of what Mr. Marshall said to me.

Mr. Duckenfield was saying he had in those circumstances
been the one to give the order? - A. That is correct.

     MR. ISAACS:    I am very grateful.   Thank you.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, before you rise I think we
will stop for a few minutes.

                   (Short adjournment)
                                         W. W. W. JACKSON


             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Mr. Jackson, can you do something which a number of other
witnesses have attempted to do, and it is not terribly
easy, and that is to put yourself back to the frame of
mind and the state of knowledge you had before this
disaster occurred and in that state of mind try and
answer these questions which I have put to a number of
other witnesses who have an important role in the case.
Here they are.   You have told the Court already, you
have mentioned in the course of your evidence the Safety
Certificate and the fact that the Safety Certificate
allocated various capacities to different parts of the
ground.   Did you believe yourself that the Leppings Lane
terrace was safe to be used to its full certified
capacity? - A. Yes, I did.

Did you know that there had been calculated an emergency
evacuation time within which that terrace could safely be
cleared in the event of an emergency? - A. I knew that in
August of 1988 the emergency services, our Officers and
the ambulance service had met to discuss evacuation.

I suppose the exact evacuation time would not be
something you would be directly concerned with? - A. No,
it wasn't.

You were aware that that point had been considered? - A.
Yes.

Did you believe it having been considered by that group
of people, if there were an emergency then tne Leppings
Lane terrace would be able to be evacuated within the
time that they had worked out? - A. That is correct, sir.

This group of people you mentioned - just to bring it
together, you were aware there was an Officer Working
Party? - A. Yes, I was.

It was made up of representatives of the Sheffield
Metropolitan District Council, the South Yorkshire County
Council, the Fire Brigade and the Police Force? - A. That
is correct, sir.

It met regularly to inspect the ground and consider all
safety aspects of the use of the ground? - A. That is
correct, sir.

Did you know also that under the Safety Certificate an
engineer had been appointed who also made annual
inspections of the structure of the ground? - A. Yes, I
did.
                                          W. W. W. JACKSON


Now from any of those sources did you ever, before the
disaster, receive any report that anyone had said that
they could foresee that with the layout of the ground
there was a risk that there might be a disastrous
crushing incident in the Leppings Lane terrace? - A. No,
sir, certainly not.

The next question is this:  did you know that in the
history of the ground there had never previously been any
occasion when it had been necessary to throw open the
exit gates in order to relieve a crushing disaster
outside the turnstiles? - A. That is correct, sir.

You did know that?   We have been told that by the
representatives of the club.   Had you ever received a
report from any of these people we have been mentioning
which had caused you to expect any circumstances in which
a disaster like this one on the Leppings Lane terrace
could occur? - A. No, sir.

Finally, until that afternoon did you ever envisage any
circumstances in which there would be an obvious risk of
death to people on that terrace from overcrowding? - A. I
did not, sir.

Even when you went along to the Control Box, as you have
discussed, at that time you still didn't realise what had
happened? - A. That is correct, sir.

Now the next topic is this: Your attention was drawn by
Mr. King to the Operational Order.    In effect it was put
to you that the Operational Order was not concerned with
matters of safety.   You gave your answer to that, but I
would be grateful if you would amplify it a little by
looking at some particular parts of the Operational
Order, just as examples of what you were saying.    I am
not going to spend too long on this because the Jury has
seen quite a lot of the Operational Order.    They have
not looked at it from this point of view on the questions
you are being asked about, whether it referred to safety
matters.   Just as an example, can you look at the very
first part of the detailed Orders, Serial 1, Sub-Sector
1, which is on our page 19? - A. Yes.

Serial 1 has got some narrative and then at the bottom of
phases 1 and 2 there is some heavy type, underlined,
which the Jury has looked at before:

     "NO ONE IS TO BE ALLOWED ACCESS TO THE TRACK FROM
     the TERRACES WITHOUT-CBHSEWT 6f A 3UHI6B   OFFICEE"
     ( EXCEPT T6 RECEIVE HEMCaL ATTaHIOHP
Now does that ?part of the instruction have a safety
aspect? - A. Yes, it does.
A
                                                                  ‘
                                                                  83

                                                     W. W. W. JACKSON


    Q. Can you explain that? - A. Yes, what it does is that it
       makes sure we do not have a pitch invasion and thus
       cause problems for the people in the terrace or the
B      people who are likely to be on the pitch.

    Q. Just go down to Serial 2 under Phase 1, for example:

           "A) 2 PCs will be located behind turnstiles 19-
           22 to ensure persons entering these premises do
           not possess items prohibited by the ground
           rules (Banners, etc., weapons or missiles) or
           alcohol."

       Does that have a safety aspect? - A. Yes, it does, sir.

    Q. That is self-explanatory really.  Look at Phase 3 at
       the bottom of that serial, which is after the match:

           "This serial will take up a position in front
           of these terraces on the perimeter track to
           prevent a pitch invasion or ensure the safety
D          of the match officials and players."

       Does that have a safety aspect? - A. Yes, it does, sir.

    Q. Which is self-explanatory.  Looking at one or two more
       examples at page 23 - and the Jury can look at this for
       themselves but I am inviting them to do so through your
       evidence - this is the Spion Kop which I am taking by
       way of example, if one looks at the top:

           "SUB SECTOR 3

           Serial 7   SPION KOP TERRACES

           Phase 1 and 2 (before and during match)

           PCs will be located at the entrances to the
           Spion Kop terraces in pairs to maintain order
           and ensure that these entrances remain clear at
           all times."

       Does that have a safety aspect? - A. Yes, it does, sir.

    Q. It goes on:

           "In the event of Liverpool Supporters gaining
           entry into this end of the ground they will be
           contained at the extreme southern part of the
           terraces at the rear of Gate 1 to await
           transference under escort to their own area.
           UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES will any supporters be




H
                                                                   &4

                                                      W. W. W. JACKSON


           transferred from these terraces to other parts
           of the ground via the perimeter tra c k ."

B      Does that also have a safety aspect? - A. Yes, it does,
       sir.

    Q. I will just go on to page 30:

           "SUB SECTOR 6

           Serial 13   Phase 1 (before match)

           D) 6 PCs will be located at the front of the
           Stand to prevent missiles being thrown/Stand
           tickets being dropped to the terraces below or
           persons climbing from the terraces to the Stand
           and to maintain order."

       Does that have a safety aspect? - A. Yes, it does.

    Q. At the bottom of the page:
D
           "EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE

           In the event of such a situation arising
           indicated at 3.16 in the serial order, PCs will
           take up positions at the emergency exits at the
           extreme front corners of the stand and ensure
           the gates are unlocked...."

       I am not going to read any more but does    that have   a
       safety aspect? - A. It does, sir.

    Q. One can see frequently throughout this Operational
       Order that many of the serials have their own
       particular reference to what they should do in the
       emergency evacuation procedure? - A. That is correct.
       That is what I was explaining earlier on.

    Q. Just to complete this exercise without being tedious
       about it, page 32:

           "SUB SECTOR 8

           Serial 16   LEPPINGS LANE TURNSTILES"

       The Jury have seen this and looked at it inquite some
       detail:

           "Phase 1 (before match)

           This serial will be responsible for turnstiles
           A-G.  They will ensure that persons entering do




H
                                             W. W. W. JACKSON


    not possess items prohibited by the ground
    rules..."

There is the usual list:

    "...They will maintain order and ensure orderly
    queues are formed."

Does that, in its intention anyway, have a safety
aspect to it? - A. Yes, it does, sir.

Just to go to the back of it now page 45 - and I am
skipping a lot of pages which can be looked at in
detail if anybody wants to:

    "SUB SECTOR 15

    Serial 39   COACH RECEPTION - HALIFAX ROAD

    Phase 1 (before match)

    This serial will supervise the unloading of
    Liverpool coaches in Halifax Road/Penistone
    Road North.  PCs will ensure that supporters
    leaving the coaches do not possess items
    prohibited by the ground rules ie banners,
    missiles, weapons or alcohol."

Does that have a safety aspect to it? - A. Yes, it
does.

Why does this mention of alcohol keep coming up? The
Police keep on being advised in their different serials
to prevent people from entering the ground in
possession of alcohol? - A. It has been recognised by
the Association of Chief Police Officers and other
people that alcohol is related to offences of violence
and can be particularly prevalent in a small minority
at football matches to cause problems.

That completes the exercise of looking at the
Operational Order and that can be put away now.  I move
on to a different topic.  This is just to clear up
something you mentioned in your evidence about the
Police response to the disaster.  One of the things
that you said was attended to, I think at the time that
you went into the Control Room, was the arrangement of
something you described as a sterile area? - A. Yes.

Just to put our minds back in the picture, what time
are we talking about? - A. About 3.12 pm.
                                               W. W. W. JACKSON


What did this involve and what is it? - A. The sterile
area is intended to link up to the Force Control Room
who were dealing with a major incident to make sure
that the Traffic Department had put on a sterile area
outside so that the ambulances had as much free flow
through the roads to hospitals.

Who was responsible for arranging that? Who actually
arranged that? - A. Both Mr. Duckenfield and myself.

On this topic then about the timing of the Police
response and what they were doing you did mention at
one point, you asked Mr. King if he could show you the
log, and it is possible to be quite accurate about the
timing of some of these events if one does look at this
- and I am not quite sure whether you would call it a
log or a transcript - but do you know that tape
recordings were made of radio traffic relating to the
events which took place at round about three o'clock? -
A. Yes, sir.

I think at the Taylor Inquiry various transcripts were
produced and I think I am going to ask you to just look
at one of them.  I am afraid there is no copy of this
at the moment.

     THE CORONER:     Let me just glance at it for a
minute.

     MR. PAYNE:     Certainly.

     THE CORONER:  I am not saying that you cannot use
it but I just want to see it.

     MR. PAYNE:  Quite.  I fished this out of the file
when the question was raised about keeping a log.

     THE CORONER:     Thank you.

     MR. PAYNE:   I know this has been sprung on you,
Mr. Jackson, and so just take a moment.   This is
obviously a transcript of radio communications between
different people.   The part that I am going to ask you
to look at to get the timing appears at pages 8 and 9.
If you go to that you will be able to tell the Jury who
this is between.   They are numbered at the top.  At
pages 8 and 9 which I am going to ask you to read out
in a moment there is a conversation between two
individuals who name themselves at the end of the
conversation and so if you turn to page 9 we are
getting to the end of it and they say who they are in
the last but dne answers or so? - A. Yes.
                                                                      &7

                                                        W. W. W. JACKSON


    Q. The names that are given are Superintendent Clarke and
       PC Rook.  Are you able to help who they are? - A. I
       think they are ambulance personnel.
B
    Q. This is radio traffic relating to the summoning of the
       ambulance? - A. Yes.

    Q. If you go back to page 8 and at the top of the page I
       think we can find a timing of this part? - A. The time
       there is 1504.

    Q. Then there is a slight gap? - A. Yes, and then it is
       1507.01.

    Q. This is the first time we will find a reference to
       anything that this Inquest is concerned with.  What
       happened at 1507.01 please? - A. The caller says:

             "Hello ambulance, yes, is one of your
             supervisors there please, love?
             Yes, good afternoon, it's PC Rook, South
             Yorkshire Police Operations Room."

    Q. Which Operations Room would that be? - A. That would be
       the Force Control Room.

    Q.   At? - A. At Snigg Hill, Police Headquarters.

    Q.   In the city? - A. In the city centre.

    Q.    PC Rook is making a call at seven minutes   past three? -
         A. Seven minutes past three.

    Q. Just read out again his words, the first words that are
       spoken? - A. He said:

             "There's been an incident at Leppings Lane end
             of the Hillsborough football, Hillsborough
             football ground, where we may need a few
             ambulances.  It's just to advise you at this
             stage, there's been a lot of pushing and
             shoving and there might have been quite a few
             injuries."

         So just to put ourselves in the picture then, by this
         time of seven minutes past three someone has
         communicated with the Police Operations Control Room
         through to PC Rook and he now then is taking steps to
         communicate with the Ambulance Service? - A. That is
         correct, sir.

    Q. Just read on jilease? - A. It says:




H
                                               W. W. W. JACKSON


    "That's Leppings Lane of Hillsborough.  All
    we're doing at the moment is just advising you
    that we may need, we may need a few ambulances
    to attend.

    You have got that facility.  We will come back
    to you should you require them.

    But it's just to sort of pre-warn and pre­
    advise you at the moment."

So what time are we up to now? - A. 1507.45.

So half a minute later? - A. Yes.

What is the next thing? - A. It goes on:

    "Not at the moment, not at the moment, just
    unless he wants you to (shouts 'Sir' in the
    background.  Male shouts 'We want a fleet of
    ambulances')."

"We want a fleet of ambulances"? - A. Yes.

What is the timing of that? - A. That is 1507.53.
Perhaps I could tie this up a little bit for you
because what I think is happening here, you will
remember I said earlier on that I made sure we had an
extended Incident Room at the Control Room where we had
a UHF and also a VHF radio.  The UHF was listening into
the match and so PC Rook may have picked that up
initially and then that is followed by the call from
the ground.

He might be doing this on his own... - A. I only
surmise that.

So we do not quite know where he has got his
information from but he has picked up something? - A.
Yes, I think he may have picked that up from the UHF
radio in the ground.

Thank you very much.  That is very helpful.  Then it
goes on that he wants a fleet of ambulances at 1507.45,
is it? - A. 1507.53:

    "Not at the moment, not at the moment, just
    unless...(shouts 'Sir' in the background.   Male
    shouts 'We want fleet of ambulances').  Hello,
    hello."

There is further conversation which goes on to make the
point and that has got the time.  Thank you.  I will
                                            W. W. W. JACKSON


turn away from that point now and just deal lastly with
another point that came up.  This is about something
Mrs. McBrien asked you and the Coroner reminded you of
the Traffic Commissioners' document which talks about
the time of arrival of coaches? - A. Yes.




                           /Q. Both that passage.
                                                           9 0   ‘


                                          W. W. W. JACKSON


Q. Both that passage that Mrs. McBrien referred to in the
   Taylor transcript, where a long question was put to you
   by a barrister, and also the Traffic Commissioner's
   document, those are standing documents which apply to
   football matches generally, do they? - A. Yes.  The
   Traffic Commissioner's Guidelines are circulated, via
   the Association of Chief Police Officers, nationally.

Q. However, for this particular match did you personally
   make special arrangements? - A. Yes, we did, by way of
   the letters that we sent.

Q. Just amplify that because I am not quite sure whether
   this picture about these letters came out - it may be
   that I was not paying proper attention - but what steps
   did you take in preparation for this particular match
   about the time of arrival of fans? - A. What we did, we
   arranged for the gates to be open, I think it was at 12
   o'clock, and we sent letters, as I have said before, to
   the Chief Officers of Merseyside and Notts, outlining
   the route, the times etcetera, so that everybody would
   know what route to take and the time to get there.  We
   also wrote letters to the people responsible for
   preparing the match programmes, so that they were aware
   of the information.

Q. Is this at the Clubs, at Nottingham Forest Football
   Club? - A. Yes.

Q. And Liverpool Football Club? - A. And Liverpool, yes.

Q. So that the information could be put in a previous
   match's programme? - A. Yes.  We also wrote to the Fire
   Brigade, the Chief Fire Officer, so that he was aware
   of the times of the matches, the routes etcetera, and
   we also wrote to the Chief Ambulance Officer.

Q. Do you know whether anything was done to give publicity
   in the press? - A. Yes.  We had publicity in the press
   and I think I am right, I will stand corrected if I am
   wrong, we went on Radio Merseyside and certainly on our
   own radio to make sure that everybody was aware, to
   make sure that no non ticket holders came, and that
   people got there in plenty of time to get into the
   Ground.

Q. That was the thrust of all the messages that you have
   spoken about? - A. Yes.

Q. Thank you very much.

               r
                                         W. W. W. JACKSON


                Further by THE CORONER

This is a question which the Jury have asked me to ask.
You have half answered it but I will just get some
more.  I think you have already told me that on the day
you were dressed in civilian clothes? - A. Yes, I was.

What actually were you wearing, can you remember? - A.
I am sorry, I can't remember.

Can you remember whether it was a suit or a pullover? -
A. I think I had a suit on, yes.

Did   you wear an anorak or anything like that as far as
you   remember? - A. I can't honestly remember.

But it was definitely civilian clothes? - A. Definitely
civilian clothes, yes.

The other thing I was a little bit puzzled about was
this, Mrs. McBrien asked you, "Did you know that there
was a coach with 50 Officers stationed in Leppings
Lane?", and you replied, "Yes".  Can you give me a bit
more detail about that? - A. Yes, the circumstances in
relation to that was that the escort from "D" Division,
when they had finished escorting, then they were put in
coaches, I think one at Leppings Lane and also one at
Penistone Road.

Perhaps I should know, but the "D" Division escorts,
what were they supposed to be escorting, or who were
they supposed to be escorting? - A. They were escorting
football supporters.  In the previous year they were
put at Claywheels Lane, and it was decided to bring
them a bit nearer the football ground.

So when would they have been located in the coach? - A.
As soon as they had finished their escorting duties,
and that could have been anything up to probably about
3 o'clock.

You are saying this from your knowledge of what you
would expect to happen or from your knowledge of what
actually happened? - A. What I would have expected to
happen.  I don't know whether that actually did happen.

So have I understood it right, forget about this match
for a moment, if everything had gone according to plan
you would have these 50 Officers sitting in their coach
while the match was in play, is that right? - A. That
is correct, sir.
                                             W. W. W. JACKSON


Then they would have gone back to whatever duties they
had at phase 3? - A. Yes, at phase 3 they would have
assisted in the duties that were outlined in the Order.

So to get this right, are you saying for phase 1 they
were engaged in escorting? - A. Yes.

Phase 2 they were sitting in the coach? - A. Yes.

And phase 3 they were back doing whatever jobs they
were supposed to do? - A. That is correct, sir.

That is your understanding and there was supposed to be
one at Penistone Road somewhere and the other one at
Leppings Lane? - A. The other one at Leppings Lane.

     MR. KING:   I think there was some evidence, sir.
There was a Mr. Lloyd who recalled that he had seen a
coach parked, because he was concerned about it.   I
won't rehearse his evidence and I can't even remember
the time he saw it but he definitely saw a coach load
of Police Officers at a time when he was concerned
about action.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, he was late-ish - I am not
saying he was late, he was late-ish, but he didn't say
he was there at 3. That is why I was interested
because I remembered that evidence but he is the only
one who has mentioned it up to now, apart from Mr.
Jackson.

        MR.   KING:   It is of interest,   sir, nothing more.

     THE CORONER:   That is right.         Mr. Jackson, thank
you very much indeed.

     MR. KING:   Sir, the radio log which was very
helpfully put in evidence through this Witness, are we
going to give that a "C" number - just that page?

     THE CORONER:    Yes.  Was it just one page?   I did
not   have a copy myself but I think I found it in some
of my papers.   May I just look and see whether I was
looking at the right bit? Which page were you
referring to, Mr. Payne?

      MR. PAYNE:  Mr. Jackson read the first page and
just a little bit of the second page, just to get the
time.

        THE CORONER:   It could not have been the first
page.     Isn't it pages 8 and 9?
                                          W. W. W. JACKSON


     MR. PAYNE:     I am sorry, it was pages 8 and 9 out
of that.

     THE CORONER:   Let's give  these two pages a"C"
number.  The rest of it is all relatively early.

     MR. BEECHEY:    The "C"   number, sir, is C517.

     THE CORONER:  We will make page 8 C517A, and the
other one B, and we will circulate copies.

     MR. KING:   If it is of any assistance those
behind me have located the evidence of Mr. Lloyd and
the coach.  It is a very short passage.  Their note
was:

     "As I turned into Leppings Lane a coach parked on
     the left hand side.  It was full of Policemen.
     They could have been used to form a cordon.  About
     2.35".

     THE CORONER:    I will put that to you.  This
gentleman, Mr. Lloyd, who describes this coach, 2.35,
does that ring a bell with you? - A. It doesn't ring a
bell, sir.  I would have thought it would have been
there a bit later. Perhaps the Officers on duty could
give you the exact time.

Yes, you weren't there so you don't speak from personal
knowledge? - A. No, I don't, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I remember that evidence, Mr. King.
Mr. Jackson, I am very, very grateful to you for being
here and thank you for your evidence.

     Now, we are not going to go on much longer, just a
few more minutes.   You remember yesterday I said that I
was going to take this documentary evidence, and I
think I called the chap "Bone".    In fact, it is
"Boyle", and the family who were particularly
interested were Mrs. Steele, who happens to be here
this afternoon, so I will read -it is only a short
passage - the statement, so that you can hear what Mr.
Boyle has to say.

     What I am going to read is either the whole or
part of a statement of Mr. Boyle, which is dated
26.9.89.  It is John Liam Boyle, he was at 14 Juniper
Gardens, Thornton in Liverpool, but I am told he is now
in Australia and I have got no idea where he is, but be
that as it may what he said was:

     "Furthei: to the questionnaire ...."
  I am not going to read the questionnaire because it
does not deal with what we are interested in, and we
have heard plenty of evidence from other people on this
like that -

     "... I made earlier this year in connection with
     the Hillsborough disaster after I had climbed from
     Pen 4 into Pen 5, I then was assisted in climbing
     up into the stand.  I then saw a lot of bodies
     lying on the pitch and decided that I would be
     needed there.

If I could pause there, I forgot to say his occupation
is a nurse.

     "I climbed back onto the fence by this time the
     gate was open to the pen and I was able to go
     through onto the pitch, looking towards the pitch
     and to the left of the 6 yard box by the corner I
     saw a youth about 14 years of age, very thin
     smooth complexion with a light brown curly hair.
     I ve no idea what he was wearing I saw a St. John
     Ambulance man giving heart massage and a civilian
     giving mouth to mouth.  The civilian appeared to
     be giving up so I went over to assist.

     I gave mouth to mouth resuscitation whilst the St.
     John s Ambulance man was giving cardiac massage.
     The youth was a greyer shade of white and slightly
     blue around the mouth.  We gave him three or four
     minutes before I decided that it was in vain.

     After this I moved further over towards the
     penalty area to the right ...."

- he is now talking about somebody else but I might as
well read it -

    ".... there were a lot of bodies in this area
    being lined up, but I made my way to a rather
    large male of about 30 years.   I think he had long
    dark shoulder length hair almost black.   I would
    estimate him to be about 16-17 stone.   He appeared
    to be dead, there were twoyoung people   with him
    but they did not appear to know what to do. I
    assisted by giving him mouth to mouth for a couple
    of minutes but it was futile.  I then wandered
    around for a few minutes looking at all the
    bodies.  I was basically looking for someone with
    at least a bit of life in them everyone seemed to
    have either a police officer or St. John's
    ambulance man with them I was in some shock
    myself.  I was on the pitch for some fifteen
    minutes and other than assisting those two bodies
     I merely assisted others to assess the people were
     dealing with.  After this I left the pitch via the
     Leppings Lane end about 10 minutes after the
     announcement to leave.

     I was wearing a bright red sweat top with a small
     motif on the left breast and a pair of bright
     strong green tracksuit bottoms.

     I am unable to identify these apparent deceased
     persons further, nor do I know who the St. John's
     Ambulance person was".

But, in fact, he did have another go because on 24th
November 1989 he gave another statement, and he said:

     "Today I have been shown photographs relating to
     the Hillsborough Football disaster by WPC Snape
     and WPC Kelly of West Midlands Police.

     In my original statement I refer to having given
     mouth to mouth to a young 14 year old boy on the
     pitch.  I have seen a mortuary photograph
     reference 82 ...."

- and we know that is, is in fact, your lad, Mrs. Steel
and you know that as well, don't you, and there is
something in brackets about exhibit numbers which we
don't need -

     "... and can identify this youth pictured as the
     youth I gave mouth to mouth to.  I have marked on
     a plan of the pitch by means of a blue dot where I
     [dealt with this youth].  I now produce this plan
     as reference JLB/1".

You won't remember the particular plan but it was
produced by Inspector Layton in April/May last year.




                      /I can give you the
I can give you the reference number, 131 or something,
but I can't quite remember.

      He now deals with the second person he was with:

      "Also in my original statement I refer to
      giving mouth to mouth to a large man with
      long black hair.  I have seen photograph
      reference 54, a mortuary photograph, and
      I can identify this man as the one I
      describe in my original statement. I have
      marked on a plan of the pitch by means of a
      blue dot where I gave, Anthony Peter KELLY,
      mouth to mouth.  I now produce this plan
      as reference JLB/2.

      I had no further dealings other than giving
      mouth to mouth to these two people."

So that is what he says.

      Your son's plan was C149 actually.   I wrote it
down on this piece of paper.

      That is it for today.  We stop for today, start
again tomorrow at 10.  If you want to leave us please
feel free to do so.

                (In the absence of the jury)

      I hope Mrs. Steele I didn't upset you by reading
it out.   Well I must have done, I realise that, but
on the other hand I think it is not a bad thing.   It
does remind us what we are actually here for which we
tend to forget when we are dealing with a lot of the
evidence.   I forget it, all of us do from time to time.

      Anything that anybody wants to say to me before
we rise? Mr. King, I think the people behind you want
to talk to you.

      MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, while Mr. King is taking
instructions can I please invite you to state your
present intentions as to witnesses tomorrow and in
particular whether you anticipate that Superintendent
Greenwood will be in the witness box tomorrow?

      THE CORONER: Mr. Russell, how can you ask me a
question like that? You know it is impossible for me
to predict how long we are going to take. It looks
as if Mr. King wants to say something.
                                                              97




      MR. KING:  I understand the family sir would ask
me to ask you whether there is any more information
from Mr. Boyle as to the time he saw what he saw?

      THE CORONER:  I have read you the complete
statement.  There is not another word in it other than
that.   Just bear with me for one minute.   I will see
if there is anything else which I could help you on.
I am looking through his questionnaire.   I have looked
through it once and I don't remember seeing anything.

      I think the best I can do and you must remember
that when somebody says a time unless you can question
him it is difficult, but he says:

      "I got into Pen 4 at about 2.50 and I fought
      my way across to the side fence and climbed
      into Pen 5. This would be about 3 p.m."

If you remember he then said he went up into the Stands,
at least somebody helped him up, then he had a look down,
could see what was going on, came down and went out,
so that is the best I can do.  I wish I could be more
helpful.

      MR. KING:  I am sure it would be wanted to be
said and I do say it, to thank you sir for the attention
you have just given to that problem.

      THE CORONER:   Mr. Russell I will try and answer
your question.

      The witnesses whom we have got for tomorrow are
Mr. Case; Sergeant Higgins; Inspector Crawford; Mr. Thomas.
We will take Mr. Thomas, this may not necessarily be in
this order.  I don't anticipate taking all that long
over these witnesses.  Then I want to read Mr. Smith's
statement and then depending on the time, Mr. Russell,
Mr. Greenwood, but I have in mind what you said yesterday
and I will use commonsense. There is no point in starting
with Mr. Greenwood unless we can make some real progress,
so to speak.

      MR. RUSSELL:   That is quite understood.    Thank you
very much.

      THE CORONER:  I have told you who Mr. Case is and
why I am calling him.  The others I think we know who
they are, don't we? Sergeant Crawford by the way is the
man who is in the concourse area.

      Ladies and gentlemen, thank you very much indeed.
Good evening.  I will see you tomorrow.

             (The Inquests were adjourned until
               10 a.m. the following morning)
