HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

           STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

S.L. TOPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

         (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

      Tuesday, 20th November, 1990




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                             INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




    OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER                1.

    PETER FREDERICK BUCK Sworn

        By THE CORONER                              7.
        Cross-Examined    by MR. HALE              10.
        Cross-Examined    by HR. PAYNE             13.
        Cross-Examined    by MR. MANNING           13.
        Cross-Examined    by MR. KING              14.
        Cross-Examined    by MRS. McBRIEN          15.
        Cross-Examined    by MR. RUSSELL           16.
        Further by THE    CORONER                  16.

®   RITA GOLDSWORTHY Sworn

        By THE CORONER                             17.
        Cross-Examined    by MR. HALE              21.
        Cross-Examined    by MR. PAYNE             22.
        Cross-Examined    by MR. MANNING           23.
        Cross-Examined    by MR. KING              24.
        Cross-Examined    by MRS. McBRIEN          26.
        Cross-Examined    by MR. RUSSELL           26.
        Further by THE    CORONER                  27.

    JACK MOUNTAIN Sworn

        By THE CORONER                             27.
        Cross-Examined    by MR. HALE              30.
        Cross-Examined    by MR. MANNING           32.
        Cross-Examined    by MR. KING              32.
        Further by THE    CORONER                  33.

0   KEITH NORMAN OLLERENSHAW Sworn

        By THE CORONER                             34.
        Cross-Examined  by MR. HALE                40.
        Cross-Examined  by MR. PAYNE               40.
        Cross-Examined  by MR. MANNING             40.
        Cross-Examined  by MR. KING                42.
        Cross-Examined  by MISS ADDELMANN          45.
        Cross-Examined  by MR. RUSSELL             45.
        Further by THE  CORONER                    46.
        Further Cross-Examined by MR. HALE         46.
        Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING         47.
                 SECOND D A Y ’S PROCEEDINGS

                TUESDAY. 2 Oth NOVEMBER 1990

   THE CORONER:   You will remember we handed out to you,
the legal representatives, a sheet with times on it.
Unless any of you have strong objections I am going to let
the Jury have a copy of the sheet as well because it is
going to be so much easier to follow rather than us explain
it. Is it acceptable to everybody who is here and you,
Mrs. McBrien, are included in that? Very well. You will
remember this is just intended in case you forget a time.
I am not saying it has got all the times on it. It is just
times that I thought might be the more relevant ones.   Is
there anything that anybody wants to say to me before we
actually get down to the business?

   MR. PAYNE:   Sir, we were wondering whether you would
think it appropriate to say something about the publicity
which has been given to the first day's hearing in the
local Press? It may not be helpful to the Jury at this
stage to see widely reported expressions of hope that this
Inquest may produce some evidence to a particular effect or
another particular effect or that the Jury may in the end
return one verdict or another. We feel it is not helpful
at this stage that such wide publicity should be given to
the understandable remarks made by the relatives of the
deceased but we wondered whether you might feel it
appropriate to make some comment to the Jury about the way
they should approach it.

   THE CORONER:   You were not here for the interim
hearings but I did attempt to deal with that then but I
quite agree it needs reinforcing.  I will make a general
comment as well. I have no doubt some of you will have
seen the local paper because the deadlines are so big.
Even if you had not bought one it would have been difficult
not to miss seeing somebody else's paper. I am not happy,
if I can use that word, with either the headlines or the
article because we are actually a Court and I am afraid
that papers and others forget that this is a Court.
Therefore, what goes on in a Court and what decisions are
taken are sub iudice. If this had been a major criminal
case at the Old Bailey, a major fraud case, and there had
been headlines of that nature I do not think it would have
gone down very well. I put it no higher than that but it
does not go down very well with me either because it is
wrong that the papers should attempt to pre-empt.   It is
not just the papers but it is the people who give the
interviews who are wrong. They should not attempt to pre­
empt your decisions.
   You will remember right at the beginning, and I will
remind you again, I did say to you that it does not matter
what anybody else says or what people have said in the past
or even in the future-  The only thing that matters so far
as your verdict is concerned is what you hear in this Court
and at the end of the day I will attempt to summarise the
evidence and pick out things to bring it together because
it is difficult to remember what is said over a period of
weeks.

   In the final analysis it does not matter what anybody
else says outside or for that matter what anybody wishes
you to decide.  You have to decide in accordance with your
Oath on the evidence on what you believe to be true and
correct verdicts. Whether that please somebody or
displeases another person is neither here nor there.  I too
have to do that to a certain extent. I do not have to
reach a verdict but I have to call evidence and some of the
evidence which we will be hearing I am quite certain will
be unpalatable to some party at some party.   I have no
doubt some part will say that is what I want to hear and
the other parties say I hate it and the next day will be
the reverse order.   I have to steel myself as well.  It
does not matter whether it is popular or unpopular. Our
task is to listen to the evidence and bring in a verdict in
accordance with it and at the end of the day I will try to
remind you of all parts of the evidence. Please ignore
anything which you read outside.

   So far as the Press are concerned, it is implicit in
what I have already said that you have a responsibility and
a duty as well.  I know it sells papers to have big and
interesting headlines but you can put those up when we have
finished.  That may be eight weeks, six weeks, five weeks,
twelve weeks, because I do not know long it will be.  It
depends how fast we go from now but I do not want you to
misuse your privileges just because this is a Coroner's
Court and may be you think this Coroner is a bit of a
pushover and is not going to be too fierce in his reaction
to what is printed.

   That, with great respect, also goes for the people who
give interviews.  If you go out and give interviews to the
Press and comment on what you think has happened, should
happen, will happen, which way the evidence is going, not
only do you put yourself at risk of being in contempt,
because that is what we are really talking about so far as
the Press is concerned, but you actually put your case at
risk if you think about it because it may not be possible
to obtain a true and correct verdict if the atmosphere and
the publicity is such that it is deemed that one cannot
find a proper Jury - I am not talking about you - but if
one wanted to proceed.  It is common sense that you keep
your mouths shut, quite apart from anything else.

   It is not my task that and in that sense you can do what
you like so far as other proceedings are concerned but so
far as these proceedings are concerned you too, and it is
relatives as well, that you treat this as a Court.  We
cannot expect the Police, the Press, the Jury, myself to
try and stick within the rules and then allow others to
breach them.  I know there is that temptation but you too
have to resist it no matter how hard it is.

   MR. KING:   Might I just say on behalf of the families
that, in fact, that which has appeared in the Press has
certainly not been at their invitation and to a large
extent those whom I represent, some if not all, certainly
tell me they are quoted in a way that they did not state.
I say that, sir, because that is another of these dangers.
I just want to say on behalf of the families I represent so
that the Jury can hear me that they want the Jury to decide
these matters on what they hear here and they are anxious
that that should be so.

   THE CORONER:   This is one of the dangers, that if you
speak, one does not have editorial control and for that
matter even the reporter has not got editorial control.
That just underlines the need to be circumspect.  Mr.
Payne, does that satisfy you?

   MR. PAYNE:   Yes, sir.

   THE CORONER:   Is there anything else anybody wants me
to say or do before we begin with what we want to do this
morning?




                            /What we are going.
      What we are going to do, we are going to have a look
at the video now, this is the compilation tape, and before I
start I ought to say both to you, ladies and gentlemen of the
jury, but particularly to members of the family, I don't know
whether you have seen this tape but if you have not seen it
of course it is going to revive your unhappiness because it
is actually what happened on the day so be prepared for that
please.   If you find that you need to go out you know we have
the big room which was specially put aside so that you can
withdraw.   If you feel you do want to see it but you are not
happy about being in here, as far as I know it will be on the
screens in the other big room so you could withdraw and sit
in there and watch, but as I warned you before you won t be
able to hear, or certainly you won't be able to see any comments
which occur so there is a loss in that respect, but I just want
to make it clear that you should be prepared that you might
be a little bit upset.   It is bound to be a little bit upsetting
but it is unavoidable.

      MR. KING:  Sir, could I just emphasise that point you
made, sir, as I understand that many of the relatives have
not seen the compilation video with sound and that there is
sound as I understand it and that is another matter which
perhaps those who are here now want to take into account
because I know from my instructions that those who have seen
it with sound it has had a marked effect on them.

      THE CORONER: As I say I am sorry about this.   I am
not doing it to upset you but I think it will make it very
much easier for us all to understand what is going on.

      We will give this compilation tape a *C' number as well
so that we know what we are talking about.

      DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE JONES:      C278 sir.

       (Video commenced at this point)




                    (Luncheon adjournment)
    THE CORONER:   There are another ten minutes or so of
th§ video but I think we will press on with the witnesses
as it will not do us any harm if we have a pause from
that. At the end of the day we will see how we go.

    I should just explain what we are trying to do.     In
one way as I have said before and I repeat this is a
completely standard Inquest except there are 95 deceased
and at the moment we are doing them altogether.    In that
sense I am trying to stick to my normal practice because
there is no good reason really to depart from it. One has
to be realistic and understand that when you have 95 lives
lost on one occasion that does put it into a slightly
different class.

    Secondly, it creates, has created and continues to
create  a lot of     national  interest   and has wider
implications than a normal death however tragic that may
be.  I am not talking about the pain and loss which the
individual families have suffered and we know about that.
Whether you lose one child in a road traffic accident or
whether you lose a loved one in a works accident or at
Hillsborough is still a loss, is it not?

    The third thing is that because of the nature of this
incident the story, if I can put it that way, is very
complicated and there are lots of facets to it. There is
much more than one car driver just driving down the road
and hitting a tree for instance and so it is not as easy
as all that to try and decide (a) what we are interested
in bearing in mind that this is a Coroner's Court and (b)
how to call the evidence so that it makes sense.

    I have got a sort of vague overall idea of what I want
to do but I can tell you now I am going to fail because it
is impossible to achieve it entirely.    My idea, just so
that you understand the plan I have in mind, is that first
of  all we    are going to go across,        what  I call
horizontally, starting early and then working to a stop
and as we get closer to main events we will be probably
calling more witnesses.   If there is something I consider
to be particularly relevant we may have more witnesses for
that than we might have for something that is perhaps more
marginal.  It would be an ideal situation.

    The four people who are here this afternoon have some
association with licensed premises and they will tell us
what happened.  Then they will go.   It would be ideal if
we could take everybody's evidence and say, "Just tell us
this little bit" but that is practically impossible
because if we brought a supporter from Liverpool to give
evidence we cannot say to them, "Just tell us the first
twenty minutes of your stay in Sheffield.     Go back to
Liverpool and come back in two days' time and tell us the
next twenty minutes".    That is why I am going to fail
because I cannot split it up.
   , My plan is to start outside at some distance and then
to work my way towards Leppings Lane, the perimeter gates
etc., to come through the turnstiles and so on and come to
the concourse area, the tunnel and the terraces.   When we
are on the terraces I want as far as possible to look at
it from the evidence of people who were in the terraces
and evidence from people who were perhaps not on those
terraces but who were looking in from different locations.
Within those bounds there are various groupings, people
like relatives, friends, supporters, strangers.    By that
I mean media personnel, people who were not directly
involved with the deceased and then Police Officers at
various relevant point so that they can say their bit,
ambulance people who were approached and so on.

    That is looking at it in horizontally but in addition
to that you have also got to look at it vertically because
it may be relevant but perhaps in a more marginal way, by
way of scene setting, to learn a little bit of what
happened in the past and why certain things were done, for
example, why are there radial fences?      I use the word
"why" which is exceedingly naughty of me because X am not
supposed to be thinking of why but there is a certain
amount of why, as I explained to you yesterday, and so we
need to find out a little bit. That is important so that
you, at the end of the day, can have a rounded picture of
what happened so that you can then reach a verdict to the
best of your ability and the best of mine and our ability
in getting the evidence of this incident before you.    Tbet
is, if you like, the plan.

    For example, we will have to have evidence about the
construction.    We will be calling experts.      We have
already had a few, as you know, but there will be experts
in different fields.   For example, there are people who
have counted how many individuals came through the
turnstiles, how many came through that gate.     There is
quite a lot of information available and when we have got
it altogether gives one hopefully a rounded view.   So we
are going across it like this and also up and down.  That
is my overall idea.     Whether, and to what extent, I
succeed I do not know. I have already told you one reason
why it is not going to work perfectly.

    There is another one, and that is that although you
might think I would know by now precisely every single
person who is going to come there are still a few whom I
have not decided on.   It may be we will be calling a few
people out of sequence or occasionally we might call them
out of sequence because they just cannot make it on a
specific day.    There are reasons why the whole thing
cannot work exactly as one would wish but that is the
general idea.
                  MR. PETER FREDERICK BUCK - Sworn

                               Bv THE CORONER:

    Q.   You are Peter Frederick Buck?       -   A.       I am.
B   Q.   Are you the licensee of the Fox Inn?         -    A.     I am,
         yes.

    Q.   Is that Foxhill Road, Sheffield?                    It i s .

    Q.   How far would you say the           Fox Inn is from
          Hillsborough Stadium roughly?      - A.  It is about
          half a mile.

    Q.   In fact, it is probably downhill from there, is it
          not? - A. Yes.

    Q.   You are up the hill somewhere?      -   A.       Yes.

    Q.   How long have you been licensee of the Fox Inn,
          Mr. Buck? - A. Two years and eight months.

    Q.   Is that two years and eight months in 1989 or now?
D   A.   No.

    Q.   As of now?   -   A.    As of now.




                                      /Q. Were you licensee...




H
                                         P.F. BUCK.


Were you licensee in 1988? - A. Yes.
✓

And '89? - A. Yes.

Both years? - A. Yes.     March 1988 I came in.

I see, so you had just taken over.  Let us concentrate
in the first instance on 1989, the 15th April 1989 when
this tragedy occurred.  You weren't at the ground at all
were you? - A. No.
You were busy.  Can you tell me then what time did you open?
- A. At 12 o'clock.

Is it your normal opening time? - A. Yes.

And when you opened did people come into the pub who were
not regular customers of yours? - A. Yes.

Did you recognise them as belonging to any particular
group or not? - A. They were Liverpool supporters.

How did you know that? - A. Well the year before when
they we?e at the semi-final, some of them came in that
I recognised from the year before and that is how I know.

In fact when you opened were they waiting to get in or
not? - A. There was probably four, five people, that is
all.
Not very many at that point? - A. No, no.

And as the afternoon, because it would have been afternoon
by then wore on, did more Liverpudlians come to your pub?
- A. A great deal.

At the height how many people did you have in and around
your pub would you say? - A. I can't honestly say.

Can you say how many, as an estimate, I am not asking y®u
to give me a precise number, how many altogether you had?
Are we talking about 10, 20, 100, 200, 500, 1,000, that
sort of bracket? - A. Probably 150.

 And in the main what were they drinking? - A. Lager, beer,
 a lot of shandies.
 Now I think you normally sell on a Saturday lunchtime
 about 200 pints? - A. That is correct.

    Give and take of course? - A. Yes.

    Would I be right in thinking that on this particular
    Saturday you actually sold 96 gallons of beer? — A. Or
    thereabouts, yes.
                                     p.F. b u c k :


There are eight pints as far as I remember in a gallon.
Is that right? - A. Yes.

So how much does that make 96 x 8, let's work it out and
see.  So that is 7 68 pints or thereabouts? - A. Roughly.

      MR. MANNING: Could you please help us      as to what
was "normal" in the question before?

      THE CORONER:  Yes, I think you said, Mr. Buck, that
your normal was about 200 pints? — A. Roughly, thereabouts,
yes .
I mean obviously it would vary from Saturday to Saturday
wouldn't it? - A. Yes.

And then I think you also said   in addition to this you
sold about, that you had about   10by 12 cases ofPilsner
lager? - A. That is correct.

Which also went? - A. Yes.

They are cans, I take it, or bottles? — A.They        are bottles
sir, half pint bottles.

So that is another 120 or so, 60 pints in rough terms?
- A. Yes.

You have mentioned beer but what about lager, is that
included? - A. That is a total altogether.

Alcoholic liquor? - A. Yes.

When you make shandy I take it you use, some of this lager
or beer went into the shandies? — A. Yes, a half pint of
beer to a half pint of lemonade.

So that stretches it so to speak? - A. Yes.

What was your impression of the Liverpudlians who were
in your pub whilst they were in your pub? - A. They were
all quite happy.  There was no animosity or aggravation,
or anything.
So you were quite content with their behaviour in your
pub? - A. I was because of the year before.

What do you mean by that? - A. Well twelve months earlier
exactly the same match occurred and I had a lot of the
same supporters came back because they had a good time
and exactly the same happened.

 In other words what you are saying is although they were
 regular customers they were repeats, at least some of
 them were repeats because they had been happy on the
 previous occasion? - A. On the year before, yes.
                                              iu



                                             P.F. BUCK


    Q. And you would therefore have expected them in any event
       to be well behaved and indeed they were? - A. Yes.

    Q. Can you tell me, I am not asking when the last person
_      left but what time approximately would you say the bulk
B      of the people who had come for the match had left?
        - A. The majority of the people had gone for 20-past~2.

    Q. And then there were stragglers, I suppose.   Can you
       remember what time the last one left about? - A. The pub
       was empty for about half-past-2 other than three or four.

    Q. So between 20-past and half-past it had cleared out? -
       A. Totally because we were all clearing up.

    Q. Did you see or notice whether most of your customers
       had tickets. Was there any comment made that you remember
       about that? - A. I can't remember.  I was too busy with
       the clearing and the serving.

    Q. So in a nutshell what you are saying is you had about
       150 or thereabouts extra customers; you sold about four,
_      four—and—a—half times as much as you would normally sell
D      on a Saturday.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

    Q. And the people in your pub were generally well behaved,
       you were quite happy with them and they had left between
       20-past and half-past? - A. That is correct.

             THE CORONER: Now, Mr. Buck, I will explain to
       you what is going to happen now. You can see there are
       a whole load of people here. We are going to work our
       way down.   These are all solicitors and barristers
       representing various people.   It does not matter who
       they represent as far as you are concerned.   They are
       entitled to ask questions and they will, may be, and
       when they have finished if there is anything else I need
       to ask you I will do so.   I will tell you what happens
       after that.

             MISS HAMPTON:   No questions.


                     Cross-Examined by MR. HALE:

    Q. Mr. Buck, do you remember some publicity, I am not sure
       where, unfortunately I was caught a little by surprise,
       I was expecting you tomorrow morning and I would have
       been looking out the newspaper cutting,, but I do remember
       there was some newspaper headlines about you? - A. Yes,
       there w a s .

    Q. Can you remember, and please understand first of all
       that whatever happened and even if whatever happened




H
                                                   II

                                                 P.F. BUCK


           is attributed in any way to drink, it is no intention of
           mine to say that you had anything to do with it. Hindsight
           is very easy but I am sure at the time you had not the
           slightest inkling of what was going to come. Can you
           remember what it was that you said at the time about the
g         extra barrelage that you got in? - A. Well I got the
           extra beer in because I knew the semi-final was coming up.

     Q. Yes, is it right to say that you said that you had had
        these fans, and as you say they were very well behaved
        and so on, at the previous semi-final and "they had
        drunk the pub dry"? - A. Yes, but there is a reason for
        that.  I had only moved in the pub on the 22nd March
        of that year.

     Q. Yes, I make no criticism, Mr. Buck? - A. No, but do you
        want me to explain the reasons why they "drunk the pub
        dry"?

     Q.    On the previous occasion? - A. Yes.

     Q.     Yes? - A. Well as I was a licensee I had only just started
           in the pub trade.   I had only moved in on March the 22nd
T)        of that year; I was new to the business and the stocks
           were only a very low barrelage for that particular pub
           when I took it over and I had hardly got any stock in and
           the reason they drunk me dry was because I had very little
           stock indeed.

     Q. But you were determined to get in extra stocks for this
        time? - A. For this year, yes.

     Q. And can you remind me because I am sorry I have not got
        it in front of me, what was the extra barrelage that
        you ordered? - A. I can't remember.  I know it was
        substantial.

     Q. Substantial? - A. Yes it was because the pub had increased
        as well.

     Q. Had you many other customers in as well as the supporters?
        - A. Yes, I had my regulars in the tap room, yes.

     Q. They came at about 12 o'clock and were there until about
        2.20, some of the supporters? - A. Yes.

     Q. Others came later? - A. Yes.

     Q. Do you say that the latest any of them left would be
        2.20 to 2.30? - A. That is correct.




                                     Q. What, would that mean
Would that mean them getting to the Wednesday Ground
about 2.45, something like that? - A. I should imagine
so.

And they were not - there was not fighting, of course,
or anything like that, because they were all from the
same club?

     THE CORONER:   Were you saying yes? - A. Yes,
sorry.

     MR. HALE:   By which you mean yes, there was no
fighting? - A. No, there was no fighting.

But in over two hours they would have consumed some
alcohol anyway, a few pints each probably, would that
be right? - A. Yes.

Prior to taking this pub, had you been in the licensed
trade before? - A. No, I had not.

But still, by now you have been in for 2% years? - A. I
have.

And you have had the pleasure at times, the pain
perhaps at other times, of observing people as a crowd?
- A. I have, yes.

Would you agree with me that people can be very nice as
individuals and happy and so on, but that sometimes
when you get more than one person together, even two or
three or half a dozen, that there is a thing that
affects people together when they do things that they
would not do as individuals.   Have you seen that sort
of thing occur? - A. Can you'-...?

Have you ever seen people together as three or four or
five together begin, say, horseplay, acting about and
that sort of thing, that they would not do in they were
on their own? - A. Yes, of course, yes.

And that doesn't mean to say that those people are in
any way evil or bad or wicked, it is just that when
people get together sometimes they do indulge in
horseplay, is that right? - A. They do, yes.

Were any of the Liverpool supporters who left your
public house at 2.20 or 2.30, would you have been happy
for them to be leaving your pub and getting into a car
and driving home? - A. Some of them, no.

But of course, as I say, I don't in any way say that it
was any part of your duty to try and stop people from
going to a football match. Thank you, Mr. Buck.
                               P. P. BUCK




     THE CORONER:   Hr. Payne, any questions?

             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Mr. Buck, on the evidence which you have given, you
would normally expect to sell 200 pints on a Saturday
lunchtime? - A. That is correct.

And you sold, including the cases, all together 828? -
A. Thereabouts.

So if you take off the 200 as the average consumption
for a Saturday lunchtime, then the difference, the 628,
is the extra amount of pints sold that Saturday? - A.
That is correct.

Is it your evidence that you attribute that to the
extra visitors? - A. Yes, I do.

And you estimate that there were 150 visitors on that
particular Saturday? - A. Estimate - I can't actually
say.  I have to say that that is roughly - it is a
rough guess.

Right, so on average that would be about four pints
each? - A. I should say so.  I have a photograph, I
don't know if anybody - I took a photograph of the pub
while all the fans were outside and I have that if
anybody ....

      THE CORONER:   I don't think we are going to — — I
knew that you had it. Have you got it in your pocket?
- A . I haven't, no.

I was aware of it but I didn't think it was necessary
because I take it your photograph shows people as being
cairn and well behaved? - A. It is a complete picture of
the pub and everybody outside.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Manning?

           Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING

You said, Mr. Buck, that four or five perhaps were
waiting for the doors to open? - A. That is correct.

By what sort of time had the majority of the people
arrived at the public house? - A. About one o clock.

Did the fact and the knowledge that there was a big
match on at Hillsborough affect your locals in deciding
whether to come in on that lunchtime? - A. Not at all.
                                                   14

                                         P. F. BUCK




    Qi All the regulars were there? - A. Every one of them,
       yes.

    Q. So the ones who may have come at the very earliest when
B      you opened your door      must have had agreater
       opportunity to have had drink than those who perhaps
       arrived either with the majority, or indeed quite late
       on, just popping in for a single pint before they went
       on to the game? - A. Yes, but they may have left
       earlier.

    Q. They may indeed.  In answer to Hr. Hale you
       acknowledged that there were some people who you would
       not have liked to have seen drive a car? - A. That is
       correct.

    Q. And indeed I am not in any way either seeking to adduce
       any criticism at all but were there some people there
       who did seem to have      had quite a lotto drink? - A. No,
       I wouldn't say quite a lot, no.

    Q.    I suppose it is a definition of in what way you view
D        somebody who has had four pints to drink over a maximum
         period of a couple of hours or just a bit more? - A.
         That is correct.

    Q. That you would not say is anything other than a fair
       average? - A. I should say that, yes.

    Q. Thank you very much indeed.

                      Cross-Examined by MR. KING

    Q. Mr. Buck, how many regulars normally come in on a
       Saturday? - A. About fifty or so.

    Q.   And on this particular Saturday they returned   to your
         pub as in the previous years? - A. As normal,   yes.

    Q. There was no question of any fighting or animosity
       between the two groups of people? - A . No, none
       whatsoever.

    Q. Tell me this, on a normal Saturday how much PiIs lager
       do you sell? - A. Probably four dozen.

              THE CORONER:   Sorry, what was the question?

              MR. KING:   How much PiIs lager,' to which the
         answer came back, four dozen:

    Q. You referred to a lot of the fans drinking shandy? - A.
       I did.




H
                                          15


                                   P. F. BUCK



Q., Was that something to do with the weather, because I
    understand it was a fine spring day? - A. It was a
    boiling red hot day, yes.

Q. And of course everybody knows shandy is a mixture of
   beer and non-alcoholic mix, usually something like
   lemonade? - A. I did, yes.

Q. Your impression of the fans in the pub that day was
   that they were causing no problems, that is right? - A.
   That is correct.

Q. They were happy but they were not in any way looking as
   if they were going out for trouble? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. As they left your public house you didn't say to
   yourself, "My God, there's a crowd of thugs going off
   down the road", or anything like that? - A. I said
   goodbye to a lot of them personally because they had
   been in the year before, and I was having a laugh and a
   joke with them.

Q. Yes, would you have them back in your pub again? - A. I
   would.

Q. I have no further questions, thank you.

        MISS SINCLAIR:    No questions.

              Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Q. Would you say it would be the most natural thing in the
   world to celebrate as the fans were doing that day, as
   they were going to a semi-final match? - A. Pardon?  I
   am sorry, I can't hear you.

Q. I am sorry, I will repeat it. Would you say that it is
   the most natural thing in the world to celebrate when
   football fans are going to a semi-final football match?
   - A. Yes, it is.

Q. It would be quite natural to do this. Would you say
   that we would all celebrate at Christmas time and at
   bi hday times, that it was just a natural ...? - A.
   Natural, yes.

Q. Thank you very much.

        MISS ADDLEMAN:    No questions.
             Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

Mr. Buck,   in answer to one of the learned Coroner's
questions   you confirmed that 96 gallons were sold of
the lager   sort.  I think we should seek to clarify the
position.   - A. It was a total, beer and lager.

That is beer and lager? - A. Yes.

The ten to twelve cases of Pilsner lager that you told
us about, what proportion of that, if any, was off-
sales? - A. Sorry, off-sales, did you say?

Yes. - A. It was all drunk on the premises.

All those were on-sales? - A. Yes.

Thank you, Mr. Buck.

                Further by THE CORONER

Two thoughts that occurred to me - did you sell any
spirits? - A. Very little.

If it you can think back to 1988, which is a long time
ago now, of course, but can you recollect by any chance
what time your Liverpudlian regulars, if I can put it
like that, left on that occasion? - A. The first one
you mean?

Yes, tne first one. - A. Well, I sold out of beer about
    I had to finish serving it at 1.15 because I had
sold out of beer.

I see, so they had to go because there wasn't anything
left, unless they wanted just to stay in the pub? - A.
Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Is there anything you want me to
ask? No.   Is there anything arising out of my last
questions?  I i tend to release the witnesses as soon
as we have finished with them, unless there is some
specific reason why we need to retain them.  If there
is a witness who you think you would like me to retain
then you must stand up and say so, so that I can
consider that. Mr. Buck, thank you very much indeed
for being here, and you are welcome to leave us if you
wish. You can stay and listen if you want to, but you
don't have to. Thank you for your help.

    The next witness is Rita Goldsworthy.
✓
               RITA GOLDSWORTHY Called (Sworn)
                                     m m m m m m m m m m ^^m ^^^m m m m m m m m



                         By THE CORONER

    Please sit down, Mrs. Goldsworthy.  Now, you have had
    the advantage of not being the first witness.

          THE CORONER:        (Addressing the members of the
    Jury) Please, if you d o n 1t hear rae you must tell me,
    a ndre m e m b e r that my back is turned to you so you might
    have to stand up and shout because I can't look in two
    directions at once - not yet, anyway:

    Now, you are Rita Goldsworthy, is that right? - A.
    That's right.

    And I think you are the licensee's wife of the Silver
    Fox public house? - A. That is correct.

    It has not nothing whatever to do with the fox we have
    just heard about? - A. No.

    And where is that, that is Unsliven Road, Stocksbridge,
    is it? - A. That is correct.

    Could you tell us approximately how far that pub would
    be from Hillsborough .Stadium? - A. I would estimate
    about eight miles, seven to eight miles.

    So you are a long way further out, in fact? - A. Yes.

    And you live on the premises with your husband I
    believe, is that right? - A. We did, yes.

    On 15th April - in fact, in M a y 1989 you had just been
    there a year, is that right? - A. That is right.

    So you were not in this pub in 1988? - A. No.

    So you know nothing about what happened? - A. No.

    But you w re there on 15th April, 1989? - A. That is
    right.

    And i fact you had been there for about 11 months,
    something of that order anyway? - A. That is right.

    Had you been in the pub trade before or was this also
    your first? - A. It was our first.

    Can you tell me what time you opened on 15th April,
    that is a Saturday as you remember? - A. 11.30.
Did you have - you obviously have regular customers but
did you have    any non-regular customers? -  A.We did,
yes.

And where were they from? - A. From Liverpool.

And did   you divine that from their dress and their talk
or ...?   - A. Thei  accents.




            /Q.   And when you opened
                                 R. GOLDSWORTHY



When you opened at about 11.30, were they waiting to come
in at that point? - A. Just an odd one or two.

Not very many? - A. No.

Did you get them all in a group, ordid they sort  of
float in throughout the morning and afternoon? - A. They
floated in, but it was about twelve o'clock when we
really started to get busy.

Can you remember how many approximately you would say you
had?   I don't mean you counted them, but how many about?
- A. About one hundred and fifty.

As you say at about twelve you started getting busy? - A.
Yes.

Would you say that most of the one hundred and fifty were
in by what time? - A. By 12.30.

So it was really   that half hour when people arrived? - A.
Yes.

You serve food in your pub as well? - A. We do.

I didn't ask Mr. Buck, he may do as well for all I know.
In your case you do serve food and in fact quite a lot of
the Liverpudlians actually ate meals and things? - A.
Yes.

I take it they also drank some alcohol? - A. Yes.

We will come to that in a moment, but just in a word,
what were they like whilst they were with you? - A. Very
good.   Very happy.   In very good spirits.   Very
pleasant.

Can you recollect how much you sold that day? - A. I am
sorry, I c a n 't.

What is your normal? - A. We are very quiet on a
dinnertime, so it is very low normally.

You may not remember how much beer you sold, butcan you,
in the roundest of round terms, say what your takings
were that dinnertime? - A. I believe they were about
£600.

What is the price of a pint? - A. Well, it is £1 now, but
it was about 82p or 85p.

If they had not had any food, of course,that would be
600 pints or thereabouts? - A. Yes.
                                R. GOLDSWORTHY


But they had food as well? - A. Yes.

What is the sort of average cost of the type of meal they
would have eaten in those days? - A. Well, we were only
doing fast food because of the amount. We could only
offer cheese burgers and chip butties because there were
too many to do full meals.

What sort of price would a cheese butty be? - A. One
pound.

So everything is about £1? - A. Yes.

In round terms. - A. I don't think that £600 was
including meals.   That was in beer sales and lager
sales.

In other words, £600 would have been on the alcoholic
side, plus whatever... - A. And soft drinks.

We heard from Mr. Buck that a lot of his customers drank
shandies.  Can you remember whether they did that in your
pub? - A. Yes, we did sell shandies.

Did you sell shorts as well, can you remember? - A. No,
very very little.

So it would have been beer, lager and shandies?   Long
drinks in other words? - A. Yes.

I think that about one o'clock some policemen came to the
pub, is that right? - A. That is correct.

That wasn't because you had rung for them because you
were worried? - A. No.

What did they come for, can you recollect? - A. They came
to ask the people who were in mini-buses to leave and
make their way to the ground straight away.

Was any objection taken to that? - A. No, they all left.

How many approximately would that be out of the 150? - A.
I think we just had two or perhaps three mini-buses, so
about twelve seaters.

So that would have left you what, 70 or-80 people? - A.
Yes.

Would that be fair?   I am not trying to... - A. Yes,
roundabout 80 to 100.

Were left after the mini-buses went? - A. Yes.
                                         R. GOLDSWORTHY


    Q. They presumably were in cars or were they... - A. In
       cars.
B   Q. What time did those 80 to 100 people leave? - A. The
       majority left about half past one, between half past one
       and quarter to two the majority had gone.

    Q. There may have been the    odd straggler, but for all
       practical purposes... -    A. There were perhapsthree or
       four left.

    Q. ...everybody had gone by quarter to two? - A. Yes.

    Q. As far as you were concerned you had no problems with
       them? - A. None at all.

    Q. You were quite happy with them? - A. Very happy, yes.

                      Cross-Examined by MR. HALE:

    Q. May I ask you the same question that I asked the previous
D      witness?   Were any of the people who left you, were you
       at all unhappy about their driving motor cars? - A. I
       believe you could tell the drivers because in each car
       there would be three to four passengers.   In each car
       there would probably be three to four passengers and so
       you could tell quite a few of the driver were drinking
       shandies or just halves, so they were obviously watching
       what they drank.

    Q. That was responsible behaviour so far as driving cars was
       concerned? - A. Yes.

    Q.   However, the others, the passengers  in the car,might not
         have been as abstemious and if they were called upon to
         exercise judgment in any sort way, whether driving a car
         or in any other way, they might well have had more
         alcohol than was good? - A. Yes.

              THE CORONER:   I am not sure whether that is an
         entirely fair question to ask of this witness.   Can you
         try and re-phrase it?

    Q.        MR. HALE:   May I re-phrase it?   If there hadn't
         been those drivers, would you have been happy about the
         passengers getting into a car to drive it away? - A. Not
         all of them, no.

    Q.   Did you sell any off-sales at all? - A. No.
                                R. GOLDSWORTHY


             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Mrs. Goldsworthy, your wet sales takings were about £600?
- A. That's right.

You have estimated about 150 visitors? - A. That's right.

Is it fair to say that that £600 would have been spent by
those visitors? - A. More or less, yes. We only have a
few regulars on a Saturday.

So that if beer was about £1 a pint, or just under, that
would be an average of four pints each, by arithmetic? -
A. Yes, but some were shandies.   That includes...
Those are our takings not just on beer and lager.

You have mentioned that about one o'clock some policemen
came and asked the mini-buses to make their way to the
ground? - A. That is correct.

Of course, this was a special occasion, and the court
knows the kick-off was due at three o'clock? - A. Yes.

And that a lot of people were expected to come supporting
the two teams. - A. Yes.

Can I ask you this:  apart from this special occasion,
have you ever had a similar experience, that the police
have come to ask people to move along to attend at the
ground? - A. No.

To get there in good time? - A. No.   We did have quite a
few visits from the police to make sure everything was
OK.   They just came and had a walk through the rooms to
make sure everything was OK and then left.

     THE CORONER:   Could you say that again? - A. We did
have quite a few visits from the police throughout the
lunchtime session, just checking everything was OK.
They just went through, looked, and then left again.   It
wasn't by our request.   They just came and checked.

     MR. PAYNE:   Those are different policemen, are
they, from the ones who asked the mini-bus drivers to
make their way to the ground? - A. No, it would have been
the same ones.

They came and then went away? - A. Yes.

Do you know if they were visiting other pubs in the area
as well? - A. I could only assume.   I thought they would
be, but...
                                 R. GOLDSWORTHY


             Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

It may be because I have had a moment longer to do my
maths than my learned friend Mr. Payne, but in fact if
your recollection is right that it was about 80p a pint
at that time, even giving account for the non-alcohol
that was sold there would have been something over four
pints on average.   Would that be about right, four
pints, four pints-plus? - A. Yes, but some of that, as I
say, would have been in shandies because it is the same
price.

Yes, but I have deducted it by doing a simple thing of
80p into £600 and coming out at 750 and dividing that by
150 you come out at 5, so I have taken some off for those
who were on the lemonades and things and averaged
backwards.

Some people, of course, who had arrived in the mini-buses
had not had all that long in the public house with you,
had they? - A. No.

Because   they had arrived in their mini-buses and having
come in   they were required by the police officers to get
back in   the mini-buses and go down to the ground? - A.
That is   correct.

Were there any things taken by them on to the coaches or
were they making sure that nothing was taken on to them?
- A. No, I believe the police were checking the mini­
buses and cars.

If we take away the 36, let's say, people, plus perhaps
the drivers of them, although we don't think they could
have been drinking, that left about 80 to 100 in the pub.
Did they show no inclination, having heard the police^
say, "We want you down at the ground in good time," did
they show no inclination to follow on after the mini­
coaches at that time? - A. Well, the majority left at
half past one, anyway.

That was about half an hour after the mini-buses? - A.
Yes.

The fact the police had come and said, "Leave yourselves
plenty of time to get down to the ground," that didn't
seem to persuade the rest of them that they needed to
leave before half past one to quarter to two? - A. No, it
didn't.

Of course they were then continuing to drink, or at least
those who weren't driving for the most part were
continuing to drink? - A. Yes.
                                R. GOLDSWORTHY


You can make figures do almost anything, so I am told,
but again all I suggest to you is that if we go on this
rule of thumb of about four pints per person, we have
taken away three dozen people who had gone and clearly
not had that sort of quota, we take out the people who
were driving and clearly not having that sort of amount
either, is it fair to say, therefore, that the ones who
fell into the remaining category probably had more than
four pints per person on average whilst they were with
you? - A. We were selling soft drinks as well.    The
takings do include everything, so I wouldn't have thought
that anybody would have had more than four pints,
personally.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Were you concerned about the state or the condition of
any of the people who left your pub? - A. No.

You say that soft drinks were sold.   What sort of soft
drinks? - A. Lemonade, orange.

I don't want to go into your pricing too much, but it is
right that soft drinks in fact are more expensive for the
quantity you get than in fact beers and so forth? —•A.
Yes, they are.

Really, in your takings you just don't know what
proportion is soft drinks, what proportion is shandy,
what proportion is beer?   You just don't know? - A. No.

What you do know is that you had no trouble at all with
the fans who were in your pub, that's right isn't it? -
A. That's correct.

What you do know is that when the police came in at about
one o clock and they asked those in mini-buses to leave?
- A. Correct.

They were only asking those in mini-buses at that stage?
- A. They were, yes.

They didn't ask the others to leave, did they? - A. No,
they didn't.

They could have done if they had wanted to, obviously? -
A. Yes.

Those mini-bus passengers and drivers, they left? - A.
They did, yes.
                                R. GOLDSWORTHY
/



You weren't concerned about their condition? - A.

Then at about half past one the majority left? -
did.




           Q. How long would it take
                                    R- GOLDSWORTHY

How long would it take to get to the ground you think
in a car? - A. Normally about twenty minutes.

           Cross-examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

Are you aware of the Government rule which came out
in 1986 and which states that no football coach or
minibus is allowed to arrive in a city centre or town
centre on match day one hour before kick off? - A.
No, I was not aware of that.

            Cross-examined bv MR. RUSSELL:

You say it would take twenty minutes from your pub on
a normal day from your pub to the ground.  Are you
talking about a day other than a match day or a
normal match day? - A. A day other than a match
day.

A day other than a match day?   -   A.      Yes.

About how long would it take to go from your pub to
the ground on a normal match day, in other words, not
an FA Cup semi final day? - A.    I would still say
about twenty minutes on a normal match.

No difference in traffic congestion in going to the
ground from your pub regardless of what is happening
at the stadium? - A. No, probably the main thing
would be if you are actually parking.  You might find
trouble in parking.

That is the element that would add to the time taken
to get from your pub to the ground on foot?
Yes, by car.

Having parked?   -   A.   By car, having parked.

     THE CORONER:     I have not understood this. Are
you saying that ittakes twenty minutes to drive from
your pub to the ground? - A. Yes.

You cannot, of course, say how long it might take
somebody to park? - A. No.

Nor can you say where they park?    -       A.    No.

Because you are eight miles away?       -    A.    Yes.

What you are talking about is driving time?             -
Driving.
     THE CORONER:    Is that clear to you, Mr. Russell

     MR. RUSSELL:    Yes, that is clear, sir.
                                             iT. MOUNTAIN




                     Further bv THE CORONER:

Q.   Just to get this quite clear, you mention the Police
      visited at several times? - A. Yes.

Q.   This was not at your invitation?    -   A.     No.

Q.   My impression is that you did not consider this an
      intrusion. You thought they were there to check that
      everything was safe and in order? - A. Y e s .

         THE CORONER:    Is there anything else that anybody
wants to ask?   No.   I am very grateful, Mrs. Goldsworthy and
like Mr. Buck you may stay if you wish.   Thank you.

    THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I know of no regulation - I
do not think it is terribly relevant about times of minibuses
— but perhaps you would refer me in due course to either the
Act or Statutory Instrument or whatever legal document you
are basing your statement on. You do not have to do it now.
If you just give me the reference we can find it for
ourselves and you do not need to obtain a copy.

                    M R . JACK MOUNTAIN - Sworn

                          Bv THE CORONER:

Q.   Are you Jack Mountain?   -   A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   You are from the Cock Inn, Bridge Hill, Oughtibridge?
A.    Yes.

Q.    That is a suburb I think?   - A.    Yes,     sir.

Q.   You live at the pub with your wife?          - A.    That is
      right, sir.

Q.    Are you     the licensee?   -A. No, my wife is the
      licensee.

Q.   You have been there for nine years?          - A.    At that
      time, yes.

Q.    It is longer now but in 1989 it was nine years? -
A.    Yes.

Q.    Can you just tell me how far your pub is from the
      Sheffield Football Ground? - A. About seven
      minutes by bus and approximately five minutes by car.
      The bus stop is directly outside the public house.

Q.    Then the road is direct?    - A.    Yes,     that is   right.
                                                           zb



                                                          J. MOUNTAIN


    Q.   So about seven minutes on the bus and about five
         minutes if you were driving? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Excluding parking time?     -   A.        Yes.
B
    Q.   You recollect the 15th April 1989?                A.       I do, sir.

    Q.   Did you open at about eleven o'clock in the morning
         that day? - A. Yes, sir, I opened at eleven that
         day.

    Q.   In fact you opened a bit earlier than normal. What
         is your normal opening time? - A. Twelve o'clock,
         sir.

    Q.   What was the reason for that? - A.    There were
         about twenty or thirty football supporters in the car
         park.  They had had a long journey so I decided to
         open at eleven o'clock, sir.

    Q.   These were Liverpudlians?       -    A.     Liverpudlians,
         true.
D
    Q.   You were quite happy about it, by their accent or
         their dress? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.   When they came into your pub, when they first arrived
         these twenty or thirty, they were well behaved? -
    A.   Absolutely.

    Q.   Having got them in, did you serve food as well as a
         matter of interest? - A. Not on that particular
         day, sir.

    Q.   Did you have a build up of fans?            -    A.    Yes.

    Q.   How many did you finish up with in the end? -
    A.   I would say 200 to 250.

    Q.   Initially the build up was quite slow?                 -   A.   Yes.

    Q.   Because it was fairly early. By what time would you
         say you had your 250 in? - A.   Probably 1.30.

    Q.   I think as far as you were concerned at that stage
         they were all well behaved? - A. They were.

    Q.   Were they mainly young or a good scattering? - A. A
         lot of youngsters but a cross-section mainly.

    Q.   Can you remember your takings on that day? - A. Yes,
         sir.




H
                                                   J. MOUNTAIN

Q . „ Can you tell me?   -       A.    Yes, sir, £800 on that
      lunchtime.

Q.   Was it like the other people, beer, lager and
     shandies? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Not much spirits?       -    A.    No, sir.

Q.   I think you felt the average that people were
     drinking was about four to five pints? - A. Yes,
     sir, that was the people who were in early doors.
     The ones who came in later would not have time to
     drink four to five pints but overall it would be four
     to five pints.

Q.   If you had between 200 and 250 in if you multiply it
     out it would be around that? - A. Yes.

Q. How did they come? Did they come by cars, minibuses?
A. Mainly cars.   One or two minibuses, yes, but the Police
 frowned on coaches.

Q.   I am sorry? - A. The Police frowned on coaches.
     They would not allow coaches to stop at the pub.

Q.   You depend on your customers being individuals, so to
     speak, in small vehicles? - A. True.

Q.   Can you remember what time the bulk of the people
     left?  Perhaps you had better start telling me what
     time the first few left? - A.    It started thinning
     out at about two o ’clock.

Q.   At what time had it emptied? - A. By half past two
     the place was empty of supporters. We had our own
     in.

Q.   I am sorry? - A. We had our own customers in but
     the majority, the whole of the Liverpudlians, had
     gone by 2.30.

Q.   They then would have had a five minute drive? -
A.   That is right.

Q.   Plus whatever parking time and walking time on top of
     that? - A. True.

Q.   But you would not know anything about that because
     you were not there? - A.    I was working, yes.

Q.   Can you tell me in very round terms what sort of
     takings you would have on a normal Saturday? -
A.   About 200 on a normal Saturday, sir.
                                                iu



                                                J. MOUNTAIN

Q., So you had about four times?       -   A.   The normal
    trade, yes.

Q.   Were you content and happy with the people when they
     left? - A. Quite happy. We have had them on
     numerous occasions over the nine years I have been
     there. We have never ever had any trouble, not with
     Liverpool. We have had with others but not with
     Liverpool.

Q.   Presumably you had regulars in from 1988 as well? -
A.   Yes, we had some who came back the following week and
     thanked us for what we had done for them who had been
     in on that particular afternoon.

Q.   They had made a special journey?      -    A.   That is
     right.

Q.    That was very gratifying for you, was it not?
A.    That is right.

Q.   If we can just think back to 1988, which is a long
     way back and if you cannot remember please say so,
     can you recollect whether the timing for  departure
     was the same or different so far as your pub was
     concerned? - A.     I would say it was the same, sir.

Q.   What time did the   last of the fans leave? - A. 2.30,
     sir.

Q.   What time did the   bulk of them leave?          - A. About
     two o ’clock they started drifting out.         You could see
     gaps.

Q.   When you next looked at 2.30?   -     A.    That was it the
     place was empty.   They had gone.

Q.   So it would be over that half hour?         -   A. Yes.

                   Cross-examined bv MR. HALE:

Q.   Mr. Mountain, of course, on several occasions when
     you would have football fans, particularly Liverpool
     ones, they are on the same side? - A. Yes, of
     course.

Q.   You do not mix them?   -   A.   No.

Q.   So everybody would be enjoying themselves and there
     would not be any cause for them to take offence at
     anything? - A. None whatsoever.

Q.   You have experience of crowds at other times, have
     you, crowds at football matches? - A.    I have.
                                                .51




                                              J. MOUNTAIN

    Q. , Have you ever had any trouble in your pubs?
    A. Yes, sir.

    Q.   Is that usually when somebody expresses a contrary
         point of view to somebody else? - A-    Quite likely,
B        yes.

    Q.   Everybody is on the same side and there is no
         trouble? - A. True.

    Q.   Somebody offers a contrary opinion and then they may
         well be? - A. That is perfectly true.

    Q.   The people who left at one o 'clock would have plenty
         of time to get to the ground? - A. Yes.

    Q.   They would also have plenty of time to go somewhere
         else to get more drink nearer the ground?

              THE CORONER:   I do not think he can answer that.

              MR. HALE: Can I just ask you the same question
         I asked the others; were any of the people who left
D        your pub, would you have been happy about them
         driving if they had been drivers? - A.' If anybody
         left my pub in a car they were absolutely potty.

         What do you mean by that? - A. On the morning in
         question a Police van drove up. An Inspector got out
         with a Sergeant, a Policewoman and seven Constables
         and directly opposite from my pub they were stopping
         all cars etc. going to the ground, taking any beer
         from them and throwing it in the river.  If you see
         ten Policemen doing this and you come out and get
         into a car with more than two pints inside you in my
         opinion they are potty.

    Q.   As a passenger? - A. Oh no, not as a passenger.         I
         am speaking as drivers.

    Q.   That is the question I asked? - A.    I am so sorry,
         I did not realise you meant passengers.

    Q-   Any of the people who were passengers and, therefore,
         had no reason to restrict their drinking would you
         have been happy if any of those had changed their
         business and started to drive?     A.  I would not
         have known who were the drivers and who were the
         passengers, would I?

         You would not but if you had seen anybody leaving who
         you would not have been happy to be driving the
         car? - A. The premises were inspected by South
         Yorkshire Police at about two o'clock.  Two
         Constables came in and walked round and they were




H
                                              J. MOUNTAIN

         quite happy with what they saw. Had there been
         drunkenness in the pub they would have immediately
         drawn it to my attention.

         You still have not understood the question but I will
B   Q-
         not pursue it. You did say something else and that
         is that the Police were stopping the cars? -
    A.   They were.

    Q-   In your view and emptying them of drink?   -   A.   Yes.

    Q.   So the Police were out at Oughtibridge and taking
         some steps to try and prevent drunkenness getting
         into the ground? - A. Of course.

                     Cross-examined bv MR. MANNING:

    Q.   We cannot be precise about matters, Mr. Mountain, but
         you are quite clear in your own mind that there were
         no people who were the drivers of vehicles who were
         taking any chances so far as you could tell so far as
         drink and driving was concerned? - A. No.
D        So clearly those people were restricting whatever
         they were drinking to small amounts of alcohol or
         soft drinks? - A.    I do not know, sir.  That may
         have been so.  I do not know who were the drivers and
         who were the passengers.

    Q.   You have said that any person who had more than two
         pints would, in your view, have been potty to attempt
         to undertake driving? - A. By all means.     They had
         to go through a Police block.

    Q.   Of course, two pints for the number of people you had
         there would not have explained the total extent of
         your takings? - A. Oh no, no.     The majority had
         four to five pints.  If a driver drank one and did
         not have any more, of course, I was not to know that,
         not with in excess of 250 people in the place.

                      Cross-examined bv MR. KING:

    Q.   Mr. Mountain, how many are your normal regulars? -
    A.   On a Saturday, 50 to 60.

    Q.   You would take about £200?     A.   Yes.

    Q.   You had over four times the normal number of
         customers? - A. True.

    Q-   You took roughly about four times more than normal?
    A.   Correct.




H
                                             J. MOUNTAIN

so the actual amount being drunk by the supporters
was no different from the amount normally drunk by
your regulars? - A. Oh no.

You would agree?   -    A.    No.

You would not agree.  Can you explain to me why, if
you had 40 to 50 people in the pub and you take £200,
and you had 250 people in and you take £800, it is
about the same per head, is it not? - A. No, no
way.

You do not think so?          A.    No.

I will not pursue that for the moment.  The amount of
alcohol which was being consumed and sold also,
however, has to be set beside soft drinks, does it
not? - A. There were not many of those.

Then when the people left your pub you did not say to
yourself, did you, "My gosh, there is a load of
drunken fans going to the grounds"? - A. No
necessity, no.

Because they were not drunk, were they?          -   A.    Not
in my opinion.

               Further bv THE CORONER:

I am intrigued by that reply which Mr. King did not
pursue but I will pursue it. When you say they drank
a different amount, can you just tell me what they
actually meant by that reply? - A. Yes, sir.     If
50 people drink £200 worth, 250 people are including
the 50 people of my own and so there are only 200 to
drink the rest and it works out, sir, at about four
or five pints per head.

It is just a different way of looking at it? ~
True.

    THE CORONER:       Mr. Mountain,      I am most grateful to
you for coming.




                             /MR. K. N. OLLERENSHAW - Called
                                                 K.N. OLLERENSHAW


                     KEITH NORMAN OLLERENSHAW Sworn
      /


                             Bv THE CORONER:

Q. Now you are Keith Norman, is it Ollerenshaw? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. And you are from 'The Owl' public house? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. Neepsend Lane, Sheffield? - A. Yes.

Q. And you live, or at least in 1989 you lived at that
   address? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you still live there? - A. No, no no.

Q. In fact you weren't the licensee, were you, it was a lady
   called Katherine Salt? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. But you managed it? - A. That is right.

Q. So you were the manager? - A. That is right.

Q. And how long had you been at 'The Owl'? - A. About 12
   months.
Q. Had you been there for the previous match in 1988? - A. You
   mean the Hillsborough disaster match?

Q. Yes? - A. Yes, I was there.
Q. I don't mean the 1989 Hillsborough one, not the one where
   we had the disaster but the one the year before? - A. No.

Q. You were not there? - A. No.

Q. Just so that we know, how far is this public house from
   Hillsborough Football Ground in miles if possible? - A.
   It will be about a couple of miles.

Q. Any guesses how long it takes to drive from your pub to
   the ground? - A. A couple of minutes, that is all.  It
   is not worth driving.
Q. A bit longer than that if it is a couple of miles, you
   would have to go quite fast? - A. Well ....

 Q.       Not very long? - A. Not very   long.

 Q.       And you have been inthe licensed trade from some years
          I believe? - A. Yes.

 Q. 15 years, I think? - A. Yes.
                                            K.N. OLLERENSHAW


Q. You were, as I say, working in this pub on the 15th April
   L989? - A. Yes.

Q. And you and Mrs. Salt actually did a bit of thinking before
   hand, didn't you? - A. That is right.

Q.    You decided if there was going to be amatch there would
     be a crowd? - A. That is correct.

Q. So what was it that you thought about, what preparation
   did you make? - A. Well we ordered double stock for the
   match what was going to come up and we got that in for
   the Saturday morning.

Q. Did you make any preparation with regard to the premises
   themselves? - A. Yes, I took all my wine and spirits off.

Q. And what else did you do? Did you remove ornaments or
   anything of that nature? - A. No.

Q. What time were you going to open, sorry,        you were telling
   me? - A. 11 o'clock.

Q. That is earlier than normal? - A. Yes.

Q.    What time do you:   normally open? - A. Normally 12.

Q.    And    you said you were going to buy         in     someextrastock?
     - a . That is right.

Q.   I will give you some figures and see whether        Ihave   got
     them right, if not correct them? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you put in seven kegs of mild beer? - A. That is
   right.

Q.    And   one    keg of Guinness? -A. Yes.

Q.    And    one   keg of cider? - A.Yes.

Q.    And six kegs of Posters lager?   - A. Yes.

Q.    And two kegs of Mansfield bitter beer? - A.That        is right.

Q. And any other kegs of anything else? - A. No, the bottle
   stuff then.

Q. I have put down 69 cases of beer, twelve bottles each?
   - A. Yes.

Q. And that is halves or wholes those bottles. What are they
   pints or halves? - A. Pints and halves.  They were mixed.

Q. Any other bottled stuff? - A. Newcastle Browns.
                                          K.N. OLLERENSHAW


Q. How many of those did you have? - A. We had 34 cases of
   tljem.
Q. And how many are there in a case? - A. Twelve to a case.

Q. And they again halves and pints? - A. No, they were just
   pints.
Q. The other ones, the 69 cases of beer? - A. They were mixed.

Q. How were they mixed, half and half?    - A. Yes.

Q. You all might know how many gallons there are in a keg
   but in fact it is 32 gallons, isn't it? - A. That is right.

Q. So you had altogether 17 kegs of beer, is that right?
   - A. Y e s .

Q. Each keg 32 gallons? - A. Yes.

Q. Each gallon eight pints? - A. Yes.

Q. That makes 4,352.   Is that right? -   A. That is right, yes.

Q. And then in addition to that you had your Newcastle Browns
   408 pints and about 600 pints of the bottled beer.  Would
   that be about right? - A. About right.

Q. That last number is not accurate, that is a guess? - A. It
   is a guess.
Q. So altogether you had quite a lot of stock? - A. Yes.

Q. What is your normal customer load on a Saturday? - A.
   Very quiet and very slow.

Q. Give me a figure? - A. It might average about 100.

Q. On this particular day how many people did you have in?
   - a . More than enough.

Q. I appreciate that but how many would you say? - A. In and
   out.
Q. Pardon? - A. We had outside about 200 and then around the
   car park and inside the pub it was jam packed, so roughly
   I should say about 400.

Q. Inside? - A. Inside at least.

 Q. And 200 outside? - A. Yes.

 Q. So it is about 600? - A. Yes.

 Q. This is on top of your normals? - A. Obviously.
                                                      J/
                                              K.N. OLLERENSHAW


    Q. Were all these extras, if I can call them that,
       Liverpudlians or not? - A. They were half-and-half.

    Q. So there were about half Liverpudlians and half Notts,
       supporters? - A. Yes.
B
    Q. But there were a whole load of them and you had your work
       cut out? - A. That is right.

    Q. Could you tell them apart the Nottingham people from the ....
       - A. Only by their accent, that is all.

    Q. Did you try and keep them apart in any sense of the word?
       - A. No, no.

    Q. Did you notice any difference in arrival times between the
       Notts, people and the Liverpudlians? - A. Not really, no.

    Q. So there was no difference? - A. No.

    Q. What time did the bulk of this 600-odd .... A. As I say
       it started at 11 o'clock I had got a lot of crowd outside
       trying to get in so I let them in.
D   Q. That is why you opened the doors? — A. That is right, I
       had to do.

    Q. Did it build up at all? - A. It did.

    Q. About what time would you say you were at your capacity,
       your maximum? - A. The build-up got up to about half-past-1,
       quarter-to-2.

    Q. And as I say you had quite a lot of work to do and you
       were in fact overrun, you had to call for a bit of help
       from Mrs. Salt? - A. I had to go and fetch Mr. and Mrs. Salt
       down.

    Q. What time approximately did people begin to leave to go
       towards .... A. The football match?

    Q. Yes? - A. They started moving off about half-past-2.

    Q. Were most of the people who were in your pub, I am talking
       about the supporters, I am not talking about your regulars,
       were they on foot, car, mini bus? - A. More or less on
       foot.

       So they had to get from your pub on foot to the club and
       you say the bulk left at about 2.30? - A. Yes.

    Q. What time was the pub empty? - A. 25-past-3.

    Q. Of your 500 or 600 people that you had there can you
       estimate how many you still had in the pub at say
       3 o'clock? - A. 3 o'clock, I should say round about 50
       roughly.



H
                                           K.N. OLLERENSHAW


Q. So in fact the bulk had left before 3 o'clock? - A. That
   is right.
Q. How many would you say you had in about quarter-to-3?
   - A. I would not like to put a figure on it.

Q. Was it appreciably more than at 3. I mean can you sort
   of visualise, don't put the figure because it is not fair
   on you, but was it an appreciably larger number ....
   A. It was a large crowd what was left in.

Q. But also quite a lot had left at 2.30 or thereabouts? -
   A. Yes.

Q. I think I am right in saying, let us just get this out
   of the way, that by the time everybody had gone there
   was not a drop of beer left? - A. There was nothing.

Q. There was nothing? - A. Not a thing.

Q. Water for you and your staff? - A. Water, lemonade.

Q. First of all we have talked about the time that people
   left. Did you notice any difference in the people who
   left as between Nottingham and Liverpudlians? - A. Not
   really, no.
Q. Did you notice any differences in behaviour between the
   Nottingham and the Liverpudlians? - A. Well I would like
   to say one thing, I don't know which side it was,
   Liverpool or the other supporters, but the bar staff got
   plenty of abuse.
Q. They got abuse? - A. Got abuse, yes.      It was not called
   for.
Q.     So whoever did it you can't say, a mixed bunch in there,
      but behaviour was not up toscratch? - A. That is right.

Q.     Wasthere any fighting? - A. Not fighting, no, but there
      was juke-box pulled off the wall and cigarette machine
      pulled away.
Q. So there was some damage? - A. There was some damage, yes.

Q. I think that you did actually have a bit of trouble with
   three particular fans.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

 Q. And did you have to get help from the Authorities? - A. Yes,
    I had to call the Police in.

 Q.   But that was just three who were specifically, who needed
      to be dealt with by the Police? - A. They had to be, yes.

 Q.   Forget those three, just think about the rest, the 597
      who were left. You say out of that lot there would have
      been people who abused the bar staff unnecessarily.  Is
      that right? - A. Yes.
                                                 K.N. OLLERENSHAW


    Q. And what else would you say about their behaviour, if
       anything? - A. It wasn't too bad.

    Q. I have not done the sums, has somebody done the arithmetic
       on the pints, but on average how many pints would you say
       people were knocking back? - A. They were coming up for
B      lager five pints at a time within about five minutes each*

    Q. I missed that? - A. Five pints of lager within the space
       of about five minutes at a time.

    Q. Individuals were? - A. Yes, plus your Guinness and whatever
       you got.
    Q. Could you repeat that answer. My question was:   on average
       what would you estimate was the consumption of individuals
       of either lager, beer, Guinness, whatever? - A. What do
       you mean, each individual?

    Q. Each individual? - A. Each individual, per person, average
       they were taking about five pints of lager or bitter,
       whatever.
    Q. Did you notice whether some people were drinking a lot
       more than others? - A. I think so.

    Q. Would you say that some of the people in your pub had had
              A. Quite enough.

    Q.      "Quite enough" you put it. - A. Too much.

    q   .    proportionally how many? - A. Well if you can take   15
            pints to 20 pints per person.

    Q.      So some of them had ....   A. Quite a lot.

    Q.       What I am trying to find out is this: out of your 500/600
            people who were there, how many of those was it, was it
            50, 100, 150 who were in what I would say the 10 plus
            pint range? - A. I should say quite a few.  I could not
            count them.
    Q. But you don't know how many? - A. No, because I was running
       out all the time.

     Q. In fact I think it is right to say on a normal day, on
        a normal Saturday lunchtime, you say it in your statement,
        you sell 75 pints of beer? - A. Yes.

     Q.     So the amount that you had in was about 69 times that
            amount or may be more, 80 times? - A. Yes, that is right.

     Q. So an awful lot more? - A. A lot more.

     Q. Was there any talk about tickets in your pub? - A. I never
        heard any mention of tickets, no.




H
                                           k .n   . ollerenshaw


Q. You didn't because you were terribly busy? - A. That is right.
      /




                   Cross-Examined by MR. HALE:

Q. So this would be very much a footballing occasion and this
   is what people do when they    go   to football matches isnt
   it in your experience,  they   drink?- A. That is right.

Q. Before the match? - A.     Yes.

Q. And there were quite a few who had had more than enough,
   I think? - A. That is right.

           MR. HALE:   Yes, thank you.


                   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q. Just help the jury will you Mr. Ollerenshaw a little more.
   You have estimated that your pub is about two miles from
   the ground so that is walking distance? - A. Yes.

Q. And you have told the Court that at 2.45 quite a large
   crowd was still left in? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. And you have told the Court that your estimate of the
   average drink was five pints with some people drinking
   between 10 and 20 pints? - A. Yes.

Q. The people who were left at 2.45 were they football
   supporters? - A. Yes.

Q.     And   did they leave to go to the     ground after 2.45?
      - A.As  far as I know, yes.

Q. Can you say anything about their condition? - A. Pretty
   drunk.
Q. And they set off on foot for the ground after 2.45?
   - A. Yes.


                   Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

 Q.   Mr. Ollerenshaw, the arithmetic seems to show that with
      the big  figure, which is the 17 kegs of 32 gallons     _
      times 8 pints you had in your public house at 11 o clock
      some 5,360 pints of beer of one sort or another? - A.
      That is right.
 Q. And the estimate that you make of the maximum number
    of people at any one time was 400 inside and 200 outside.
    - A. Yes.
                                               41

                                            K.N. OLLERENSHAW


    Q. And of course a lot of those people were not there at
       3,1 o'clock? - A. That is right.

    Q. Were not there at 12 o'clock? - A. No, it kept building
       up and building up.
B   Q. Until about 1 or 1.30? - A. That is right.

    Q. And the majority of them had gone by 2.30 although there
       was still a large crowd left? - A. A large crowd left.

    Q. And even doing any simple arithmetic, and I have had the
       advantage of a calculator so you may have to take my
       word for it, if you divide 600 into 5,360, you arrive
       at 8.93, in other words almost nine pints per person if
       everybody drunk that amount? - A. That is right.

    Q. Now obviously you are used to matches at Hillsborough?
       - A. Who me?

    Q. No, the public house? - A. The public house, yes.

    Q. You guessed that it would take a couple of minutes in
       the car to do the couple of miles and I think the
D      learned Coroner suggested to you that it perhaps would
       take a little bit longer than that in a car because
       that would assume the car going down the road at a
       constant 60 miles an hour which it really should not
       be doing, should it? - A. It should not be doing it.

    Q. How long in your estimation on an ordinary day, not a
       match day, does it take to walk from the pub down to
       the ground.  Have you ever tried it? — A. Never tried
E      it.

    Q. You have never tried it? - A. No.

             MR. MANNING:  I won't pursue the line of questioning
       because it would all be theory.   Yes, I have no other
       questions, thank you very much.

             THE CORONER: You put it to the witness that the
       pub starting clearing at 2.30.  In fact I think
       you told me it was 2.45 that people began to clear up?

             MR. MANNING:  The note I have sir is that "people
       started moving off at about 2.30" but there was quite
       a large crowd.  I think it was then put the reverse
       way round. You then said: "How many were left at
       3 o'clock?" and he said "50" and then you said:  "What
       was the position at 2.45?"

             THE CORONER:  You are right,   Your note is correct
       and mine incorrect, thank you.




H
                                     K.N. OLLERENSHAW


              Cross-Examined by MR. KING:
 /

Mr. Ollerenshaw, how many bar staff were on duty? - A.
There were six altogether.

And there was yourself or does that include yourself?
- A. No, that is including me.

What about Mrs. Salt? - A. She was working.

Is that on top of the six? - A. No, that was including her

So there was just six people to deal with about 600 people
- A. That is it.




                         Q. So you must
                                                43

                                          K. N. OLLERENSHAW




Q ^ S o you must have been rushed off your feet? - A. Never
     stopped.

Q. Never stopped.   You didn't do a head count, did you? -
   A. A what?

Q. You didn't do a head count of how many people were in
   your public house? - A. No.

Q. You were doing your honest best to give estimates? - A.
   That is right.

Q. But just to give you an example of how estimates can be .
   horribly wrong, you very fairly said that the public
   house was a couple of miles from the ground, didn't
   you? - A. Yes.

Q. And then you said it would take a couple of minutes to
   get to the ground by car? - A. Yes.

Q. And you accept now that that probably isn't right? - A.
   Probably not.

Q. No, because one can get estimates wrong, can't one? -
   A. You can.

Q. In order to tell the time, and I am not trying to make
   a silly point, but you have to look at your watch,
   don't you? - A. You do.

Q. Or you look at a clock? - A. Yes.

Q. I don't suppose you had a diary and you were saying,
   "My gosh, it's 2.25, there's 550 people here", or
   "2.30, there's 400 people", or anything like that, did
   you? - A. No.

Q. So these estimates you are giving us could be quite
   wrong, couldn't they? - A. I doubt it.

Q. You doubt it. Hell tell me this much, you might have
   had 700 people there, might you not? - A. No, I don't
   think so.

Q. Why not? How can you be so sure there were 600 people
   there? - A. You can't be sure, can you?

Q. No. You see, all this mathematics we .have heard
   presupposes that your figures are absolutely right,
   spot on, but you are not claiming that, are you? - A.
   No.
                                        K. N. OLLERENSHAW




/People who left your pub at 2.45 were unlikely to get
 to the ground at all before 5-to-3 or 3 o'clock, that's
 about right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

The bulk of the people who left - I am talking about
the great mass of people who left - you are not really
suggesting that the great mass of people who left were
absolutely drunk out of their minds, are you, the great
mass of theia? - A. Can you repeat that again?

Yes, you are not suggesting that the great majority of
the people who left - I accept there may well have been
people who were worse for wear      - butthe  great mass of
people weren't worse for wear, were they, for drink? -
A. They were.

You think they were? - A. I think they were.

So if they were, are you saying that if anybody had a
video camera, shall we say, and saw these people
walking along the road, you would be able to say to
yourself, "There's a whole mass of people worse for
wear for drink"? - A. Yes.

So if we had a video of people walking along the road
at, say, 20-to-3, and they were the people who were in
your pub, it would be very obvious that they were
drunk? - A. Could be, yes.

Because you would be expecting them to be reeling all
over the road, I suppose? - A. Yes.

Staggering, I suppose? - A. They would be staggering,
yes.

So what we would be looking for would be a video of
lots of, thousands, hundreds of people staggering along
the road, that is what we would be looking for from
your pub? - A. Yes.

            Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Ollerenshaw, would you expect the fans who were
obviously drunk to be allowed into a football ground
that day? - A. No.

And also,   do you think it would be the duty of the
Police to   stop these fans getting in at the turnstiles.

      THE CORONER:   No, I am not going to permit that
 question.  I don't think that we can ask a lay witness
 to express an opinion as to what the duty of the Police
 is in that respect:
                                        K, N. OLLERENSHAW




,Don't answer the question.   It is not a proper
 question.

     THE CORONER:   It is good experience for you, but
I don't think it is a proper question.  Is there any
other question you want to ask, Mrs. McBrien?

     MRS. McBRIEN:      No.

           Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN

Were there many off-sales, Mr. Ollerenshaw, that day? -
A. No.

None at all? - A. No.

            Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

Mr. Ollerenshaw, has your pub always been called the
Owl? - A. It has, yes. As far as I can gather, yes.

Did it change its name to be more in tune with the
nickname of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club? - A. I
have no idea.

The route to the ground from your pub, if you go
straight from your pub to the ground, brings you to the
Penistone Road end, doesn't it? - A. That's right.

So supporters going to the ground who   had to get in at
the Leppings Lane end not only had to   get to the ground
but then had to go from the Penistone   Road end around
to the Leppings Lane end? - A. That's   right.

Your pub was featured on television following this
disaster, wasn't it? - A. Correct, that's right.

What was the nature of the feature? - A. I can't
remember now off-hand what it was.

I am sorry? - A. I can't remember now actually.

Was there complaint made about the behaviour of people
in the pub? - A. There was.

Is it commonplace for your pub to be featured on
television for its activities before a football match?
- A. No.

Has that ever happened before? - A. Not as far as I
know, no, I don't think so.

In your experience was what you had at the pub unusual?
- A. It was.
                                                           46
                                              K.   U. OLLERENSHAW




                     Further by THE CORONER

Q. I just have one matter.  Hr. King very rightly put to
   you that you didn't go round counting heads? - A.
   That's right.

Q. So when you say 400 and 600 you could be wrong? - A. I
   could be wrong.

Q. That's right, but are you right about the quantity of
   beer that you had in that day, the number of kegs? - A.
   Yes.

Q. There is no question about that? - A. No question about
   that.

Q. And no question about the number of Newcastle Browns         or
   the other beer? - A. No doubt.

Q. So those figures are correct? - A. They are correct.

Q. It is also absolutely right that there wasn't any left?
   - A. There was nothing left.

Q. So if there were less, then presumably on average more
   would have had to be drunk per person, and if there had
   been more people less would have been drunk, on
   average? - A. Yes. We had supporters coiningback   at 6
   o'clock at night trying to get back in.

Q. Sorry? - A. We had supporters coming back at 6 o'clock
   at night trying to get back in and we couldn't open up.

Q. Because you didn't have anything? - A. Because we had
   got none left.

Q. One final question, once you had your approximately 600
   people there was it a static crowd, or did it keep on
   changing? Did you keep on getting new ones, as opposed
   to old ones? - A. No, the same crowd all the time.

Q. They were the same lot? - A. Same crowd.

           THE CORONER:   Any other questions arising out of
   that?

               Further Cross-Examined by MR. HALE

Q. Can I just ask if you have ever had yo.ur bar packed
   with people shoulder to shoulder, so that they could
   not reel or stagger? - A. No.

Q. Have you ever seen people packed that tight? - A. Not
   that tight.
                                            K. N. OLLERENSHAW




        THE CORONER:     Hr. King, anything else you want to
'ask?

            Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Did you refuse to serve anybody? - A. No.

     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen anything you
want me to ask? Mr. Ollerenshaw, thank you very much
indeed for being here this afternoon.

     MR. KING:         Sir, one of the families would like to
put a question:

The question which I am asked to put to you, and I do,
is could you tell us what the takings were? - A. I
couldn't, no.

     THE CORONER:   I think we will pause for ten
minutes and then have another go at some of these
videos and get it over and done with, so to speak?
Gentlemen, is that satisfactory to you, if we rise for
a few minutes? We will aim to make it ten, so we delay
ourselves for as little as possible, then I think we
will finish the video because it is only another ten
minutes and we might as well see it through and then we
have got two more which are short.  If we can do them
we will, if not we will do them at the next convenient
opportunity.  Is that satisfactory to all of you, or
very inconvenient? We will rise then.

                   (Short Adjournment)

     THE CORONER:  We will carry on with the video and
finish it. Can you switch it on and dim the lights,
please?

(Videos numbered C279 and SDB1 commenced at this point)
             (Purina the showing of SDB.l the following
                      intervention took place)
     /

    MR. PAYNE:   Would you just stop the video for a
moment?   May I ask, sir, through you of the person who
made the tape what time are we looking at on the left hand
screen because we think it looks like 14:58?

    THE CORONER:         On the left hand screen I make that
14:59.

    MR. PAYNE:          That screen has not moved for quite some
time.

         THE CORONER:    Can you explain that?

    PC BROWN:   I did not compile the tape.  One of the
reasons could be that the camera in 88 was not pointing at
that part of the ground.

    MR. PAYNE:   The point is that for about the last five
minutes the comparison has not been exact and I wanted to
make sure that was plain.

    THE CORONER:   I think that is a very valid point and
I think it is a defect in the compilation.  I cannot give
you a complete answer but my understanding is that if it
is like that there is none available.

     MR. PAYNE:   Quite.  I am not certainly criticising,
sir.   It is a very useful exercise but I just wanted to be
sure that we had got the time right.

    THE CORONER:   You are quite right. We are comparing
scenes but early on. You may have noticed there was
14:53.

    MR. PAYNE:   There were, yes.  The last note I have
got is the comparison at 14:51 is quite accurate.

    THE CORONER:   It is a valid point and one has to
accept that this is really to give an impression rather
than an answer.

    MR. PAYNE:          At this moment it is quite a good
comparison.

         THE CORONER:   That is right, and that is 14:59-     It
is        14:58 on the other, and that is within about a minute.

         MR. PAYNE:     Thank   you very much.

             (The video tape SDB.l ceased at this point)

    THE CORONER:   The last tape is only a few minutes in
length but the quality is not very good. It is the best I
have got though.  I just wonder whether in view of the
time we ought to have it now.   There is a tiny bit of 89
on that and then it is 88 and 81.   I think you compiled it
for. me at my request when I viewed it in order to make it
easier for us to see.   Shall we leave that until tomorrow
or the day after, whenever we find a convenient ten
minutes or so, and we can slot it in then?    Is there
anything else?




                                    /MR. HALE
    / MR. HALE:  Before you rise, sir.   Will there be an
opportunity later, perhaps with individual witnesses, for
those of us who represent people to comment on those
pictures because I do feel they are extremely telling and
what we have seen in the last twenty minutes may hold a clue
to the whole matter?

     THE CORONER:   Within my control, yes.   I am not
giving a blanket consent that anything can be said, but that
is one of the reasons why we have shown it because it may
well be convenient and useful, yes.   That is the idea.

     MR. HALE:      I am much obliged, sir.

     THE CORONER:     We can let the jury go.

     (in the absence of the jury)

     THE CORONER:     Yes, Mr. Catchpole?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    I hope I can be relatively short. _ I
don't intend to make any formal submissions, but I rise in
relation to the application made by Mr. Isaacs yesterday
along with a number of other of my learned friends.        I
rise to express our support for that application, although I
am not going to go   into any detailed submissions in^ the-
absence of Mr. Duckenfield.    Perhaps I can very briefly
explain that basis.

     I, along, I believe, with quite a few other people in
this room were taken by surprise yesterday by the
application made by Mr. Isaacs.

     THE CORONER:   Can I stop you?      I did give Mr. Isaacs
my assurance that we weren't going to take anything, except
insofar as I was prepared to hear whether people in general
supported it.     I think it is only fair to Mr. Isaacs -
reserve the point.      It is not that I am cutting you short
but I want him to be here if he wishes to be here.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   It is actually a matter relating to
the club witnesses.   I am not actually commenting on the
merits of Mr. Isaacs' application.    I am, if you like,
grabbing on to the coat tails.    I don't intend to go into
any detail because it would not be right in the absence of
Mr. Isaacs.

     It is simply to say that having heard Mr. Isaacs and
the clarity with which he expressed himself, it was apparent
there was very considerable force in what he was saying.
My plea, however, is for a consistency of approach.    That
is, that all those people, and there are two people at the
club who fall into this category, Mr. Mackrell and Mr.
Locke, who face the possible risk of a prosecution, should
be treated exactly the same.   If you are minded to grant
Mr. Isaacs' application, the opportunity should be afforded
for others who fall into that category of submitting
transcripts in the place of giving evidence.

     I have to say that had it not been for the offer given
by Mr. Isaacs of the transcripts for evidence, at the very
least the club would have remained neutral or possibly
opposed the application on the grounds that everyone should
have been called to give evidence here.   We actually
believe there is some considerable benefit in putting those
transcripts in because it enables you and, more importantly,
the jury, to have access to much more information than they
are likely to receive from the people who are going to be
giving evidence under oath and claiming privilege.

     My plea is for consistency, and that applies to Mr.
Mackrell and Mr. Locke and obviously if you are minded to
grant Mr. Isaacs' application and mine, it would be on the
basis the transcripts go in as was discussed yesterday.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.   I will not comment on that
because...

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   It wasn't intended for comment.   If
necessary I will actually go into much more detailed
submissions as to why Mr. Mackrell and Mr. Locke fall into
those categories.

     THE CORONER:   When the time comes I will obviously
look to you again and if appropriate ask you just to repeat,
or at least summarise it.    I haven't felt under any
particular pressure to reach a decision on this matter, but
I am considering it carefully.   Mr. Isaacs' instructing
solicitors are not here either, but I don't think I am doing
anything wrong by saying what I am going to say.   My
intention is that as soon as I am minded to take the matter
further I will get my Officers or somebody to contact the
instructing solicitors - I know who the people are because
we have already named them and that will include, of course,
your instructing firm - and say I am going to deal with this
matter on whatever date it may be and at such a time and for
them to make sure they are here if they want to hear what is
happening.   Then it will be up to the representatives to
make sure they are here.    If they are not, then it is on
their own heads.

     I think that is the best way of doing it.   That
includes you as well, Mr. King.

     MR. KING:   Sir, can I simply say that I have yet to
make any submissions to you in relation to the club or,
indeed, for example, Dr. Eastwood, on the application which
has just been made?

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MISS SINCLAIR:   Sir, in the light of what my friends
have just said, I repeat the position I stated yesterday.
Dr. Eastwood does not wish to make an application in like
terms to that made by my learned friend Mr. Isaacs
yesterday.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, he did dissociate himself from it,
I remember.

     MISS SINCLAIR:   Sir, he remains able and willing to
attend and assist this court as he may.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I understand.

     MISS HAMPTON:   Sir, may I say on behalf of the City
Council that the City Council is considering its position
with regard to its two witnesses.  We would therefore be
grateful to be informed when you are going to make your
decision.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.   That in fact means virtually
everybody.   I think that would be the easiest thing and
then nobody can say that they don't know!   In fact it does
mean everybody apart from Mrs. McBrien, but you will know
about it because you will hear it in court.




            MR. MANNING:   Now for something
      MR. MANNING: And now for something entirely different.
It was indicated by you sir at the former meeting that the
28th might be a day when this room was unavailable to you
and that you might have in mind to take the jury to then
view the ground because it would be a useful use of that
time.
     It would help me if that were still your plan because
obviously I have been, there might be others who are in a
like position.
     THE CORONER: There are rumours, if I can put it like
that, that in fact the Council are going to meet somewhere
else, I don't know where they are going to meet. The reason
why we had to vacate was because it is a Council meeting day
and they wanted to be in here, not surprisingly, but I have
heard a rumour that they may waive that requirement.  Now
if that were to hhppen my present thinking is we would still
go ahead with our visit, I have not mentioned it to the
jury yet, but my intention is to use the morning for a visit.
I could not do it today because I thought it was too late
and the wrong time to ask them, but probably tomorrow, I will
discuss it with them in your presence, of course, but then
if we have access to the room I would like to come back in
the afternoon and get on.
     MR. PAYNE:     Sir, I wonder if I might mention a different
subject?

     THE CORONER:    Yes.
     MR. PAYNE:  It applies to something that.Mr. Hale said a
moment ago about the opportunity to comment on the video
film which was shown last this afternoon.  I mention this
because it is something which may crop up later on during
the Inquest and as he made those remarks I was looking at
Rule 40 of the Coroners' Rules at page 389 in Jervis.

     THE CORONER:     This is a question of addressing me on
facts, is it?
     MR. PAYNE: Yes. Of course it is open to Counsel and
Solicitors to question witnesses and thereby to elicit
any evidence which they think may be helpful to the Coroner
but the question of submissions or comments it appears to
us falls into the category of Rule 40, so I am mentioning
it at this stage in the context of Mr. Hale's remarks
because we anticipate that it may crop up elsewhere during
this Inquest.
      THE CORONER:  Thank you.  If Mr. Hale meant a submission
 on fact then clearly I misunderstood you and the answer to
 that is no. What I thought he meant was that if he had^
 a witness he might say to him:  "Now look did you see that
 picture?" and ask a question about it, in other words
it would be the witness whose attention would be drawn to
the object. Was that what you had in mind?

    MR. HALE:   Yes, you have understood me perfectly sir.

     THE CORONER: That I think meets the point, but you
are quite right that Coroners' Courts are different to
other courts and you cannot address me on facts. Why that
should be I don't know.  The rule is quite clear and as you
know within reason I want to stick to the rules.  Is there
anything else that we want to say?

     Can I just say a quick word to Mrs. McBrien.
Mrs. McBrien, you raised a point yesterday with Inspector
Layton about the 14.48 entry and you said it had been
corrected in the transcript of the interim Inquest and
I said I would look. Well I have looked and you are mistaken
as far as the interim Inquest is concerned.  You may be
thinking of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry, that is a possi­
bility but the point, I have looked at it myself and you
are mistaken but you can check it for yourself.

     MRS. McBRIEN: Sir, it was altered in John's Inquest
notes to allow ....
      THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I am not going to go into
that.   I have looked and I am quite satisfied that the point
was dealt with and your question and in fact what you are
now saying is incorrect as far as the interim Inquest into
John's death is concerned and you must get a transcript and
you must look at it yourself and that is all I am going to
say on that.

     Yes, Mr. King?

     MR. KING: Could I just assist Mrs. McBrien in relation
to that because she did have a word with me and ask if I
would help her. Although I don't represent her ....

     THE CORONER:  Yes indeed, I appreciate that.   I am
very happy if you will.

     MR. KING:  Sir, if you were to look at a convenient
moment to a transcript of Superintendent Marshall at the
Taylor Inquiry, pages 106—107, and that is the matters
which Mrs. McBrien has drawn to my attention, there is
there in the evidence of the Officer a concession and
agreement that what was originally thought to have been
an influx of fans of their own volition at. that time, that
is the first opening of Gate C, was in fact with the^
encouragement of — and no one would necessarily criticise
this at the moment - with the encouragement of Officers
who were at the gate and that is what I think Mrs. McBrien
probably has in mind.
     THE CORONER: That may be so. The point I am making
is that it was not dealt with at the interim Inquest. What
happened at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry was not and is not
evidence here yet.  It might become evidence but that is
all and that is why I wanted to correct it.  It is very
important. We cannot and must not, I know none of you would,
confuse the evidence in April 1989, April/May 1990 and what
we are doing now with what Lord Justice Taylor did between
whenever it was, 15th of May and August, whenever it was,
I can't remember the exact dates, but thereabouts.

     MR. KING: Sir, I think Mrs. McBrien simply wanted to
draw your attention to the fact that it is an issue which
has yet to be investigated as to whether or not at that time,
that is to say at 14.48, the fans entered the gate simply
of their own volition or as Mrs. McBrien and I would say
on behalf of the relatives, in fact with the encouragement
of Officers.
     That is a matter of evidence.  I think she was concerned
that the commentary given by the Officer yesterday was
stating as a fact that which had yet to be resolved.

     THE CORONER:  I see. Okay, well fair enough.   I accept
what you are saying is that we may need to resolve some
aspects with regard to that.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, before you go just on that point
again I rise on behalf of Mrs. McBrien.  She has actually
submitted a transcript from Superintendent Marshall's
evidence to you with a note, and I know the point she
is concerned about is actually vital to her.  Sir, it has
been brought to your attention.  I believe she should have
a say on the day.
     THE CORONER: That is why I referred to Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry because I knew that is what she is basing
it on but what I was concerned about was that we should
be quite clear as things stand that point has not been
dealt with in my Inquest.  Now hopefully, and insofar as it
is necessary, we will deal with it.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: We have had discussions and I think
Mrs. McBrien would like you to know how important it is
to her.
     THE CORONER: Okay, Mrs. McBrien, you have got lots
of support, I can see.
     Is there anything else that we need to do this evening
before we go?  (No response). Well in that case, ladies
and gentlemen, shall we adjourn till tomorrow morning.

            (The Inquest was adjourned until 10 a.m.
                     the following morning) ~
