                                                                  J "' /
                                                                           C'
                                                                                r%.




DRAFT.




I am now going to turn to giving you a number of d i.
                                                    1 . 0 0 1 1 onr,



on issues of law.    As yon w.i.J.I :•'■-■ in a moment, a     a jori ty
                                                            111


of the time will be occupied with aspects relating to a

possible verdict of unlawfully I id led.      You are not to

construe this as meaning that I am directing you either

towards or away from that particular verdict,        i.t is simply

that the legal concepts and aspects which have to be

considered are a.     numerous,   b-   complex    c. important and

d.   differ in certain respects from those applicable to

some of the^verdicts whrch may be open to you.

However, before I get down to that, I wish to draw your

attention to the provision of the Coroners Act 1988 Section

II (5) (b).
Furthermore, see Section 6 of that Act.



As an aside I should perhaps mention that this amendment

was introduced in 1977 prior to that, it had been possible

for coroners' juries to name people who they thought had

been guilty of murder, manslaughter or infanticide.

In addition to the Act of Parliament, there are also Rules

which apply to coroners and the current rules are the 1981

coroners rules.
I therefore now draw your attention to Rule 36.             This rule




BAFAAG
fc                   1

£ p t7 h f~ >   1"
reads as follows




The effect of this rule is that neither you nor I are

allowed to put on to the inquisition what used to be known

as 'riders ' i.e., advice or comments.
I am also required to draw to your attention Rule 42.



It is essential that the provisions of this rule together

with the provisiions of Rule 36 (b) are strictly adhered to

by you and indeed by me.



SELF INCRIMINATION.



I also wish to draw your attention to Rule 22.   This

reads:-

     1.   "No witness at an inquest should be obliged to

           answer any question tending to incriminate

           himself.

     2.   Where it appears to the coroner that the witness

          has been asked such a question, the coroner shall

          inform the witness that he may refuse to answer".



This is an exceedingly important rule and is fundemental to




BAFAAG
the present system of justice in the United Kingdom.

You may have noticed that some of the witnesses were told

of the rule and of the privilege to which they were

entitled and some exercised their rights.    Put another way,

n   witness has a right of silence.



RIGHTS OF SILENCE.



It would be grossly unfair and quite contrary to the

intention of the rule and indeed to justice if you were to

construe a refusal to answer a question under the privilege

as an admission or an indication of guilt.    To construe the

privilege in such a way would not only run contra to the

whole principle of the rule but would in effect place the

person who exercised the privilege in a far worse position

than if he had in fact answered the question.

The position is simply this:-    That you may not construe

silence as constituting any part of the evidence on which

your deliberations are based.    You have to be satisfied

from the evidence which you have heard and not from

evidence which you have not heard nor may you draw any

inferences from the exercise of the privilege.    Under no

circumstances must the privilege be turned into a noose.



VERDICTS.



I now remind you of the possible verdicts which you might




BAFAAG
1

                                   _ 4 -




    be able to consider in respect of these inquests



         1.   Unlawfully killed.
         2.     Accidental death or misadventure (I will tell    you

              now that in law, there is no difference    between

              these two terms. We will deal with     this in a

              little more detail later on).

     ?   3.   A special verdict which again I will deal with a

                little later on.

         4.     What is known as an open verdict.



    STANDARD OF PROOF.



    In considering the evidence, you obviously will have to be

    satisfied that the necessary standard of proof has been

    achieved in order to enable you to reach one or other of

    the verdicts which I have mentioned.      Different standards

    of proof are required for different verdicts.      If I may

    summarise first of all, in respect of the verdict of

    unlawfully killed you have to be satisfied to the standard

    which can be described as the criminal standard of proof.

    In respect of accidental death or misadventure (or a

    special verdict) the standard wou Id be that of the balance

    of probability.     In the case of an open verdict there is in

    a sense no standard for the reasons which you will see

    later on.




    BAFAAG
CRIMINAL STANDARD.




Let us then deal in a little more detail with the standard

of proof required for unlawfully killed.   Before you are

able to bring in a verdict of unlawfully killed, you     have

to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt (or to put it in

slightly more modern language, you have to be satisfied so

that you are sure) that the evidence which you have     heard

and which you are considering, satisfies you that both the

act and necessary mental state of the criminal offence

which you are considering has been made out.



In respect of the other verdicts except of course an open

verdict the standard of proof is the lower one normally

described as the balance of probability.   It will be
obvious to you therefore that a very much higher standard

of proof is required before you can bring in a verdict of

unlawfully killed.



ORDER OF CONSIDERATION.



As a direct consequence of this the order in which you

consider the verdicts becomes important. In considering the

verdicts, you have to apply your mind to the verdict of

unlawfully killed first of all.   You have to consider the

verdict in respect of each of the deceased.    You have to

apply the facts within the context of the law as explained




BAFAAG
to you and you must apply it in respect of each of the

parties whose conduct you are considering based as I have

already said upon the evidence which you have heard.




UNLAWFULLY KILLED - INTRODUCTION.



What then are the legal parameters or requirements that

have to be met in the context of these inquests before yon

are able to consider a verdict of unlawfully killed.

I do not propose to take you through the whole law of

murder or manslaughter but for the purposes of these

inquests the criminal equivalent of the verdict of

unlawfully killed is one of the forms of involuntary

manslaughter and by definition excludes what we know to be

murder or any other aspects of deliberate killing.      The

legal requirements for this type of manslaughter have been

considered in various cases and in particular a case known
as   r   _ v _ west London Coroner Ex parte Gray.   In that case

which dealt with an alleged unlawful killing by a police

officer by neglect, Lord Justice Watkins set out the

matters which a jury have to be satisfied on beyond

reasonable doubt.
Before I go through the points I should add that although

in that particular case the issue related to neglect on the

part of the police, the fundamental principles of the

direction would apply in respect of anybody whom you might




BAFAAG
!
                                    7




    be considering as falling within the purview of this

    verdict.



    You have to be satisfied of the following points in the

    first instance



         1.    That the person whose conduct you are considering

               had a duty^to have regard to the health and

               welfare say safety of the deceased^. *1



         2.    That in the circumstances, there was a failure to
                                                           /'

               do what should have been done^for the health and

               welfare, say safety of the deceased!.



         3.    That that failure amounted to a substantial cause

               of death.



         4.    That the failure amounted to recklessness.



         5.    Recklessness means that there was an obvious and

               serious risk/to the health and welfare (safety)
                                  *2
               of the deceasedjj and that the person whose conduct

               is being considered having regard to his duty was



                  a. Indifferent to such risk or



                  b. Recognising that risk oejtid be present,

         *1    (aliter:    not to c a u s e i n j u r y to the d e c e a s e d )

         *2    (aliter:    of i n j u r y to t h e d e c e a s e d )
    BAFAAG
                   deliberately chose to run that risk by doing

                    nothing about it.



         6.   It must be clearly understood however that a

              failure to appreciate that there was such a risk

              would not by itself be sufficient to amount to

              recklessness.


         7.   You can only return a verdict of unlawfully killed

              if you can attribute these ingredients to a single

              individual whose conduct is being called in

              question. Such an individual should on no

              account be named or otherwise identified.


JlAH   QLkj



   CAUSATION.



   The next point that I think I have to mention is the issue

   'Causation'.  You have to be satisfied that the a^:t or
      / c                       '9e?m                        0^4 ^ - <
   ommislon complained of fe«rs acLuall“j— cdUsfed the injury or

   tne death in this particular case.      Not every causative act

   would give rise to liability.     For example it could be

   argued that no-body would have died if the game of football

   were not played in the United Kingdom or, bringing it

   slightly nearer home, if there was no F.A. Cup competition.

   All of these in one sense are causes, but with none of them




   BAFAAG
I think would we have any difficulty in excluding them as

causing these deaths because they are obviously too remote.

(1 1   other words, you have to be satisfied that the act    01   :

oinniision which you are looking at is:-



         a.   sufficiently close, sufficiently related to tin>

              event as to be .logically classifiable as causative-'

              of death and



         b.   is a substantial cause of death.



RISK & RECKLESSNESS.




Recklessness is at the heart of a verdict of unlawful

killing.       In addition to what I have already told you I

think it might be helfpul if I illustrated the legal

approach by reference to what was said in another leading

case which is known as R - v - Lawrence.         The details of

that case do not concern us but it may help to understand

what is meant by recklessness if I give you a couple of

quotes.



The first one is from Lord Hailsham.         He says when speaking

about the word reckless that:-



         "Unlike most fenglish words it has been in the english




BAFAAG
                        -   10   -




     language as a word in general use at least since the

     eight century /& .101 ■ almost always with the same meaning

     applied to personal conduct, as a state of mind

     stopping short of deliberate intention and going

     beyond mere inadvertence".



Lord Diplock comments     "that the word     not acquired a

special meaning as a term of legal a v r. but more its popui<ii

o r dictionary meaning of ^areless\ regardless or heedless
of possible harmful consequences of ones act".      He goes   011



to say:-



     "One does not speak of a person acting recklessly even

     though he has given no thought at all to the

     consequences of his act...unless the act is one that
     presents a real risk of harmful consequences which

     anyone acting with reasonable prudence would recognise

     and give heed to".



Lord Diplock also says:-




     "Recklessness on the part of the doer of an act does

     presuppose that there is something in the

     circumstances that would have drawn the attenti on of

     an ordinary prudent individual to the possibility that

     his act was capable of causing the kind of serious,




BAFAAG
       harmful consequences that the section which creates

       the offence was intended to prevent and that the risk

       of those harmful consequences occurring was not. so

       slight that an ordinary prudent individual would

       feel justified in treating them as negligable-

       It is only when this is so that, the doer of the act   is

       acting recklessly if before doing the act he either

       fails to give any thought, to the possibility of

       there being any such risk or having recognised that,

       there was such a risk he nevertheless goes on to

       do i t " .



Although as I say, the precise details are of no concern

of ours, you may be interested to know that it was a case

which dealt with the issue relating to reckless driving and

one of the aspects which the law lords were applying their

minds to was the distinction between an offence of reckless

driving and driving without due care and attention.

It seems to me that not every assumption of a risk can

therefore be described as being reckless for example, every

operation performed by a surgeon carries with it the

inevitable risk of injury as well as a risk of other

adverse consequences including in some cases, death.      This

risk in many cases is both obvious and serious and can

occur however competent the-operation is in fact carried

out.

The assessment of whether or not a patient should proceed




BAFAAG
to operation is made both by the surgeon and by the patient

by assessing this benefit^ equation and trading off the

advantages and disadvantages of operating or not.                      It

would however be somewhat surprising if say having

considered a risky operation and decided, to proceed,                       the

surgeon having performed it competently were to be

prosecuted for manslaughter because in the events the

patient had died.



Summarising then again, recklessness is defined as:-



     1.   There has to be an obvious and serious risktto the

          health and welfare of the deceased^                     If that has

          been established then,



     2.   That the person whose conduct was called in

          question either,



          a.   Was indifferent to such risk or



          b.   Recognising the risk has decided to go on

               and take it.



Beforehowever coming to the         definition of recklessness in

thistype of    case, as I have already indicated there are

three preliminary steps which you have to consider and

which we will look at in a little more detail now.


          * (aliter:   of i n j u r y to th e d e c e a s e d )

BAFAAG
    1.   That there has to be a duty of care.     That in many

         instances is not too difficult to determine.     As a

         general rule if somebody undertakes to perform a

         task e.g., stage a football match or organise It

         or supervise it, they can be assummed to have a

         duty of care towards the people with whom they

         come in contact.   Slightly more difficult, but.

         I think still relatively straightforward is the

         issue of whether or not fans who attend also     have

         a duty of care to each other -   I   can see no reason

         why if road users have a duty of care to others

         upon the road, pedestrians and fans attending do

         not also have a similar obligation towards each

         other.



    2.   Breach of duty i.e.,



         Failure to do what should have been done.      This

         may require more thought.



Simply because something goes wrong does not mean that

there has been a breach of duty.



There are two major aspects which you need to think about:-




BAFAAG
Professional

Person.


    0 j. a.
     .          You have to be satisfied that in the case

                of a professional who is required to

                exercise special skill, knowledge or

                experience the standard of care which he is

                expected to achieve is that of an ordinary

                skilled member of that profession and which

                such ordinary skilled, person would have

                exercised or professed to have had in respect

                of that special skill-   We are not talking
                about some paragon of virtue nor of somebody

                who is particularly bad, it is an ordinary

                average member of that profession or class.

Ordinary

individuals.


           b.   In respect of people who do not profess to

                have special skills you apply the standard of

                an ordinary prudent person as exemplified by

                yourselves.
     ..... „_If when you apply this test you were to come

                to the conclusion that there has been no

                breach of duty in respect of the person who

                you are considering, then there is no need to

                consider the other points in respect of him.




 BAFAAG
    )i   <2 .        The    second aspect                is w h a t      I would describe               as a

                     dilemma          or   a crisis           situation.             If a p e r s o n    is

                     faced with            an e m e r g e n c y      then      the degree         of c a r e

                     mav varv with                the    a \ rcumstances•                In a n e m e r g e n c y
         A                                                                                       . .        .
             \       the     f ac t     that      in    the    events         a wrong       decision        is

              1      taken        ne e d    not    constitute            a breach         of    duty

                 I   provided            that     t he d e c i s i o n w a s       not    unreasonably

                 I taken          in t h e c i r c u m s t a n c e s      i^eiating w h i c h

                 | prevailed               and    taking       all      the    aspects         into    account .




If y o u         come       to    the c o n c l u s i o n      f ro m    t he e v i d e n c e    that    the.ro

was      an      emergency              situation you           then      have       to d e c i d e    whether

the      response            to t h a t      s i t u a t i o n was       not    unreasonable.




Y o u m a y of c o u r s e               come     to    t he c o n c l u s i o n     that      there was         no

emergency              situation            at all       or    alternatively              the    situation

itself            had been caused                 or p r e c i p i t a t e d b y a b r e a c h of d u t y

b y th e p e r s o n w h o s e              conduct you           are      considering.               You must

have      it c l e a r l y          fixed        in y o u r m i n d s      that      b r e a c h of    duty      has

to be         proved beyond                 reasonable          doubt         from the ev idence,                and

as— t h a v e          a l r e a d y m e n t i o n e d .w . i »d e a l        with     in m o r e     detail,

that      it m u s t         be     attributable              to o n e     individual           and    not C          ,A

^asumation              of       t he    acts     of d i f f e r e n t     p e o p l e . ^ The      third

point         is t h a t         the     failure        amounts         to a s u b s t a n t i a l     c a u s e of

d e a th .           This    is a n        important          point      because we            have    in the

c o u r s e of         this       inquest         beeri' l o o k i n g     at   the      activities         of

all      kinds         of    people         including          some      junior        officers        or   as

has      been mentioned                    'small       cogs     in a b i g m a c h i n e ' .          There




BAFAAG
1

                                -   16   -




        may well have been some failures by very many people but it

        should not take you very long to exclude the vast majority

        of the people from your deliberation.



        The word 'substantial' should be given its usual meaning-

        II   is an ordinary English word find T am sure that you

        understand it.                                         ^



        If the person whose conducl/you are considering does not in

        your view meet the^criteria Jyou do not have to pe^ee-ive- to

        consider the issue of recklessness in respect of him. /^Tf

        it: does meet the criteria the most that you have in fad

        established would be that he had been negligent.      It is

        e v e n poss^ible that you may feel that he was very negligent
    7   or/grossly negligent but that is not as the law is at the

        moment, sufficient ground for you to bring in a verdict of

        unlawfully killed.     It simply seems to me to be in this

        particular type of unlawful killing, the opening of the

        door which enables you to consider the heart of the matter,

        namely whether or not there has been recklessless as

        defined by the judges.      I remind you again that you have to

        be satisfied on three basic matters in respect of

        recklessness.



               1.   That there is an obvious and serious risk of

                    injury.   I— use the word 'injury' because that is

                    the term that has been used by many of the judges




        BAFAAG
                                        18              ( (fl^ lCV^ < jU %*.
                                                                 ^ J
                               -             -


                                                        v
 problem which you are faced with.               You may feel that the

 word 'obvious' means something like 'perfectly evident,

 ntaring one in the face, immediately apparent "and indeey

 these terms were canvassed before Mr.              Justice Turner/      Mi

 Justice Turner also clearly distinguished the word
                                   ft


  n ivious   and    serious'       w-pstn being mere synonyms of

 reasonably foreseeable            You may ask obvious to whom?

 Clearly in the first instance the person whose conduct               you

 are considering, but in assessing that you apply the test

 of the ordinary skilled professional, as I have already

 described or if you were thinking of a non-professional

 person, an ordinary prudent individual as exemplified by

yourself and who might find himself in that position or

condition on that day.         I also want to make it clear to you

that obviousness on its own is not enough.               The definition

clearly includes the word 'serious' and you have to give it

appropriate weight.       In other words there must be an

obvious and serious risk of injury.               If you were satisfied

that there was an obvious and serious risk you are not yet

home and dry       because you have to ask the next questions

namely, was the person whose conduct you are calling in

question indifferent to the risk or having recognised the
risk decide to go ahead and take it.




In order to avoid any misunderstanding Lord Justice Watkins

then adds that it must be emphasised "that mere failure to




BAFAAG
recognise the presence of such a risk is not sufficient.

In other words, he is drawing the distinction as I see it

between a person who may well be negligent   and in that

sense liable say to civil pexialiies- e-P damage^ but whose

state of mind does not        the criteria required J.oi

recklessness which despite the repetition is either a

recognition of an obvious and serious risk and decision l.c

take it or indifference to such risk-    There are two

further points to this.



Firstly, in considering these aspects of recklessness t.hei

is a very interesting case which was decided by the Privy

Council and in which one of the Law Lords, known as Lord

Roskill gave the leading judgement (explain that Privy

Council judgements are not binding in English courts but

clearly has persuasive authority).    This particular case

involved the collision of two hydrofoils in Hong Kong in

bright clear daylight.    Lord Roskill having quoted

extensively from Lord Diplock.    Lord Diplock whom I have

already mentioned goes on to say "their Lordships

emphasised that in this passage Lord Diplock was speaking

of an obvious and serious risk of causing physical injury

created by the defendent.    He was not there concerned to

deal with cases where the conduct complained of was of a

defendent's re-action or lack of re-action to such a risk

created by another person".




BAFAAG
1


                            -   20   -




      You will see that this passage in some way mirrors what I

     have already indicated to you regarding crisis situations

    or emergency i.e. , you are entitled and indeed must, take

     into account all the circumstance.1?.    This point is backed
                                                                     v.
    up to a certain extent by another Lord, Lord Edmund Davis

    who in R - v - Caldwell says "in the absence of exculpatory

     factors the defendent's    state of mind is therefore all
                                                                          )
    important where recklessness is an element in the offence

    charged".    In other words, if there are no excuses which

    are legitimate and proper then the state of mind is an all
    important factor.

    Finally on this point it is possible to imagine a situation

    where a person perceives a situation, assesses it as not

    constituting an obvious and serious risk situation at all,

    and Indeed to a certain extent this seems to be the case in

    respect of nearly all the parties who immediately before

    the incident if asked, would have-I— think, would have said

    that they felt the use of the stadium was reasonably safe

    for the admission of spectators to the semi-final match.

    This may have been based on various assumptions as to what

    or would not happen but it forms a basis of their belief.

    If you were to find that this applied then that person

    would not fall within either of the two limbs of the

    definition of recklessness because he would have applied

    his mind    to the risk situation-   In other words he would

    not have been indifferent to it and having decided that

    there was no risk could not be described as having seen it,




    BAFAAG
                               21 -




 deliberately went on to take it




 One of the interesting features of the Hillsborough

 disaster from a legal point of view is the difference

 between this and many of the other disasters which    have

 unfortunately occurred in recent times-   For instance   yon

 think of the ZeSrugge Disaster (passengers killed on a ship

 which sailed with open bow doors or the Kegworth Disaster

 when an engine caught fire and the wrong engine was

 switched off or the Lockerbie Disaster where a bomb was

 placed on an aircraft or some of the train accidents which

 have recently occurred or the Manchester Air Disaster)-        In

 all of these the people who were killed were in a sense

 entirely helpless.   They had nothing whatever to do with

 the flying of the planes, running of the trains, the

 sailing of the ship, operation of the bow doors.     In the

 Hillsborough Disaster the position is slightly different

 in that there is a very active interplay between all the

 parties involved, and at least the situation outside the

 turnstile area and possibly even the situation within or on

 the terraces.

^ Finally before   you can bring in such a verdict, you have

 to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the

 recklessness which you are considering is attributable to

 one single person.    What this means is that you may not

 aggregate or add together the acts of different people and




 BAFAAG
then attribute say the failures of several persons to just

one particular individual.



r:nch person stands on his own and you have to be   satisfied

on idie evidence that the inqredients have been made out.

This is not to say that y ou cannot in fact have more than

one person who might be liable to the finding of unlawfully

killed.   For example, if two or three people attack one

individual and they all ind.ividna.ll ly inflict wounds which

are sufficiently severe as to constitute a substantial

cause of death, the fact that there may be three wounds,

each one of which on its own would have been sufficient to

kill the victim does not absolve two of the assailants.

All three for their individual act may be held

because each one, taken on its own would satisfy the

definition of the offence of murder or manslaughter as the

case may b e , j^ Finally, and I no not need to spend time on

this, if you were to find the verdict of unlawfully killed,

under no circumstances must you name or identify the

person.



You are dealing not with persons to be blamed but with an

inquest and you have to decide not whether someone is to be

charged with some offence or other but whether the death

was occasioned unlawfully. •You are looking at the victims

but to reach the verdict,    you have to find that some

person whose conduct you are considering meets the




BAFAAG
requirements which I have tr-ied'-fee outlined(for you.      If you

decide that the verdict of unlawfully killed is

inappropriate   in respect of some or all of the deceased,

I:.hen in respect of those yon w.i.J 1 then have to proceed to

the other verdicts.

Before I discuss these I should just mention one other

point and that is the question of corporate liability.

There has been a lot of   argument   as to   whether it is

possible   for the company to have acted in such a way that

the verdict of unlawfully killed be returned in respect of

its conduct.

To a certain extent these arguments have been settled and

the present position is that if a company is to be liable

the directing mind of the company^fulfil/ the criteria of

unlawfully killed in exactly the same way as if the company

were an individual.    It follows that the only issue which

you have to decide is what or who is the directing mind of

the company.    The position seems to be that not every

employee   of the company would fulfil that term but that a

director   or senior manager who has the running of the

affairs of the company would fulfil those criteria.          As it

happens in this particular inquest, we have different forms

of companies which I do not think you need to be too

concerned about but by way of example you might be prepared

to take the view for instance that Dr.       Eastwood whose

company is known as Eastwood and Partners would constitute

such a person in respect of his company, probably Mr.




BAFAAG
Mackrell in respect of Sheffield Wednesday.

I am very much more doubtful as to whether it would be

possible for you to reach the conclusion that Mr. Bounds

w;is sufficiently elevated to constitute a directing mind

and will of Sheffield City Council, .                                      on should also

remember that all the rulers which I have outlined

apply           including the rules against aggregating.

If you come to the conclusion that unlawfully                                             killed i

inappropriate then you may go                          011   to decide whether a

verdict of accidental death or misadventure is appropriate.

In this case the burden of proof is entirely different.

You may bring in such a verdict if you                                     are satisfied on

the balance of probabilities.                            In other words, if you are

satisfied that it is more likely than not that the

deceased's death was due to accident or misadventure.

There is no difference in the meaning of these two words.

You may chose whichever you                          prefer, but I would advise you

that if you              were considering these verdicts,, if you can

not make a decision on which word you prefer, you may feel

that you could safely decide on the word 'accident'.

You should understand                        quite clearly that the                           word

 'accident' straddles the whole spectrum of events from the

 force majaeur* or act of (§od where most of us would take the

view that no-one can really be blamed to a situation where

you are satisfied that there has been carelessness or

 negligence to a greater or lesser extent jTld -that— oomeono.                                                  ,

j^ e t t l d   lidVfa   Lu lHdke   Iu l   i. lib LJ I i ' e ,— c o m p e n s d L i u n   p a y m e n ts   In   a —




 BAFAAG
•givi-l— 1 i Ltya Lio*i .   In other words bringing in this verdict

does not mean that y ou absolve each and every party from

any measure of blame,, you are of course not entitled to sn

which party or who is to be          blamed because the rulers

quite clearly say that we are not to          decide   aspects of

civil liability fcmt W h a t does accident or misdadventure

mean.     It means an unforeseen event ox— accounts arising on

of a situation which was intended to occur.            Most of us

understand the word without too much thought.             We may    tor

instance wish to wash a glass and whilst doing so drop it.

in the sink.        It breaks, it is an accident.      Whether there

is any culpability would depend on all the circumstances,

for example, you were washing up glass as carefully as you

could and one slipped out of your hand because of soapy

suds you might feel that y ou couldn't be blamed.             On the

other hand if you decided to do it in total darkness you

might think to yourself, well perhaps that wasn't very

wise.     IfLyou decide that the verdict of unlawfully killed

is inappropriate you _ c a n then move on to the other

possible- verdrcts etc.




BAFAAG
i




    i
    i




        10
!




!




j
!




i




    j




        11
Farrar's Building,
Temple,                   PETER BIRTS QC
LONDON EC4Y 7BD

6 December 1990




                     13
R.H.B. STURT, M.A.(CANTAB)                                           34 & 36 CASTLE STREET
H.M. CORONER FOR COUNTY OF KENT                                               DOVER
 (CANTERBURY & DOVER DISTRICT)                                                 KENT
                                                                            CT161PN
     TELEPHONE 0304 240250
         FAX 0304 240040




      Our ref: RS/JK/ZEEBRUGGE INQUEST                               11 February,   1991

      Dear Dr. Popper,

            Mr. Sturt has asked me to send to you copies of the rulings made by
      Mr. Justice Turner in the manslaughter trial following the capsize of the
      Herald.

            I hear that you are still labouring away on the Hillsborough Disaster
      Inquest.  I do feel for you and hope it will all be over soon.

                                  Best wishes from all of us here,




                                           Mrs J. Kernev




      Dr. S.L. Popper, LLB BMED Sci BM BS MRCGP
      H. M. Coroner for South Yorkshire
      (West District)
      Medico-Legal Centre
      Watery Street
      SHEFFIELD
      S3 7ET

      Encs
                                                                              MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,      /I ,fX
                                                                                                             , . , yP
                                       OFFICE O F H.M. CORONER FOR                                      I /r ,
                                                                                                        hs v >
                                                                              WATERY STREET
                                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE              SHEFFIELD
                                                      (West District)
                                                                              S3 7ET
     S T E F A N L. P O P P E R , LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.Q.P.
                                                             CORONER

                                                                                   .8   .August   19 .
                                                                                                     89.
                                                                                                       ..
                                   Tetephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721




CONFIDENTIAL
Mr A Green QC                   For the attention of Mr, 0, Newell.
Director of Public Prosecutions
Crown Prosecutions Service
4/12 Queen Anne*s Gate
LONDON
SW1 9 AZ

Dear Mr Green

Ret HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

1        You will of course be aware that on the 15th of April an^
         incident occurred at the Hillsborough Football Ground which
         resulted in the loss of 9 5 lives as well as injury to other
         spectators.
2.      Lord Justice Taylor was charged with holding a Public Inquiry
         and that the first part of it has been completed.  I understand
         that Lord Justice Taylorfs interim report is being published
         on b August 1989*
3.        As Coroner for South Yorkshire West District, it falls to me
          to deal with the deaths by way of Inquest.

4.        It is my present intention to resume the Inquests on the 15
          January 1990*
 5. Mr Hytner QC in his oral submission to Lord Justice Taylor
     at the close of the oral evidence stated*-
     '•It is no secret, and I say this at once, that many of tne
     bereaved have specifically instructed us that they wish
     consideration to be given to criminal prosecution or criminal
     prosecutions in due course, but this they understand is not
     the time nor the place for that to be said.w

 6.        This point is also reported rather more specifically in the
           D a i l y Telegraph, Saturday 15 July where it is stated:-
           ”Solicitors representing the bereaved and injured believe that
           the Inquest is likely, to return verdicts- of-- Unlawful Killing .
           They say that if the Crown Prosecutor fails to act they will
           seek leave to begin private criminal action against the people
           thev hold responsible. Miss Elizabeth Steele, Chairman-of a
           group of Liverpool Solicitors said yesterday that her clients
           were more i n t e r e s t e d in seeking prosecutions than gaining
            compensation payments. --A substantial number were determined
            to ensure those they felt were responsible for the deaths were
            "Brought to book” she said. A summons alleging corporate
            manslaughter by P & 0 European Ferries following the Zebrugge
                                          OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR               MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                   WATERY STREET
                                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE                  SHEFFIELD
                                                       (West District)
                                                                                   S3 7ET
             STEFAN L. POPPER, LLB., B.MED.Sci.. B.M., B.S.. M.R.C.G.P.
                                                          CORONER


                                      Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721                 .8....Augus.t....i9.89.


                                                                       -   2   -




        Mr A Green QC



               Ferry Disaster which, claimed 193 lives was issued at Bow Street
               last month. Mr Michael Humphries of the Liverpool Solicitors
               Group said *My clients want the people responsible for this
               disaster made to pay the proper price for what has happened*.''

        7.     You will of course be fully aware of the provisions of
               Section l6(l)(a) of the Coroners Act 1988 which in effect
               provides that where the Clerk of the Magistrate^* s Court
               informs the Coroner that certain serious offences have been
               charged, the Coroner shall in the absence of reason to the
               contrary adjourn the Inquest. Sub section l6(l)(b) is even
               wider in scope and enables the Director of Public Prosecutions
               to request the Coroner to adjourn an Inquest in certain
               circumstances.
               Section 1 6 (2 ) provides savings which enable the Coroner not
               to adjourn Inquests which fall within Section 16 (1) or where
               having adjourned an Inquest, he; may be permitted to proceed.
               I believe in fact that where Inquests are adjourned by
               Coroners under Section;16 (1) it is in fact very rare for the
               Coroner to resume theset and the matter is usually completed
               under the provisions of Section 16(4) and (5)«

        8.      Rule 27 of the Coroners Rules 1984 substantially covers the
                point covered in Clause16(1)(a) of the Coroners Act 1 9 8 8 .

        9«      Rule 28 of the Coroners Rules provide that if during the
                course of an Inquest evidence is given from which it appears
                to the Coroner that the death of the deceased is likely to
                be due to an offence within Rule 26.3 and that a person
                might be charged with such an offence, then the Coroner,
                unless he has previously been notified by the Director of
                Public Prosecutions that adjournment is unnecessary, shall
                adjourn the Inquest for 14 days or such longer period as he
                may think necessary and send to the Director particulars of
                that evidence.
                At any time before the date fixed for the holding of the
                adjourned Inquest the Director of Public Prosecutions may ask
                the Coroner for further adjournment and the Coroner may
                comply with his request.




R8606
                             ' “bFFIC E OF H.M. CORONER FOR      MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                 WATERY STREET
                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE           SHEFFIELD
                                            (West District)
                                                                 S3 7ET
  STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M.. B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                CORONER


                           Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721            8 August.1989-.
                                                                        .. ...




                                                         - 3 -


Mr A Green QC



10. I appreciate that you have not yet had an opportunity to
    assess the evidence in the Hillsborough Disaster, and therefore
    are not presumably in a position to say whether any charges
    may be brought which fall within'the provisions of Section
    l6(l)(a) or Section l6(l)(b).

11. I also fully appreciate that it would not be right for you
    to take any decision purely upon what legal representatives
    of bereaved families might say or what is stated in newspaper
    articles.

12. However, these comments are very relevant to me because they
    indicate the line of thinking which at least a portion of
    the interested parties are likely to pursue.

13. You will of course be aware of Regina v St.5 Pancras Coroner* s
    Court ex party Higgins, Divisional Court QBD, 23 May 1 9 8 8 ,
    where their Lordships appeared to indicate that a Coroner can
    withdraw the verdict of Unlawful Killing from the Jury where
    there was no evidence which could conceivably have amounted
    in law as sufficient to justify such a verdict.

14. You will appreciate that it is impossible for me to take a
    view until in fact the evidence has been given at the Inquests,
    and it will be at that stage no. doubt that I will have to
    decide whether there is evidence which can be left to the
    Jury to consider a verdict of Unlawful Killing or whether the
    evidence is of such a nature that I can properly withdraw
    that verdict from their consideration.

15. This position precisely encapsulates the problem which I
    am now faced with:—

     a. I anticipate that it will be necessary to call a considerable
        number of witnesses and that consequently the Inquests will
        take some considerable time. This apart from being
        expensive will of course generate a great deal of stress
        both for the bereaved but also for the witnesses, some of
        whom may well wish to shield under the provisions of Rule 22
        (Rule against Self Incrimination).
                               OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                WATERY STREET
                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                            (West District)
                                                                SHEFFIELD
                                                                S3 7ET
  STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci.. B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                CORONER


                           Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721         8 .August .19 85...




Mr A Green QC



16 . I am particularly anxious not to get into a situation where
     having started the resumed Inquests I am forced to stop
     because I am requested to do so , or because I have to under
     the provisions of Rule 28. This would create considerable
     distress I am sure to relatives and witnesses and would
     leave us open to the criticism that we have not covered a
     situation which is foreseeable in view of the comments referred
     to in paragraphs 5 and 6 above.

17« You will of course know that if we were dealing           with a serious
    Road Traffic Incident where Section 1 proceedings were
    contemplated, :fi»3gsaBUHii|jll under the Road Traffic Act 1972,
    it would be the normal practice to adjourn the Inquest until
    such time as the CPS have indicated whether or not they intend
    to proceed under that Section. If they indicated that they
    do not wish to proceed, then we would deal with the Inquest
    in the normal way.If they do decide         to charge someone,
    then the provisions of Section 16 of the Coroners Act 1988
    would apply.

18. It seems to me in 1?is case that there are two possible
    courses open as far as my Inquests and your involvement
    are concerned:—

     a. You can notify me that you have no objection to me proceeding
        with the Inquests and that you do not require me to
        adjourn the Inquests notwithstanding that evidence may be
        given which might require me to leave the possible verdict
        of Unlawful Killing with the Jury. You will of course
        appreciate that it is their decision not mine as to what
        verdict they bring in.?
        I imagine that this situation must have arisen in the
        Zebrugge Inquest undertaken by Mr Sturt at Dover.

     b. The alternative would of course be for you to request me
        to adjourn the Inquests before I resume until such time as
        you have completed your investigations, and then in the
        light of your decision, one would have to decide whether
        or not the Inquests should be resumed or dealt with under
        Section 16 Coroners Act 1988.
                                              OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR              MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                      WATERY STREET
                                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE                 SHEFFIELD
                                                           (West District)
                                                                                      S3 7ET
               STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                             CORONER


                                          Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721                   AugW.S.t ...19.89...


                                                                               ■5 -



          Mr A Green QC



          19.    You will appreciate that there is a considerable amount of
                 public interest in this disaster as well as a great deal of
                 anxiety and personal grief*. X am very anxious that whatever
                 is done by me should be done correctly, but with a view to
                 minimising the upset and pain which the Hillsborough Disaster
                 has, is and will cause.

          20. I would be grateful if I could hear from you as soon as
              possible. Irrespective of what the decision might be,
              several urgent matters have to be dealt with and I would like
              an indication of your thinking. If it would help to discuss
              this a mutually convenient time could I am sure be arranged.

          Yours y^ithfully




        C.C.     G-    J   -   Gg&j
                f~7,                  .




R6606
                               OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR           MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                    WATERY STREET
                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE              SHEFFIELD
                                            (West District)
                                                                    S3 7ET
   STEFAN L POPPER, LLB., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                               CORONER


                           Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721             8.. August:....19 .89...


                                                                5



Mr A Green QC



19. You will appreciate that there is a considerable amount of*
    public interest in this disaster as well as a great deal of
    anxiety and personal grief. I am very anxious that whatever
    is done by me should be done correctly, but with a view to
    minimising the upset and pain which the Hillsborough Disaster
    has, is and will cause.

20. I would be grateful if I could hear from you as soon as
    possible. Irrespective of what the decision might be,
    several urgent matters have to be dealt with and I would like
    an indication of your thinking. If it would help to discuss
    this a mutually convenient time could I am sure be arranged.




c .c . M r. G .J . S e ar.
       M r. M. Jones.
INSTRUCTIONS TO COUNSEL TO ADVISE


         MICHAEL POWERS
A J k iu J
INSTRUCTIONS TO COUNSEL


Enclosed herewith is a draft provisional direction to the Jury
on the issues of the law, particularly as it relates to Unlawfully
Killed but also coverinq the various rules which need to be drawn
                                        U*.          . . . .
to the attention of the Jury as well as,rule against incrimination.


Counsel is asked to advise as soon as possible whether the draft
correctly outlines the legal position or whether any material
changes need to be considered.

It is, of course, understood that this draft has been prepared prior
to any legal submissions in the Inquest and it may be necessary to
make adjustments in the light of what is then said.


Counsel has discussed the question of whether or not, if the
verdict of Unlawfully Killed is left to the Jury, any of the parties
whose conduct has been called in question should be excluded. It
is understood that counsel's view is that nobody should be excluded
if the verdict is left, notwithstanding that the effect of this
would be that if the Jury were to bring in such a verdict it would
have a "blunderbus" effect, a point deprecated in ex parte Gray.

Counsel's attention is drawn in particular to ex parte Higgins,
QBD 23 May 1988, with which counsel will be familiar. He will
recollect that the case seems to indicate that if a Coroner takes
the view that as a matter of law there is insufficient evidence
to sustain such a verdict, it should be withdrawn from the purview
of the Jury. This is stated very positively on Page 247 in "Case
Book on Coroners" of which counsel is co-author.

Counsel's attention is also drawn to ex parte Spooner et al QBD
6 October 1987, where Mr Sturt in effect w i t hdrew the possibility
of corporate manslaughter from the Jury whilst leaving it in respect
of individuals.   See particularly "Casebook on Coroners" Page 215.

                                                      /continued.
INSTRUCTIONS TO COUNSEL

-   2   -




As you know, I am somewhat concerned about this because on the one
hand I can see disadvantages for anybody who is retained in the
frame but on the other hand it seems that if there is retention
of people who in law could not be held liable, there might be a
judicial review on the basis that ex parte Higgins was not followed.


There have been innumerable people whose conduct to a lesser or
greater extent has been called in question. In addition to those
there are, as I have already indicated to you, the following major
groups:-

            The Club and senior staff.
            The Engineer.
            The local authority.
            The Police, whatever that might mean.
            The match commander, Chief Supt. Duckenfield.
            The   control room commander, Supt. Murray.
            The   ground commander, Supt. Greenwood.
            The   pitch perimeter gate officers (two gates, one officer each)
            The   outside commander at Leppings Lane (Supt. Marshall).
            The   fans or some part of them.

I think it is necessary that we sort out the point of principle on
whether withdrawing the verdict in respect of certain persons or
categories is appropriate before I take a decision on whether in law
there is sufficient evidence to leave the verdict in in respect of some
or all of the above.


Please let me have your advice as soon as possible. If you wish to
discuss it with me, please contact me on 0742 736902.
J   A                  /& /              '^ - k
                                                  r
        6U   ^ J j       '^ IU   '       ^        ^ '/c~3     '




    fe,     <£ /~ tZ^./?C ^


    £ * £             /9^4-          /                    ^       ^



                 u (J. r^4 0                          ^
INSTRUCTIONS TO COUNSEL TO ADVISE

         MICHAEL POWERS
Counsel is asked to consider and advise on various legal and
procedural matters which it is thought are likely to arise out of the
inquests into the death of the 95 supporters who attended at the
Hillsborough Stadium on 15th April 1989.

I will first of all outline as briefly as possible the back ground
and circumstances of the incident together with some of the points
for f'T’d against which have or are likely to arise out of the evidencei



Hillsborough stadium has been in being for over 100 years. In 1979
it received a safety certificate under the Safety in Sportground
Act 1975 issued by the South Yorkshire County Council who were
disbanded in 1986 when on 1/4/86 Sheffield City Council took over the
responsibility for this. There were regular inspections by working
parties or advisory groups but on the relevant date no new certirica e
had been issued despite the fact that the council had been drafting
one for some time and that some reservations about the existing one
had been expressed. Nor had the existing certificate been amended
despite the fact the substantial changes had been made to the Leppings
Lane terracing over the years since the certificate was issued. In
fact I think that in many respects the certificate could not be
complied with by the club because of these changes and that these
changes were known to the licencing authorities.

Prior to 1981 the perimeter track fencing was put up to deter pitch
invasions and this was done to comply with I think International
football standard requirments.

Until 1981 the Lepping Lane terracing was entirely open expanse
capable of accomodating thousands of spectators.

 In 1981 a crushing incident occurred despite the open terrace.
 Subsequently for various reasons including I think for segregation
 control and for the avoidance of similar incidents radial fences w e ^e
 erected with gates at the back. This enabled the terrace to be divided
 into segments and for only part to be used at small fixtures and the
 whole at larger fixtures.

  From the evidence at Lord Justice Taylors enquiry (LJT) there was
 some dispute between the various authorities as to whether these gates
 should be manned by the Police during matches. The fire service
 understood that they would whilst the police did not think that the
 wording of thftminutes ("under police control” )meantthat. In any event
 on the day these gates were in a locked open position with no police
 in attendance nor for that matter any steward (thought to be too
 risky). The idea was that the terrace should be treated as a whole
 with the fans finding there own level by spreading out along the
 terracing by using these gates or by finding other means of entrance
 to the side elevations which did exist but which were either not
 signed or only very poorly signed.

 It seems that every one accepts that the central pens are the most
 popular and that from the layout of the ground the likelihood would
 be that the majority of the fans would head down a tunnel which leads
 from the relevant turnstyles (A-G) and Gate C as to which see below.

 The adequacy of the number of turnstyles for the number expected
 depended on a relatively smooth flow of spectators arriving over a
 period of time and indeed in 1988 the semi final between the same
                                    Page   1
clubs and under virtually identical arrangements had gone off as far
as those in authority knew smoothly and without any real   problems.

The FA had chosen this ground fo semi finals on three consecutive
years and as far as I know no complaint regarding the structure,
signingvpolicing or other matters had been raised.

An operational order had been drawn up by the police in 1989 which for
all intents and purposes followed the operational order of 1988. it
made reference in its Intent section to achieving law and order and
the safety of the fans both within and without the ground. Apart f
that most of the order dealt with specific duties of hundreds of
police officers at various stages of the match both within an
the ground. Most of these duties were directed to public order matters
and the issue of safety was not addressed in words. The orde^ ^ h o u g h
running to about 100 pages or so did not include sections setting out
con t i g e n q p l a n s in the event of unforseen events occuring and in
particular there was no contigency plan as to what to do if there wa
a late influx of supporters in whatever state they might be. Matcn
briefings also took place.

On the day in question it would appear that large numbers of fans
arrived latter than expected. A severe crush occurred outside the
turnstyle area and Supt Marshall having decided that there was a risk
to life requested that large gates normally only used as exit gates e
opened. After repeated requests this was done and a large influx o
fans entered the stadium. Supt Marshall did not request a delay in
kick off (he thought that in the circumstances it would be
ineffective).  Other officers acting independently did ask for this
but match control took the view that it was too late to do so.  1
should perhaps mention that a policy decision had been taken that the
match would not be postponed unless there were extranous reasons such
as fog on the motorways ie delays not due to fans fault.

 Fans having entered the stadium via the exit gates without checks and
 therefore probably included numerous ticketless fans,entered the
 ground through the central tunnel which was not controlled or
 stewarded and overfilled the central pens which were already full l
 not overfull. This led to crushing and as a result fans requested the
 gates on the perimeter fencing which incidentally were very narrow o
 be opened. The delay in opening these gates is hotly disputed but
 there is not much doubt that initially the gates were opened and again
 shut before it was recognised by the officers on the track that a
 crush situation had occurred.

 The reaction at the control box appears to have been that a          ,
 pitch invasion was taking place and steps were taken to deal with      e
 situation on this basis and it was not until about the time that the
 match was stopped that ambulances etc were summoned about.

 There was considerable pandemonium and it took time for some
 organisation to be brough to the scene. Again there is some dispute
 but Ch. Supt Nesbit who arrived from elsewhere at about 15.12 seems to
 have been successful in organising a coordinated rescue attempt.

 In 1988 a similar fixture had been played . There were no reports of
 injuries though evidence has now been given that the terracing was
 uncomfortably full on that occasion too. There has also been evidence
 that fans were elevated from the terracing to the stands a b o v e d u r i n g
 that match and indeed on other occassions too.   No police officers had
                                     Page   2
been designated to man the rear of the radial fences but t h e r e Seems
to be some evidence that at one point the central tunnel access ‘
had been barred by officers and fans diverted to other areas by
a group of police officers but unfortunatly this does not seem to
have been mentioned in the debriefing.

the above is a very very sketchy outline of the events but it will be
evident from this that the conduct of at least the following parties
may be called in question:

The   Club
The   Engineers
The   Local authority
The   Police (whatever that might mean)
The   Match commander Ch. Supt Duckenfield
The   control room commander Supt Murray
The   Ground Commander Supt Greenwood
The   pitch perimeter gate officers (two gates one officer each)
The   Outside commander at Lepping Lane (Supt Marshall)
The   fans or some part of them

I am of course aware that an inquest is a fact finding exercise and
not a fault finding one and that there are no parties.     ......
Nevertheless if one is to consider a possible verdict of unlawlully
killed even if no one is to be named then it is necessary to consider
the evidence to see whether the ingredients of the offence have been
made out against one or more parties without aggregation of course.



 A* Without claiming to be exhaustive the arguments which have been
liifiltoEdftgiiijBStj th e various parties except t h e f a n s a t i d |the evidence
                     "would have to be relied on to justify a verdict
 of unlawfully killed,would include:

 1 4 that the planning was defective in that there was inadequate
 reference to safety in the operational order and that this was
 obvious.

 2. That there were no contigency plans to deal with inter alia the
 late arrival of fans, the filtering out of ticketless and or drunken
 fans, the packing of the terraces in particular as the gates at the
 rear of the radial fences were not visible when the pens were full
 arid that these defects and others were obvious to all.

 3* That the actual policing on the day outside was unsatisfactory
 in that fans were allowed into a restricted area in too large numbers
 which led to crushing and danger. That the remedial actions to try and
 remedy this situation by closing perimeter gates and placing police
 horse cordons etc was not only too late but ineffective because

  ^a^ it should have been done further back ie away from the turnstyle
 area,

 (b) that the pleas to people to stop pushing etc would not help
 because it was addressed to people who had no control over their
 movements and could not respond;

  (c^ that none or insufficient or ineffective filtering systems had
  been put in place to weed out ticketless fans and people inebriated
  if any.
                                             Page     3
4. “Chat closing off Leppings Lane compounded the problem because it
made it easier for people to come down in large numbers and thus
increase the congestion .

5 . T h a t it was known that crowds tended to come late and w e r e
getting later for football matches and that they should not have been
caught by su rprise.

6.T-hat it was entirely to be expected that the crowd would have
consumed alcolol and that nothing excessive or unusual occurred.

7. T h a t attempts to communicate with the crowd w«£r*. inadequate
and that messages were not heard.

8. T-hat the match should have been postponed and that this information
if properly announced over loudspeakers and tannoy would have allayed
the natural anxiety of the crowd about getting in and reduce the
crushing and danger,

9. T-hat there was a lack of communication between ground control and
those outside in both directions and in particular that those outside
failed to communicate effectively the excess numbers still there
whilst those on the inside failed to alert those outside of the
numbers inside so that they could make a better assessment of the
situation.

10.T-hat the outer perimeter gates should have been used as crowd
control barrier as was apparently done in the previous year and that
to close the gates on the crowd merely inflam ed the situation

1 1 . T h a t there was a failure in policing in that not every one was
searched and that people who could have been arrested were not taken
into custody.

12. T-hat under no circumstances should the main exit gates have been
opened to let people in because this would allow a large mass of
people in,a proportion of whom would not have tickets,and therefore
this would lead to overcrowding. In addition many of these people
would have perhaps been the worse for wear and that unruly behaviour
which had been exhibited outside would now be transferred to the
inside.

1 3 . T h a t the opening of concertina gate C allowed a large influx at a
far highcfspeed than normal and that the ground dispersal ability would
be exceeded.

14. Even if it was essential that the croud should be let in then
arrangements should have been made to seek to divert them from the
tunnel and access to the central pens and that there was plenty of
tine to action this as there was about a 4 minute interval between
the first request to open the gate and action.

15. That in fact arrangements for a police serial were put in place at
another gate (Gate A) before it was opened as that gate led to
the seated area and that this exhibifeja desire to avoid overcrowding
in that area.

16. That even before the gates were open it was obvious that the
central pens were full or overcrowded and that to allow hundreds or
even thousands in just before kick off was obviously undesirable and
                                   Page   4
dangerous.

17. That even after it became obvious that something was wrong within
the central pens the problem was not recognised and when recognised
misdiagnosed and the incorrect remedy applied which led to delay and
therefore loss of life.

18. That no heed was taken of pleas for help both from within the
terrace and without and that this was at least in part due to the
terms of the operational order which made it clear that the integri y„
of pitch and track had to be maintained and that the pitch gates had
to be closed except for medical emergency

19. That the training of the force was such as to respond to law and
order situations rather than safety aspects and that this was
confirmed and reinforced by the briefings and operational order.

20. That the agreed emergency message which would have alerted all to
undertake stated activities was never broadcast and that indeed no
effective use of the loudspeaker equipment was made or only used too
late.

21. That once the incident was recognised no effective leadership was
given   by senior officers

(V) that the rescue attempt at the front was uncordinated and largely
 left to individual initiative until too late

(b) that although it was obvious to various police officers that an
 approach to clear   the terrace had to be made from the back that action
 was not organised   or coordinated by those in command and   perhaps not
 even realised.

 22. That to allow Ch. Supt Duckenfield to control the match was
 irresponsible as this was only days after taking over command of the
 division and this was his first large match.

 23. That the testing layout and arrangements of barriers     was
 inadequate and not in conformity with the green guide or the
 safety certificate and that the collapse of one of the barriers in pen
 three contributed to a massive loss of life (8 deaths in pen 4 over 80
 in pen 3 wher.ethe barrier broke).

24. Thofc the licensing authority had permitted the removal of a barrier
some years prior to the incident but that this increased the load on
the others a n d 7although obvious^had not been noticed.

 25. That indolence of the licensing authority and their failure
 over the years to appreciate the obvious defects and problems and
 their failure to amend the safety certificate <, even though they were
 aware of the need, and also their responsibility as to safety as well
 as their failure to apply their mind to contigency plans^contributed
 to the disaster

 26. That the lack of provision for stewards or for that matter
 police officers on the terrace whsrG10000 people might be was
 obviously dangerous.

 25. That the poor signing and the confusing layout of the Leppings
 Lane terracing increased the problems outside and also led to the
                                    Page   5
large mass of people heading into the central tunnel.
B.      In answer to some'/these points,the following has been said or
is anticipated will be said in ev id e n c e .

1. The order was virtually a carbon copy of the previous y e a r . No one
had taken any objection to it nor had anyone raised any obJ®cJ;*°         .
any ommisions.it was threfore not obvious at the time,though both with
hind sight and also if carefully analysed,obvious defects could
demonstrated.

2. There were no written contingency plans but the Operational Order
did not purport to be an exhaustive instruction. It was unnecessary to
specify safety considerations as these would a u t o m a t i c a l l y .c?®
play. That      police officers were expected to use their own m i t i
and take decisions depending on contingencies on the ground and that
i n c a s e the contingencies were catered for by the large no of V ° ^ c e
officers on the ground. It was also impossible to specify each and
every contingency that could or might arise. The arra?8e®ents f o r th®
packing and policing and stewarding of the terr® ? ^ ? ri^ j v b® ® " i cularly
successful method which had worked without any difficulty,:           P ^ t i c u l a :Ly
in the year before. That although the rear gates would not have been
visible to people at a distance,the crowd within a terrace wo
 detect movement through them and they would therefor be effective.

3. That policing at a sporting occassion depended on consent. That it
was impractical to seek to hold supporters at a distance
because it would merely transfer the problem elsewhere.In addition,
enormous man power resource would be needed. That attempts to contr 1
ingress at the turnstyle area had been made as soon as it was real!
that a problem was or had occurred,that closing LL was unprecedent
but that at the time it was done for safety reasons and to produce a
holding area. That the pattern of arrival of the crowd was quite
different from the previous year and that no intelligence had been
received to suggest this. That the behaviour and mood of the crowd
changed after 2.30+ and that it was not possible to reason with them,
 that although a proportion could not respond there was a
 sufficiciently large minority who could have done so but chose no
 People pushing etc into the crowd compounding the problem, lhat
 although lateness could be expected,the scale was unprecedented and
 that the vol of people in drink (not drunk) was proportionally higher
 and also numerically greater because of the crowd size. That
 loudspeaker appeals were made both from the front and the back without
 success and that therefore announcing a postponement would not have
 made any difference.

     ( In passing this raises a very interesting point. It is suggested
     that the crowd who was being addressed was unable to effectively
     respond and not push because it was too heavily compacted together.
     On the other hand it is said that if the kick off had been postponed
     the natural anxiety of the crowd which generated an urgency to get in
     would have been abated resulting in a reduction in the pushing and
     congestion" and thus avoiding the need to open exit gates. It seems
     to me that if this is correct then it cannot also be argued that the
     crowd were incapable of response ).

     Whilst it is true that the crowd were not held back at a distance
     there was no reason why people had to join the back of the crowd an
     push forward as the congestion was clearly visible and there was
     plenty or room in Leppings Lane itself which was virtually trallic
                                        Page   6
free. Comparision video of 1988 and 1989 show a distinct difference in
the build up of the crowds on the two occassions.

4. It was agreed that it would have been useful to have had some
knowledge of the numbers within the stadium at different times and
similarly in retrospect it would have been better to have sent a
messenger to the control room with verbal information^ particularly at
times when radio communications were poor or non existant,though it
was taken that the control room because of video equipment would have
had a view of the situation outside.

5. Apart from communication difficulties with the crowd and the
assessment that there would have been a poor response there was also
the strategic decision not to postpone kick off simply because a
number^people were late. The decision to postpone kick off has
numerous implications including the effect on the people within the
stadium.

6. That it is a practical impossibility to search every one and w itb a
large crowd to exclude everyone who in other circumstances it might
have been possible to weed out. Arrests are very costly in man power
and would lead to even greater depletion of resources. One can only   o
what is in fact possible.

7. That the opening of the large exit gates was not an action taken
lightly as it negated the match policy of excluding ticketless fans
and other undesirables but that when it became evident that for
whatever reason it was impossible to resolve the situation by crowd
control methods from the middle /further back and that lives were at
stake,then it was the only solution . Mr. Marshall^who authorised this
action,agreed that sometime after 2.30pm the police lost control of
the situatior^hough h^iolds at least a minority of the crowd
responsible.

 That there was a risk attached to opening the Gates but
that crowd safety outside demanded it. He did not consider
where the people would go to once inside (he knew there was large
concourse area within the turnstyle area). He also said that his
concern was the safety of the people outside_,he did not have
reponsibility for the people on the inside and that he would have
expected match control or ground commander to have taken any
appropriate action.

All the evidence has not yet been taken but it is quite likely that
evidence will be given if not already done so dealing with various
other matters set out in A 1-25 above.

C. The behaviour of the fans is obviously a major matter and has to be
considered from the point of view of whether some one or more of the
fans could be considered to have acted or ommitted to act in such a
way as to give rise to the possibillity of the ingredients of
recklessness being made out or if that is not the case whether the
behaviour of the^jjfn some way affects (diminishes or eliminates the
possibility of a finding of recklessness against the other interested
parties. It seems to me that there are three ways of looking at the
behaviour of the fans.

 (Note no one has suggested that all the fans were drunk misbehaving or
 otherwise in some way undesirable. On the contrary,it seems to me
 that most parties were prepared to concede that the majority were
                                    Page   7
ordinary decent people who were caught, up in the situation bu
there was a minority which was both substantial and influential w
precipitated the crisis by their selfish d i s r e g a r d of others,their
determination to enter at any cost and their lack of willingnes
cooperate with authority).

a ) That the task of the police became impossible in the last 15_20
minutes before scheduledkick off,partly because such a large ™ " b e r        of
fans decided to come late or latish to the match. This overwhelmed           the
resourses both of police and club (ie not enough turnstyles). ihis
 generated an understandable anxiety andworry that the people would          not
 get into the ground in time for kick off. In other words that the
 conduct of each individual fan did not amount to reckless behaviou          .

b^ That there was a sufficient number of people who either because of
disinhibition due to alcohol or for some other r e a s o n were heedless of
the welfare of their fellow fans and were determined to enter
grourcl and, by extension,the terracing at whatever cost. ihat
notwithstanding that it must have been obvious that there was a 1 g
crowd already at the turnstyles and the presenaeof police horse
and loudspeaker annoucements etc they were determined to get in#
that not only did they not hold back but, without regard for the
welfare of others they pressed forward creating a dangerous situation
or in other words’ that they acted recklessly in relation to others,
is not suggested in this paragraph that these individuals were acting
together as a group but that each individual acting on his own acted
 recklessly. Assuming that this were to be correct for a moment,it is
 hard to believe that in say a crowd of 4000,the reckless pushing etc
 of one person could have created the pressure patterns which led to
 the opening of the gates. It is not so hard to understand that the
 cum ulative effect of these individually motivated and generated
 pushes could have had the described effect. Assuming for a moment that
 the jury were to take the view that the evidence supports this
 hypothesis and that they also took the view that causation of the
 tragedy could be brought back to the events outside the turnstyle
 areas would the rule against aggregation prevent the jury from
 considering     . unlawfully killed verdicts in respect of both unknown
 and obviously unnamed fans? provided that in the direction to t em 1
 had been made clear that they would have to be satisfied that t e
 ingredients of recklessness ie obvious and serious risk of injury and
 either indifference or deliberate taking of the risk was established
 against each and every several individual and that they would not be
 allowed simply to take the cum ulative effect into account. The reason
 why I ask this is that it£not that uncommon where a clear murder has
  occulted but the culprit has not been discovered,for unlawfully killed
  verdicts to be returned be the perpetrators one or more persons.

 c') There has been some evidence (not much but in a way that is to be
 expected) that there were a number of fans in attendance who, knowing
 that they did not have tickets,were going to take concerted action
 to get into the ground without paying. The strongest evidence we heard
 was from someone in a Pub who happened to overhear three fans talking.
 The substance of the conversation being that one of the three was
 explaining to the others that he       had a group of other fans who e
 was meeting up with that they would create sufficient disturbance
 outside the ground so that a gate would have to be opened and that
 they would then get in. He apparently claimed that this had been
 done before and that there were no particular problems. There is also
  evidence from fans who entered through the big gates overhearing
  comments to the effect that we would get in without tickets and also
                                      Page   8
the evidence of at least one of the gatekeepers of many years
experience that there was a group of ticketless fans outside his gate
(Gate A) who were a t t e m p t i n g to force an entry. He was able to tell
that they were ticketless because they were waving money at him.

Apart from the fact that it might be difficult to make the jump from
say the conversation in the pub mentioned above and execution of the
plan there is the added problem of the fact that there were so many
people outside the turnstyles that day. Even if there was such a
conspiracy it may not have needed to be implemented. I assume that in
a conspiracy it might be possible to aggregate the activities of
individuals as they are acting together. I would be interested to
hear whether you think that,given that the evidence is as stated
above, whether this would be an example of Cunni%ham recklessness
rather than Caldwell or Lawrence. I would also value your view on
whether, given that the evidence is as above,it would be appropriate to
give a Cunningham direction to the jury in respect of this.

Assuming for a moment that for evidential causation or aggregation
reasons it is not possible to consider a verdict of unlawfully killed
against one or more of the fans then their presence must nevertheless
have played a part in the disaster as it is difficult to imagine any
deaths occuring if fans had not been present.




                                      Page    9
I will now turn to the heart of the matter but before I do so I
want to make it quite clear that it is not part of my function to
achieve one verdict as opposed to another. I am conscious of the fact
that on the one hand there is a body of opinion which is keen for the
jury to return a verdict of unlawfully killed whilst of course there
are others who would prefer another verdict. I am also conscious of
the fact that notwithstanding that no party may be named in the
inquisition and that it is no longer the case that anyone is
immediately in peril as a result of such a verdict, nevertheless it is
a very serious matter to record such a verdict in a high profile
inquest such as this. Further more, because the numerous
individuals and companies involved (even if we exclude the fans) and
because of the rule against naming an individual in the inquisition
such a verdict will have a blunderbuss effect notwithstanding ex
parte Gray. It is for this reason that I am most anxious to try to
ensure that the jury are properly directed. This will have the
additional advantage that their verdict whatever it m a y ^ i l l carry
perhaps that much more weight.

D.
1. It seem to me that( except as mentioned above in respect possibly
of what is known as the conspiracy theory) a finding of unlawfully
killed would have to be based on manslaughter by neglect or, put
another way( lawful act manslaughter and that consequently we start off
with the law as propounded in
                          R v Caldwell   1981 1 All ER p 961
                          R v Lawrence   1981 1 All ER p 974
                          R v Seymour    1983 2 All ER p 1958
                          R v H.M. Coroner ex parte Gray case book on
                                   coroners page 97 1986
                          Kong Cheuk Kwan v The Queen Privy Council
                          case  1985

In addition one has to consider the Lacuna referred to by Smith and
Hogan in their sixth edition as well as the application of mistake
as described on page 63 and page 85 et sec

I would value your opinion as to existance of the lacuna or whether
it is not merely another way of saying that the facts have to be
be taken as the defendent (interested party) believes them to be.

I would like to draw your attention in         the Lawrence case to p 978
at    cwhere  L. Hailsham d e s c r i b e the use of the word reckless.
 He states that it evidences a state of mind stopping short of
deliberate intention and going beyond mere inadvertence which he there
equates with the word ’’carelessness” . He also on the same page at f /g
states
 ’’Since the days of Noah the effecfe of alcohol have been known to
produce a state of mind described as recklessness and not to inhibit
it and for that matter to remove inhibitions in the field of intention
and not to destroy intention”

At p 981 "j" Lord Diplock says " One does not speak of a person acting
’’recklessly” even though he has given no thought at all to the
consequences of his act unless the act is one that presents a real
risk of harmful consequences which anyone acting with reasonable
prudence would recognise and give heed to.

At page 982 ”g" the direction is set out beginning with "In my view”
and ending "to take it” . Two further para follow in one of which he
                                   Page 10
states that in deciding whether the risk created by the m anner of the driving
was both obvious and serious and that the jury should apply the standard of
the ordinary prudent motorist as represented by themselves. In the next
paragraph he makes it clear that before drawing the inference that the
person being considered is in one of the states of mind described, they
have to take the totality of the evidence including any explanations
which may displace the inference.

Presumably this could include mistakes of fact, e.g. it might be claimed
that the officers on the track believed initially that people were not
distressed or that they did not hear cries of help or, if they did hear
them, interpreted them incorrectly in the light of previous experience
or training.

Another example might be the match controller. If when he became aware
of the crowds outside he may have taken the decision that they would all
get in. Assuming this is an error, this could have arisen either because
of poor advice or lack of experience. Similarly, if one considers the pens,
he may have formed the impression that the over crowding was not dangerous
or again, possibly wrongly, he may have thought that the scaling of the
pitch fences was the beginning of a pitch invasion rather than an overspill.
Presumably if the Jury believe the evidence in relation to those matters
then they would have to determine the question of recklessness on the
basis that the facts were as he believed them to be.
This brings me to the second point, that the Lawrence direction as it
stands in the text on p982 does not refer to the exclusion of inadvertance
unless possibly one were to read it down to the end of "j" p982 or read
it subject to what L Hailsham said about the meaning of Recklessness.
In Kong Cheuk Kwan there is no reference to inadvertance or carelessness
(see L Hailsham above) whilst in ex parte Gray, which seems the latest
case and one specifically dealing with coronal matters, Lord Justice
Watkins, but only in the divisional court, rephrases the direction
"without having given any thought to the possibility of there being any
such risk" by stating "that acting recklessly the police officer having
regard to his duty was indifferent to that risk" and by adding expressly
     "It should be emphasised however that a failure to appreciate
     that there was such a risk would not of itself be sufficient
     to amount to recklessness".

This seems to me to put a rather different emphasis    on the definition
and y o u r view on this would be appreciated.
My un derstanding of the cases is that the Batemen test has been abolished
and that establishing gross negligence is not enough. This also seems
to be the view of Prof Zanders as reported in the Times some time ago
when commenting on the acquittals in the Zeebruggen prosecutions he says:
"But in three cases in the early 1980's the House of Lords ruled that
proof of gross negligence was not enough. The prosecution must also
show that the defendants were reckless in regard to an obvious and
serious risk".

This again puts it slightly d ifferent ly but is in line with ex parte
Gray I think.

If that is so, am I right in thinking that in order    to make out the
offence of lawful act manslaughter, one has to be

                                     Page 11
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that there is a duty of care, breach
of that duty, and damage.  Once that has been established one then
applies the test of whether the act or ommisfton so established falls
within the two limbs of the Lawrence test but making it clear that
mere inadvertance or carelessness ( is this not the same as negligence
) is not sufficient. In addition are the jury to be directed that in
determining the state of mind of the party they have to take into
account any explanations which he has to offer to determine what in
fact his state of mind was. I.e he may have been negligent but was he
reckless,taking everything into account including the activities o
other .

I now move onto the next point which again arises out of Kong Cheuk
Kwan ( I realise this is a Privy Council decision and thus only of
persuasive authority). Having quoted Lord Diplock from his speech
in Lawrence, Lord Roskill goes on to say:

’’Their Lordshipsemphasise that in this passage Lord Diplock was
speaking of an obvious and serious risk of causing physical injury
created by the defendant. He was not there concerned to deal with
cases where the conduct complained of was of a defendent reaction
to such a risk created by another person” .

 and again just before the end he says:

’’Their Lordships did not find it necessary to hear counsel for Kong on
the issue and it would not be right for them to offer any detailed
comments upon the facts beyond observing that the summing up does not
seem to have distinguished between an obvious risk created by those
navigating each hydrofoil by their own navigation and the response by
those on board one hydrofoil to any obvious risk created by the
navigation of the other” .

Applying these passages to the present problem:

 The officer on the field may not have been aware either of the crush
outside the turnstyles nor the decision to open the gates (Radio was
on ’’talk through” so he might have heard the messages though
reception was apparently terrible and in any case the messages would
not necessarily have impinged on his mind as they were not directed to
him) nor would he have been aware of any action or inaction in
relation to the tunnel. He was then confronted with a pen which was
full but which received in a short time a substantial extra number of
people. Does the passage quoted mean that in such circumstances the
test of recklessness does not apply or applies in some modified way
and if in what way?

In most major   disasters eg Zeebruggen, Kegworth, Clapham, Marchioness,
as well as in   RTAs involving say reckless driving,the victims and the
survivors are   helpless and entirely in the hands of for example the
traidriver or   the pilot etc.

  What distinguishes Hillsborough from these examples is that there is
 an interface between,shall we say for simplicity, the police and the
 fans. It is quite clear from say the evidence of Mr. Marshall that at
 about 2.30 pm he knew he had a substantial no of people there but felt
 that they could be coped with. By 2.45. or so the position had so
 changed with regard to the fansfboth with regard to their location^
 attitude^response and behaviour generally, that not only had it led
 to loss of control for a period but also created such a dangerous
                                    Page   12
situation that unprecedenftlaction had to be taken to open the Gates,
notwithstanding that this was against normal practice and also had the
potential of creating further problems inside. Needless to say another
point of view is that the situation within the turnstyle area had
been allowed to develop because of poor policing both in planning and
and in execution and that the behaviour etc of the crowd,whilst perhaps
not helping., was not the cardinal problem.

In the end this is a question of fact which the jury will have to
decide on.  I suppose it depends on where one starts but if one were
to take the view that the initial fault lay in not recognising the
situation at 2.30 or in having a defective operational plan is it open
so to speak to shelter behind a loss of control and poor behaviour of
the fans.

A further example is connected with the tunnel which was not sealed
off when the Gates were opened. It has been suggested that the
commander had plenty of time to make the necessary arrangement for
this to be done as a period of 4 minutes had passed from the first
request to open the gates to implementation. However this assumes that
the decision to open the gates was taken at the first request. What if
any are the implications in the fact that the request( for
Hillsborough) was unprecedented;  the fact that the commander had
responsibility for other parts of the stadium not just Leppings Lane,
and that this was his first major match since taking commnand.

There is another matter that troubles me about the Lawrence direction
in connection with the Hillsborough disaster . It must be evident that
not every action which carries an obvious and serious risk of injury
and which is taken deliberately could be classified as reckless. For
example if i. a surgeon were to carry out a major operation which had
say 30%-50% risk of failure and death even when properly carried out,
If the patient dies and one were looking simply at the Lawrence
direction it could be argued that the criteria of the definition had
been met and the surgeon was liable to be charged. It is true that if
one were to apply the ex parte Gray test,ie was there negligence and
only if the answer were yes to apply the Lawrence direction then the
result would make more sense but the danger then is that one is
creeping back to the Bateman test. Counsel's view on this would be
appreciated.

I have already mentioned my understanding re aggregation and have
raise two problems with regard to it in relation to the fans.

A further difficulty that presents itself to me is not the question of
aggregation inter parties but aggregation intra party. In other words
to what extent if at all is it correct and permissible to add together
perhaps relatively minor breaches of the same pa r t y . Presumably where
the activity or ommision forms part and parcel of one continuous
activity the whole of it can and must be looked at as one. Your view
on this would be appreciated and in particular\lf you agree that this
is the correct way of looking at where one should draw the line.

I will now turn to the question of corporate manslaughter. I
understand that the directing mind and will of the corporation has to
fulfil the appropriate criteria and that it is likely that it is not
possible to aggregate the acts and ommisions of top company employees
or directors so as to establish corporate guilt.

One of the parties who appears before me is counsel for the Chief
                                   Page  13
Constable of S.Yorkshire. As I have mentioned to you already on the
phone I am puzzled as to whether in law the Chief Constable could
take personal criminal responsibility for the act and ommis&ons of
officers serving under him in the South Yorkshire Police. I believe
the Police Act makes provision for the Chief Constable to take
vicarious liablity for the civil liablity of officers analogously to
an employer with his employees but I am not aware that either that
Act or any other provision would make him criminally responsible. I
presume that if he were to have such a liability it would be not in a
personal capacity but as a corporation sole but I am not aware that
that is in fact his status.

If we now look at the South Yorkshire Police force, what is its legal
status, and in particular does it have an identity which could be
fixed with criminal responsibility . I find this difficult to believe
as the force is made up of individual officers all of whom hold a
commisLon as constable which is the basis of their power and authority,
though for practical purposes they are structured into a hierafchical
structure.

The only other body that I can think of is the Police Authority which
is of course "a>$ocal authority committee. If that is the ultimate
authority then one would have to shew that they were fixed with the
necessary degree of recklessness - a very difficult task as Chief
Constables are very anxious to ensure that they have operational
freedom from their authority.

I wonder if you have any thoughts on the   above points relating to the
police.

These instructions to advice are sent to you with the consent and in
the name of Rotheras.

It is regretted that they are lengthy but as you will have already
noticed I prefer to set out my understanding and argue out some of the
points. Although this no doubt means that it takes longer for you to
read I hope that its effect is to actually save you some time in
considering the matters.

You may feel that it would be easier in the first instance to adviSe
in conference and then to restrict your written advice to core matters
and this may prove to be both quicker simpler and cheaper. If you
feel that a conference would help I could come down for late Friday
afternoon or if that were not convenient sometime on Saturday.
Unfortunately on other days we tend not to finish till 4 o'clock or
later though I suppose if it were essential I could try to arrange
an early finish at say 2.pm on some other day.

There is an element of urgency as I need your advice well before I
approach the summing up which no doubt will be preceded by legal
submissions by the interested parties’ legal representatives.
#



              A D V I C E




    M.S. Howells Esq
    H.M. Coroner for the District of
    Pembrokeshire
    17 Hamilton Terrace
    Milford Haven
    Pembrokeshire
                         A D V I C E




                                          I am asked to advise

on the law of unlawful killing as it applies to inquests of

this kind and, given the notorious difficulties of this part

of the law, to settle appropriate Directions for the Jury.




                               1
Possible Verdicts

4.   The possible verdicts for consideration in the present

case are accident, misadventure, unlawful killing by a person

and/or a company and an open verdict. There is little

difference between the first two of these and nothing turns on

it for present purposes. The order in which the possible

verdicts are to be approached is, however, important. The

Court of Appeal has recently held that a jury should be

directed not to consider a verdict of accident or misadventure

if it has found unlawful killing; but if it has decided not to

find unlawful killing it should then consider accident or

misadventure: see R v Wolverhampton Coroner, Ex Parte McCurbin

[1990] 1 WLR 719 per Woolf LJ at 728. Further, it is now

confirmed that the criminal standard of proof is requisite for

a verdict of unlawful killing, whereas the civil standard is

appropriate for all other verdicts except, of course, an open

verdict: see McCurbin at 727-8 (approving the Gray case) and

see Gray at 477.



Unlawful Killing

Involuntary manslaughter by neglect

5.   On the assumption that arson cannot be shown to the

criminal standard, we are here concerned only with involuntary
manslaughter, and involuntary manslaughter by neglect at that.

(Were there to be sufficient evidence of arson we would be

concerned with another limb of involuntary manslaughter - the

intentional doing of an act which, whether the doer knows it

or not, is unlawful and dangerous in that it is likely to

cause direct personal injury: see eg Smith & Hogan, Criminal

Law, 6th ed (1988) at p 345).



Definition

6.   Manslaughter by neglect is committed when a person causes

the death of another intending to do an act which creates an

obvious and serious risk of causing personal injury (a) not

giving thought to the possibility of such risk, or (b) having

recognised that there was some risk involved, nonetheless

going on to take it ("recklessness" as defined by Lord Diplock

In R v Lawrence [1982] AC 510).



Causation

7.   To amount to manslaughter a person's conduct need not be

the only cause of the death, but it must be a substantial

cause in that it contributed significantly to the result.

Whether it did so contribute is generally a question of fact

for the jury in a criminal case: Paqett (1983) 76 Cr App Rep

279, 287-91. In an inquest, a jury should be directed that

causation is indeed a matter of fact for them but they should

be guided by the coroner as to which of the possible causes

disclosed by the evidence are candidates for substantial

causes.
Gross negligence

8.   It may also be that manslaughter is committed if the

person causing the death intends to do an act, or omits to do

an act where there is a duty to do so, being grossly negligent

whether death or serious personal injury results ("gross

negligence"): see again Smith & Hogan at p345. The law is      at

present uncertain whether gross negligence still exists as a

separate head of liability, two recent authorities having held

that the earlier cases where manslaughter is defined in terms

of negligence should not be followed and that Lord Diplock's

test should be applied universally.



9.   In Sevmour (1983) 76 Cr App Rep 211, Watkins LJ, giving

the judgment of the Court of Appeal in a reckless driving

case, said:

      "...we are of the view that it is no longer necessary or

     helpful to make reference to compensation and negligence.

      The Lawrence direction on recklessness is comprehensive

      and of general application to all offences, including

      manslaughter involving the driving of motor vehicles

      recklessly and should be given to juries without in any

     way being diluted. Whether a driver at the material time

     was conscious of the risk he was running or gave no

      thought to its existence, is a matter which affects

      punishment for which purposes the judge will have to

      decide, if he can, giving the benefit of doubt to the
      convicted person, in which state of mind that person had

      driven at the material time."



10.   In Kona Cheuk Kwan v R (1985) 82 Cr App Rep 18 Lord

Roskill, giving the opinion of the Privy council, said at p

25:

      "Their Lordships are of the view that the present state

      of the relevant law in England and Wales... is clear. The

      model direction suggested in Lawrence and held in Seymour

      equally applicable to cases of motor manslaughter

      requires, first, that the vehicle was in fact being

      driven in such a manner as to create an obvious and

      serious risk of causing physical injury to another and

      secondly that the defendant so drove either without

      having given any thought to the possibility of there

      being such a risk or having recognised that there was

      such a risk nevertheless took it.

           In principle their Lordships see no reason why a

      comparable direction should not have been given in the

      present case as regards that part of the case which

      concerned the alleged navigation of the Flying Goldfinch

      by Kong and indeed as regards the alleged navigation of

      the Flying Flamingo by the other two defendants. Did

      their respective acts of navigation create an obvious and

      serious risk of causing physical damage to some other

      ship and thus to other persons who might have been

      travelling in the area of the collision at the material

      time? If so did any of the defendants... so navigate
      either without having given any thought to the

      possibility of that risk or, while recognising that the

      risk existed, take that risk?"

At p 26, Lord Roskill said:

      "Their Lordships... respectively agree with the comment

      made by Watkins LJ... in Seymour."



11.   However, as pointed out by Smith & Hogan (6th ed (1988)

at p 353), while the clear implication from Kong Cheuk Kwan is

that there is no longer any separate test of gross negligence

in manslaughter, it may be that the courts would not be

prepared to exclude it altogether in an appropriate case. Some

support for this view is found in Goodfellow (1986) 83 Cr App

Rep 23, where Lord Lane LCJ said that the question in Kong

Cheuk Kwan was whether the defendant was "guilty of

recklessness (or gross negligence)".



Inquests

12.   Sitting in the Divisional Court in the Gray case, Watkins

LJ returned to the Lawrence test in the context of the

appropriate directions to be given to inquest juries when

considering gross negligence or manslaughter by neglect. There

allegations were made against the police following the death

of a man while in police custody concerning the use of force

against him and failure to summon an ambulance promptly when

he became unconscious. The coroner's directions to the jury as

to unlawful killing were quashed by the Divisional Court,

which held that a coroner directing a jury on manslaughter
comprising unlawful killing alleged to have occurred because

of neglect by police was required to direct them as follows:

      (1) that they had to be satisfied of four ingredients,

      namely (a) that the police were under a duty to have

      regard to the health and welfare of the deceased,   (b)

      that in the circumstances there was a failure to do what

      should have been done for the health and welfare of the

      deceased, (c) that the failure amounted to a substantial

      cause of death, and (d) that the failure amounted to

      recklessness;

      (2) that the test of "recklessness" was whether a police

      officer, having regard to his duty, was indifferent to an

      obvious and serious risk to the health and welfare of the

      deceased or, recognising that risk to be present,

      deliberately chose to run it by doing nothing about it;

      (3) that a failure to appreciate that there was such a

      risk was not by itself sufficient to amount to

      recklessness; and

      (4) that the jury could only return a verdict of unlawful

      killing if they could attribute the unlawful conduct to a

      single police officer.



13.   Plainly these are the directions now to be given in any

inquest where manslaughter by neglect by one or more of a

number of persons present is alleged to have caused the death

and Instructing Solicitor will see that I have adapted them in

the suggested Directions accompanying this Advice.
Corporate Manslaughter

14.   The question whether a corporation can commit

manslaughter was considered at length by Professor J.C. Smith

in relation to the shipping company's liability for the

sinking of the Herald of Free Enterprise in an Opinion dated

25th November 1987. He concluded that the company in that case

could be properly indicted for manslaughter by gross

negligence or recklessness, assuming it could be proved that

one or more of the directing minds of the company caused the

deaths, and did so with the fault required by the definition

of manslaughter. Professor Smith relied, in my view correctly,

on DPP v Kent and Sussex Contractors Ltd [1911] 2 KB 832 and

the well known Tesco Supermarkets Ltd v Nattrass [1972] AC

153, 173 among other authorities. In due course proceedings

were begun against the shipping company and others and on 5th

June 1990 Turner J, sitting at the Central Criminal Court,

dismissed a motion to quash the indictment against the

company, holding that both on the authorities and on principle

a corporation is capable of committing manslaughter. I have

seen a note of the Reserved Judgment, which includes a full

consideration of the authorities, and in my respectful view it

correctly represents the law as it stands today, the

subsequent acquittal of all defendants at the direction of the

Judge being immaterial.



15.   It is worth noting in passing that, ironically as it

turns out, the Divisional Court in R v H.M Coroner for East

Kent, Ex Parte Spooner (1987) 3 ECC 636; (1988) 152 JP 115;
(1988) JPN 94, in judicial review proceedings of the Herald,

inquest, had earlier rejected judicial review of the Coroner's

decision not to call evidence directed to the question whether

there had been an unlawful killing on the express assumption

(of the Divisional Court) that a company can indeed commit

manslaughter.



16.   I accordingly advise that in an appropriate case a

coroner should direct a jury that a verdict of unlawful

killing by a company is open to them providing one or more of

the directing minds of the company under consideration commits

manslaughter as that offence is currently defined.



The present case

17.   Having indicated my view of the law, it may be helpful if

I make some tentative observations on how the evidence likely

to be adduced might be most clearly presented to the jury

within the framework of my suggested directions. I hope this

will not be thought presumptuous by an experienced coroner.



Unlawful killing by a person

18.   The investigations following disasters commonly unearth a

number of factors which might have played some part in causing

death, yet are not necessarily a substantial cause, and this

case is no exception. Since a jury must find causation

established to the criminal standard of proof, and given the

difficulties of the definition of recklessness, it is often

more helpful and less confusing for a jury, after having heard


                                9
the coroner's directions on law, to be reminded by him of the

factors which are capable of being a substantial cause of the

death and to be given specific guidance on, and then invited

to eliminate, those factors which might be regarded as not

being sufficiently substantial in the light of the heavy

burden of proof. The jury may then be spared lengthy and

difficult deliberation on whether acts or omissions which were

not a substantial cause were reckless, and the inquest time

shortened accordingly.
Farrar's Building,
Temple,              PETER BIRTS QC
LONDON EC4Y 7BD

6 December 1990
                      CORONER'S DIRECTIONS TO JURY



Unlawful Killing

     It is open to you to find a verdict of unlawful killing in

this case - that is, a verdict that the deceased's death was

manslaughter.

     In order to find a verdict of manslaughter you must be

satisfied that the act or omission of a single person amounted

to unlawful conduct which was a substantial cause of the death.

In this case you are concerned with manslaughter by neglect and

you should pay careful attention to the directions of law which

I am about to give you and which you must leyaUriy -put into

effect.

     My directions to you are as follows.

     1.    In order to bring in a verdict of manslaughter by

     neglect    you    must   be   satisfied    on   the   evidence   of   the

     following ingredients:

     (1) That a person on board the vessel was under a duty to

     have regard to the safety of the deceased.

     (2) That that person failed to do what in the circumstances

     he ought to have done for the safety of the deceased.

     (3)   That   his    failure    was   a    substantial   cause    of   the

     deceased's death.

     (4) That in failing to act for the safety of the deceased

     he acted recklessly.
2.   'Recklessly' has a specific meaning in law which I will

now explain to you. To act recklessly means that there was

an obvious and serious risk to the safety of the deceased

to   which   the   person,   having   regard   to   his   duty,   was

indifferent (in other words he gave no thought) or which,

recognising that risk to be present, he deliberately chose

to run by ignoring it (in other words doing nothing about

it). Let me emphasise, however, that a failure to appreciate

that there was such a risk would not by itself be sufficient

to amount to recklessness.

3.   You can return a verdict of unlawful killing only if you

can attribute those ingredients to a single person aboard

the vessel whom you should on no account name or otherwise

identify.

4.   You should consider the position of each person on board

who may have been under a duty to have regard to the safety

of the deceased.

5.    It is of the utmost importance that you should only

bring in a verdict of unlawful killing if, although you are

not identifying the offender, you are satisfied so that you

are sure that such a criminal offence has been committed.

6.   If you are so satisfied, there is no need for you to go

on to consider death by misadventure. If, on the other hand,

you are not satisfied so that you are sure that this was an

unlawful killing, you should then consider the question of

misadventure.
     7.   When considering misadventure you do not need to bear

     in mind the heavy standard of proof which is required for

     unlawful killing. You may bring in a verdict of misadventure

     if you are satisfied on a balance of probabilities -in other

     words, if you are satisfied that it is more likely than not

     that the deceased's death was misadventure.



Corporate Manslaughter

     It is open to you to find a verdict of unlawful killing by

a company in this case - that is, that the deceased's death was

corporate manslaughter.

     In order to find a verdict of corporate manslaughter you

must be satisfied that the act or omission of one or more of the

directing minds of the company responsible for the safety of the

deceased amounted to unlawful conduct which was a substantial

cause of the death.

     In this case you are concerned with corporate manslaughter

by neglect and you should pay careful attention to the directions ,.

of law which I am about to give you and which you must loya1 iy

put into effect.

     My directions to you are as follows.

     1.   In order to bring in a verdict of corporate manslaughter

     you must be satisfied on the evidence of the       following

     ingredients:

     (1) That a company was under a duty to have regard to the

     safety of the deceased.

     (2) That one or more of the directing minds of that company

     failed to do what in the circumstances he or they ought to


                                3
have done for the safety of the deceased.                     By        directing

mind ' I mean       a director     or ^manager who           represents         the

directing mind and will of the company and who actually

controls what it does - not an employee or agent who is

merely    taking    orders      from above and cannot              be    said    to

represent the mind or will of the company.

(3)   That   such    failure     was    a    substantial      cause       of    the

deceased's death.

(4) That in failing to act for the safety of the deceased

he or they acted recklessly.

2.    ‘Recklessly' has the specific meaning in law which I

have already explained to you but which I will repeat. To

act recklessly means that there was an obvious and serious

risk to the safety of the deceased to which the directing

mind of the company, having regard to the company's duty,

was   indifferent     (in other words he gave no thought)                        or

which, recognising that risk to be present, he deliberately

chose to run by ignoring it (in other words doing nothing

about it). Let me again emphasise, however, that a failure

to appreciate that there was such a risk would not by itself

be sufficient to amount to recklessness.

3.       Further,    in   the    case       of   corporate    manslaughter,

recklessness is not made out by adding together the acts or

omissions of a number of people where none of those acts or

omissions by themselves was reckless.                 You can only find

recklessness if you are satisfied that the act or omission

of one or more of the directing minds of the company was

itself reckless in the sense defined above.


                                   4
    4.     You should not name or otherwise identify the company.

     5.    If you are satisfied of corporate manslaughter, there

     is      no    need     for you     to   go     on   to consider      death    by

    misadventure. If, on the other hand, you are not satisfied

     so that you are sure that this was an unlawful killing by

     a    company,    you     should         then    consider the      question of

    •misadventure. When considering misadventure you do not need

     to     bear     in mind the       heavy      standard of    proof     which   is

     required for unlawful killing. You may bring in a verdict

     of   misadventure       if   you        are    satisfied on    a balance      of

     probabilities - in other words, if you are satisfied that

     it is more likely than not that the deceased's death was

     misadventure.



Other important directions arising from R v West London Coroner^
ex parte Gray T19881 OB 467

     1.      This inquest is an investigation                   into how, when and

     where the deceased came by his death - it is a fact finding

     exercise and nothing else. It is important to appreciate

     that it is not a method of deciding or sharing out blame.

     The rules governing Inquests are such that neither I nor you

     the Jury may express any                opinion on any othermatters.



     2.     In particular,        I must direct you             that     you are not

     permitted to add any rider to your verdict.



     3. Nor are you permitted to charge any person or company

     with any offence of unlawful killing.
CORONER'S DIRECTIONS TO JURY
                      CORONER'S DIRECTIONS TO JURY



Unlawful Killing

     It is open to you to find a verdict of unlawful killing in

this case - that is, a verdict that the deceased's death was

manslaughter.

     In order to find a verdict of manslaughter you must be

satisfied that the act or omission of a single person amounted

to unlawful conduct which was a substantial cause of the death.

In this case you are concerned with manslaughter by neglect and

you should pay careful attention to the directions of law which

I am about to give you and which you must

effect.

     My directions to you are as follows.

     1.    In order to bring in a verdict of manslaughter by

     neglect    you   must   be    satisfied    on   the   evidence   of   the

     following ingredients:

     (1) That a person on board the vessel was under a duty to

     have regard to the safety of the deceased.

     (2) That that person failed to do what in the circumstances

     he ought to have done for the safety of the deceased.

     (3)   That   his    failure    was   a    substantial   cause    of   the

     deceased's death.

     (4) That in failing to act for the safety of the deceased

     he acted recklessly.
2.   'Recklessly' has a specific meaning in law which I will

now explain to you. To act recklessly means that there was

an obvious and serious risk to the safety of the deceased

to   which   the   person,   having   regard   to   his   duty,   was

indifferent (in other words he gave no thought) or which,

recognising that risk to be present, he deliberately chose

to run by ignoring it (in other words doing nothing about

it). Let me emphasise, however, that a failure to appreciate

that there was such a risk would not by itself be sufficient

to amount to recklessness.

3.   You can return a verdict of unlawful killing only if you

can attribute those ingredients to a single person aboard

the vessel whom you should on no account name or otherwise

identify.

4.   You should consider the position of each person on board

who may have been under a duty to have regard to the safety

of the deceased.

5.    It is of the utmost importance that you should only

bring in a verdict of unlawful killing if, although you are

not identifying the offender, you are satisfied so that you

are sure that such a criminal offence has been committed.

6.   If you are so satisfied, there is no need for you to go

on to consider death by misadventure. If, on the other hand,

you are not satisfied so that you are sure that this was an

unlawful killing, you should then consider the question of

mi sadventure.




                              2
     7.   When considering misadventure you do not need to bear

     in mind the heavy standard of proof which is required for

     unlawful killing. You may bring in a verdict of misadventure

     if you are satisfied on a balance of probabilities -in other

     words, if you are satisfied that it is more likely than not

     that the deceased's death was misadventure.



Corporate Manslaughter

     It is open to you to find a verdict of unlawful killing by

a company in this case - that is, that the deceased's death was

corporate manslaughter.

     In order to find a verdict of corporate manslaughter you

must be satisfied that the act or omission of one or more of the

directing minds of the company responsible for the safety of the

deceased amounted to unlawful conduct which was a substantial

cause of the death.

     In this case you are concerned with corporate manslaughter

by neglect and you should pay careful attention to the directions

of law which I am about to give you and which you must

put into effect.

     My directions to you are as follows.

     1.   In order to bring in a verdict of corporate manslaughter

     you must be satisfied on the evidence of the       following

     ingredients:

     (1) That a company was under a duty to have regard to the

     safety of the deceased.

     (2) That one or more of the directing minds of that company

     failed to do what in the circumstances he or they ought to
have done for the safety of the deceased.                       By    'directing
                                         / U s

mind'     I mean      a director                       who     represents        the

directing mind and will of the company and who actually

controls what it does - not an employee or agent who is

merely     taking     orders     from above and cannot               be   said    to

represent the mind or will of the company.

(3)     That   such    failure    was    a       substantial    cause     of     the

deceased’s death.

(4) That in failing to act for the safety of the deceased

he or they acted recklessly.

2.    'Recklessly' has the specific meaning in law which I

have already explained to you but which I will repeat. To

act recklessly means that there was an obvious and serious

risk to the safety of the deceased to which the directing

mind of the company, having regard to the company's duty,

was   indifferent       (in other words he gave no thought)                      or

which, recognising that risk to be present, he deliberately

chose to run by ignoring it (in other words doing nothing

about it). Let me again emphasise, however, that a failure

to appreciate that there was such a risk would not by itself

be sufficient to amount to recklessness.

3.       Further,     in   the    case   of       corporate     manslaughter,

recklessness is not made out by adding together the acts or

omissions of a number of people where none of those acts or

omissions by themselves was reckless.                   You can only find

recklessness if you are satisfied that the act or omission

of one or more of the directing minds of the company was

itself reckless in the sense defined above.


                                   4
     4.    You should not name or otherwise identify the company.

     5.    If you are satisfied of corporate manslaughter, there

     is     no     need   for you    to    go     on   to consider       death    by

     misadventure. If, on the other hand, you are not satisfied

     so that you are sure that this was an unlawful killing by

     a    company,    you   should        then    consider the       question     of

    ■misadventure. When considering misadventure you do not need

     to     bear     in mind the    heavy        standard of    proof     which   is

     required for unlawful killing. You may bring in a verdict

     of   misadventure      if   you      are    satisfied on    a      balance   of

     probabilities - in other words, if you are satisfied that

     it is more likely than not that the deceased's death was

     misadventure.



Other important directions arising from R v West London Coroner,
ex parte Gray f19881 OB 467

     1.      This inquest is an investigation into how,                   when and

     where the deceased came by his death - it is a fact finding

     exercise and nothing else. It is important to appreciate

     that it is not a method of deciding or sharing out blame.

     The rules governing Inquests are such that neither I nor you

     the Jury may express any opinion on any other matters.



     2.     In particular,       I must direct you thatyou are not

     permitted to add any rider to your verdict.



     3. Nor are you permitted to charge any person or company

     with any offence of unlawful killing.
CORONER'S DIRECTIONS TO JURY
                     t4 ic > ^ c x £ j         fo(A3€T-5         .




        r C   :^ S >     , -




                 I                 fe p ^ r    f iL J - jje u ^ g - S



                                      [ rT^"sCTi c!PO •
                                    ^<^14-        y       -7 e = P .



~ \^jjzp r\< sn      £ - 1     -
 Counsel is asked to consider and advifSe on various legal and
 procedural matters which it is thought are likely to arise out of the
 inquests into the death of the 95 supporters who attended at the
 Hillsborough Stadium on 15th April 1989.

 I will first of all outline as briefly as possible the back ground
 and circumstances of the incident together with some of the points
 for ^nd against which have or are likely to bi»r-mado ftn n-rnrwTt: nf t.hn «
 arisias out of the evidence.

 Hillsborough stadium has been in being for over 100 years. In 1979
 it received a safety certificate under the Safety in Sportground
 Act 1975 issued by the South Yorkshire County Council who were
 disbanded in 1986 when on 1/4/86 Sheffield City Council took over the
 responsibility for this. There were regular inspections by working
 parties or advisory groups but on the relevant date no new certificate
 had been issued despite the fact that the council had been drafting
 one for some time and that some reservations about the existing one
 had been expressed. Nor had the existing certificate been amended
 despite the fact the substantial changes had been made to the Leppings
 Lane terracing over the years since the certificate was issued. In
 fact I think that in many respects the certificate could not be
 complied with by the club because of these changes and that these
 changes were known to the licencing authorities.

 Prior to 1981 the perimeter track fencing was put up to deter pitch
 invasions and this was done to comply with I think International
 football standard requirments.

 Until 1981 the Lepping Lane terracing was entirely open expanse
'capable of accomodating thousands of spectators.

 In 1981 a crushing incident occunfed despite the open terrace.               *
 Subsequently for various reasons including I think for s e g r e g a t i o n
 control and for the avoidance of similar incidents,radial fences were
 erected with gates at the back. This enabled the terrace to be divided
 into segments and for only part to be used at small fixtures and the
 whole at larger fixtures.

  From the evidence at Lord Justice Taylors enquiry (LJT) there was
 some dispute between the various authorities as to whether these gates
 should be manned by the Police during matches. The fire service
 understood that they would,whilst the police did not think that the
 wording of theminutes ("under police control") mefifcfc th a t. In any event^
 on the day, these gates were in a locked open position with no police
 in attendance nor for that matter any steward (thought to be too
 risky). The idea was that the terrace should be treated as a whole
 with the fans finding there own level by spreading out along the
 terracing by using these gates or by finding other means of entrance
 to the side elevations which did exist but which were either not
 signed or only very poorly signed.

 It seems that every-one accepts that the central pens are the most
 popular and that from the layout of the ground the likelihood would
 be that the majority of the fans would head down a tunnel which leads
 from the relevant turnstjles (A-G) and Gate C as to which see below.

 The adequacy of the number of turnstiles for the number expected
 depended on a relatively smooth flow of spectators arriving over a
 period of time and indeed in 1988 the semi final between the same
                                    Page   1
 clubs and under virtually identical arrangements had gone off as far
 as those in authority knew smoothly and without any realS f problems.

 The FA had chosen this ground fo semi finals on three consecutive
 years and as far as I know no complaint regarding the structure,
 signing^policing(or other matters had been raised.

  An operational order had been drawn up by the police in 1989 which for
  all intents and purposes followed the operational order of 1988. It
  made reference in its Intent section to achieving law and order and
  the safety of the fans both within and without the ground. Apart from
  that most of the order dealt with specific duties of hundreds of
  police officers at various stages of the match both within and without
  the ground. Most of these duties were directed to public order matters
  and the issue of safety was not addressed in words. The order, although
  running to about 100 pages or so/did not include sections setting out
* contigenCj plans in the event of unforseen events occuuing and in
  particular there was no contigency plan as to what to do if there was
  a late influx of supporters in whatever state they might be. Match
  briefings also took place.

 On the day in question it would appear that large numbers of fans
 arrived latter than expected. A severe crush occurred outside the
 turnstfle area and Supt Marshall, having decided that there was a risk
 to life,requested that large gates normally only used as exit gates be
 opened. After repeated requests this was done and a large influx of
 fans entered the stadium. Supt Marshall did not request a delay in
 kick off (he thought that in the circumstances it would be
 ineffective).  Other officers acting independently did ask for this
 but match control took the view that it was too late to do so.   I
 should perhaps mention that a policy decision had been taken that the
 match would not be postponed unless there were extraifeus reasons such
 as fog on the motorways^iey delays not due to fans1 fault.

 Fans having entered the stadium via the exit gates without checks,and
 therefore probably included numerous ticketless fans^entered the
 ground through the central tunnel which was not controlled or
 stewarded^and overfilled the central pens which were already full if
 not overfull. This led to crushing and as a result fans requested the
 gates on the perimeter fencing^, which incidentally were very narrow,to
 be opened. The delay in opening these gates is hotly disputed but
 there is not much doubt that initially the gates were opened and again
 shut before it was recognised by the officers on the tractsthat a
 crush situation had occurred.

 The reaction at the control box appears to have been that a
 pitch invasion was taking place and steps were taken to deal with the
 situation on this basis and it was not until about the time that the
 match was stopped that ambulances etc were summoned about.

 There was considerable pandemonium and it took time for some
 organisation to be brough to the scene. Again there is some dispute
 but Ch. Supt Nesbit who arrived from elsewhere at about 15.12 seems to
 have been successful in organising a coordinated rescue attempt.

 In 1988 a similar fixture had beaoplayed . There were no reports of
 injuries though evidence has now been given that the terracing was
 uncomfortably full on that occasion too. There has also been evidence
 that fans were elevated frmojthe terracing to the stands above during
 that match and indeed on other occassions too.   No police officers had
                                     Page   2
been designated to man the rear of the radial fences but ther/e seems
to be some evidence that at one point the central tunnel access
had been barred by officers and fans diverted to other areas    y
a group of police officers,but unfortunatly this does not seem to
have been mentioned in the debriefing.

The above is a very very sketchy outline of the ®ve" t® bu^ lt:
evident from this that the conduct of at least the following parties
may be called in question:

The £ l u b
The Engineers
The Local Authority
The Police (whatever that might m e a n ) ’
The Match commander Ch. Supt Duckenfield
The control room commander Supt Murray
The Ground Commander Supt Greenwood
The pitch perimeter gate officers (two gates,one officer each;
The Outside commander at Lepping Lane (Supt Marshall)
The fans or some part of them •

I am of course aware that an inquest is a fact-finding exercise and
not a fault finding one and that there are no parties.
Nevertheless if one is to consider a possible verdict of unlawfully
killed even if no one is to be named then it is necessary to conside
the evidence to see whether the ingredients of the offence have been
made out against one or more parties without aggregation of course.



A. Without claiming to be exhaustive the arguments w h i c h have been
advancedagainst the various parties except the fans a n d the evidence
which I suppose would have to be relied on to justify a verdict
of unlawfully killed^,would include:

 1.Tthat the planning was defective in that there was inadequate
 reference to safety in the operational order and that this was
 obvious.

 2. That there were no contigency plans to deal with inter a ^ a
 late arrival of fans, the filtering out of ticketless and or drunken
 fans, the packing of the terraces in particular as the gates at the
 rear of the radial fences were not visible when the pens were full,
 and that these defects and others were obvious to all.

 3. That the actual policing on the day outside was unsatisfactory
 in that fans were allowed into a restricted area in too large numbers
 which led to crushing and danger. That the remedial actions to try and
 remedy this situation by closing perimeter gates and placing pol ce
 horse cordons etc was not only too late but ineffective because •

 (a) it should have been done further b a c k (ie away from the turnstile
 area,

 (bl that the pleas to people to stop pushing etc would not help
 because it was addressed to people who had no control over their
 movements and could not respond t

 ( cl that none or insufficient or ineffective filtering systems had
 been put in place to weed out ticketless fans and people inebriated
  if any
4.TThat closing off Leppings lane compounded the problem because it
made it easier for people to come dowfii in large numbers and thus
increase the congestion.

5.TThat it was known that crowds tended to come late and where
getting later for football matches and that they should not have been
caught by surprise ,

6.^1that it was entirely to be expected that the crowd would have
consumed alcolol and that nothing excessive or unusual occurred.,

7 . "£hat attempts to communicate with the crowd was inadequate
and that messages were mot heard

8.^that the match should have been postponed and that this informationj
if properly announced over loudspeakers and tannoy; would have allayed
the natural anxiety of the crowd about getting in and reduce the
crushing and danger,

9 . T h a t there was a lack of communication between ground control and
those outside in both directions and in particular that those outside
failed to communicate effectively the excess numbers still there^
whilst those on the inside failed to alert those outside of the
numbers inside so that they could make a better assessment of the
s it ua ti on .

1 0 . ^ h a t the outer perimeter gates should have been used as crowd
control barrier as was apparently done in the previous year and that
to close the gates on the crowd merely inflamjfted the situation .

1 1 . ^ h a t there was a failure in policing in that not every-one was
searched and that people who could have been arrested were not taken
into custody*

12.^Chat under no circumstances should the main exit gates have been
opened to let people in because this would allow a large mass of
people in, a proportion of whom would not have tickets^ and therefore
this would lead to overcrowding. In addition many of these people
would have perhaps been the worse for wear and that unruly behaviour
which had been exhibited outside would now be transferred to the
inside.

1 3 . ^ h a t the opening of concertina gate C allowed a large influx at a
far higlf^speed than normal and that the ground dispersal ability would
be exceeded.

14. Even if it was essential that the croud should be let in then
arrangements should have beoomade to seek to divert them from the
tunnel and access to the central pens^and that there was plenty of           v
tif?i to action this as there was about a 4 minute interval between          '


the first request to open the gate    J  &        .




15. That in fact arrangements for a police serial were put in place at
another gate (Gate A) before it was opened as that gate led to
the seated area and that this exhibitala desire to avoid overcrowding
in that area.

 16. That even before the gates were open it was obvious that the
 central pens were full or overcrowded and that to allow hundreds or
 even thousands in just before kick-off was obviously undesirable and
                                    Page   4
 dangerous.
 17. That even after it became obvious that something was wrong within
 the central pens,the problem was not recognised and when recognised
 misdiagnosed and the incorrect remedy applied^which led to delay and
 therefore loss of life.

    18. That no heed was taken of pleas for help both from within the
    terrace and without and that this was at least in part due to the
    terms of the operational order which made it clear that the i n t e g r i t y
    of pitch and track had to be   maintained and that the pitch gates had
    to be closed except for medical emergency*

    19. That the training of the   force was such as to respond to law and
    order situations rather than   safety aspects and that this was
    confirmed and reinforced by the briefings and operational or d e r .

    20. That the agreed emergency message which would have alerted all to
    undertake stated activities was never broadcast and that indeed no
    effective use of the loudspeaker equipment was made or only used toe»           ^
    late.

    21. That once the incident was recognised no effective leadership was
    given by senior officers *
-
( a )  T h a t the rescue attempt at the front was uncordinated and largely
    left to individual initiative until too late *

^bi"*?hat although it was obvious to various police officers that an
 approach to clear    the terrace had to be made from the back that action
 was not organised    or coordinated by those in command and   perhaps not
 even realised.

    22. That to allow Ch. Supt Duckenfield to control the match was
    irresponsible as this was only days after taking over command of the
    division and this was his first large match.

    23. That the testing layout and arrangements of barriers     was      v
    inadequate and not in conformity with the green guide or the            ^
    safety certificate and that the collapse of one of the barriers in pen
    three contributed to a massive loss of life (8 deaths in pen 4 over 80
    in pen 3 welre the barrier broke).

    24. ThcjVthe licensing authority had permitted the removal of a barrier
    some years prior to the incident but that this increased the load
       others and(although obvious^had not been noticed.

    25. That indolence of the licensing authority and their failure
    over the years to appreciate the obvious defects and problems and
    their failure to amend the safety certificate / even though they were
    aware of the need( and also their responsibility as to safety as well
    as their failure to apply their mind to contigency plans^ contributed
    to the disaster.

    26. That the lack of provision for stewards or for that matter
    police officers on the terrace      10000 people might be^was                   v
    obviously dangerous.

    25. That the poor signing and the confusing layout of the Leppings
    Lane terracing increased the problems outside and also led to the
                                       Page   5
 large mass of people heading into the central tunnel.

 B.
                       4
      In answer to some^xhese points,the following has been said or
 is anticipated will be said in evidence!

 1. The order was virtually a carbon copy of the previous year. No one
 had taken any objection to it nor had anyone raised any objection to
 any ommisions> it was therefore not obvious at the time, though both with
 hind sight and also if carefully analysed^obvious defects could be
 demonstrated.

 2. There were no written contingency plans but the Operational Order
 did not purport to be an exhaustive instruction. It was unnecessary to
 specify safety considerations as these would authomatically come into
 play. Tha^t police officers were expected to use their own initiative
 and^take decisions depending on contingencies on the groun^jjnd that
 in incase the contingencies were catered for by the large rne' of police
 officers on the ground. It was also impossible to specify each and
 every contingency that could or might arise. The arrangements for the
 packing and policing and stewarding of the terracing had been a
 successful method which had worked without any difficulty/ particularly
 in the year before. That although the rear gates would not have been
 visible to people at a distance^the crowd within a terrace would
 detect movement through them and they would therefor be effective.

 3. That policing at a sporting occassion depended on consent. That it
 was impractical to seek to hold supporters at a distance
 because it would merely transfer the problem elsewhere.In addition,
 enormous man-power resource would be needed. That attempts to control
 ingress at the turnstyle area had been made as soon as it was realised
 that a problem was or had occurred.That closing LL was unprecedented
 but that at the time it was done for safety reasons and to produce a
 holding area. That the pattern of arrival of the crowd was quite
 different from the previous year and that no intelligence had been
 received to suggest this. That the behaviour and mood of the crowd
 changed after 2.30+ and that it was not possible to reason with t h e m *
"*Fhat( although a proportion could not respond^ there was a
 sufficiciently large minority who could have done so but chose not to.
 People pushing etc into the crowd compounding the problem. That,
 although lateness could be expected., the scale was unprecedented and
 that the volfof people in drink (not drunk) was proportionally higher
 and also numerically greater because of the crowd size. That
 loudspeaker appeals were made both from the front and the back without
 success and that therefore announcing a postponement would not have
 made any difference.

 ( In passing this raises a very interesting point. It is suggested
 that the crowd who was being addressed was unable to effectively
 respond and not push because it was too heavily compacted together.
 On the other hand it is said that if the kick-off had been postponed
 the natural anxiety of the crowd which generated an urgency to get in
 would have been abated^, resulting in a reduction in the "pushing and
 congestion" and thus avoiding the need to open exit gates. It seems
 to me that if this is correct then it cannot also be argued that the
 crowd were incapable of response ),

 Whilst it is true that the crowd were not held back at a distance
 there was no reason why people had to join the back of the crowd and
 push forward as the congestion was clearly visible and there was
 plenty or room in Leppings Lane itself which was virtually traffic
                                    Page   6
free. Comparision video of 1988 and 1989 show a distinct difference in
the build-up of the crowds on the two occassions.

4. It was agreed that it would have been useful to have had some
knowledge of the numbers within the stadium at different times and
similarly in retrospect it would have been better to have sent a
messenger to the control room with verbal information, particularly at
times when radio communications were poor or non existant,though it
was taken that the control room because of video equipment would have
had a view of the situation outside.

5. Apart from communication difficulties with the crowd and the
assessment that there would have been a poor response,there was also
the strategic decision not to postpone kick-off simpl’ijf because a
number^people were late. The decision to postpone kick off has
numerous implications including the effect on the people within the
stadium.

6. That it is a practical impossibility to search every^one and with a
large crowd to exclude everyone who in other circumstances it might
have been possible to weed out. Arrests are very costly in man-power
and would lead to even greater depletion of-resources. One can only do
what is in fact possible.

 7. That the opening of the large exit gates was not an action taken
 lightly as it negated the match policy of excluding ticketless fans
 and other undesirables but that when it became evident that for
^v^JStever reason it was impossible to resolve the situation by crowd
 control methods from the middle /further back and that lives were at
 stake^then it was the only solution . Mr. Marshall, who authorised this
 action, agreed that sometime after 2.30pm the police lost control of
 the situationthough h^iolds at least a minority of the crowd
 responsible.

 That there was a risk attached to opening the Gates but
that crowd safety outside demanded it. He did not consider
     the people would go to once inside (he knew there was large
concourse area within the turnst.yle area). He also said that his
concern was the safety of the people outside,, he did not have
reponsibility for the people on the inside and that he would have
expected match control or ground commander to have taken any
appropriate action.

All the evidence has not yet been taken but it is quite likely that
evidence will be given, if not already done so dealing with various
other matters set out in A 1-25 above.        '




C. The behaviour of the fans is obviously a major matter and has to be
considered from the point of view of whether some one or more of the
fans could be considered to have acted or ommitted to act in such a
way as to give rise to the possibillity of the ingredients of
recklessness b e i n ^ m a d e out^or if that is not the case^whether the
behaviour of thej^in some way affects.diminishes or eliminates the
possibility of a finding of recklessness against the other interested
parties. It seems to me that there are three ways of looking at the
behaviour of the fans.

(Note^no one has suggested that all the fans were drunk^misbehaving or
otherwise in some way undesirable. On the contrary^ it seems to me
that most parties were prepared to concede that the majority were
                                   Page   7
ordinary decent people who were caught up in the situation but that
there was a minority which was both substantial and influential who
precipitated the crisis by their selfish d i s r e g a r d of others;their          ^
determination to enter at any cost and their lack o f w i l l i n g n e s s o
cooperate with authority).

a ) That the task of the police became impossible in the last 15-20
minutes before scheduledkick-of f, partly because such a large number of
fans decided to come late or latish to the match. This overwhelmed the
resourses both of police and club (ie not enough turnstyles). This
generated an understandable anxiety and worry that the people would not              ^
 get into the ground in time for kick off. In other words that the
 conduct of each individual fan did not amount to reckless behaviour.

b. That there was a sufficient number of people who either j>ec^ se o i
disinhibition due to alcohol or for some other reason were heedless
 the welfare of their fellow fans and were determined to enter the
 gro$rr and„by extension,the terracing at whatever cost. That               ,
 notwithstanding that*it must have been obvious                 there was a large
 crowd already at the turnstyles and the present of police hors                  ^
 and loudspeaker annoucements etc .they were determined to get liuefl                ^
T h a t not only did they not hold back but; without regard for the
 welfare of others.they pressed forward creating a dangerous situation,
 or in other words,that they acted recklessly in relation to others,
 is not suggested in this paragraph that these individuals were acting
 together as a group but that each individual acting on his own acted
 recklessly. Assuming that this were to be correct for a moment;it is
 hard to believe that in say a crowd o p 4000,the reckless pushing etc
 of one person could have created the pressure patterns which e                o
 the Opening of the gates. It is not so hard to understand that the                 ^
 cumrfulative effect of these individually motivated and generated
  pushes could have had the described effect. Assuming for a moment that
  the jury were to take the view that the evidence supports this
  hypothesis and that they also took the view that causation of the
  tragedy could be brought back to the events outside the turnstyle
  areas,would the rule against aggregation prevent the jury from                      ^
  considering * unlawfully killed verdicts in respect of both unknown
              j o


  and obviously unnamed fans> provided that in the direction to them.it
  had been made clear that they would have to be satisfied that the
  ingredients of recklessness, ie obvious and serious risk of injury and
  either indifference or deliberate taking of the risk,was established
  against each and every several individual and            that    theywould not be
  allowed simply to take the    c u m u l a t i v e effect into    account. The reason
  why I ask this is that itiaiot that uncommon where a clear murder has
  occulted but the culprit has not been discovered^for unlawfully killed
  verdicts to be returned be the perpetrators one or more persons.

 c. There has been some evidence (not much,but in ayay that is to be
 expected) that there were a number of fans in attendance who,knowing
 that they did not have tickets.were going to take concerted action
 to get into the ground without paying. The strongest evidence we heard
 was from someone in a Pub who happened to overhear three fans talking.
 The substance of the conversation being that one of the three was                   n

 explaining to the others that he wa<r had a group of other fans who he
 was meeting up with,that they would create sufficient disturbance
 outside the ground so that a gate would have to be opened and that
 they would then get in. He   apparently claimed that    this had been
 done before and that there   were no particular problems. There is also
 evidence from fans who entered through the big gates overhearing
 comments to the effect that * we would get in without tickets and also
                                     Page   8
the evidence of at least one of the gatekeepers of many years
experience that there was a group of ticketless fans outside his gate
(Gate A) who were att/empting to force an entry. He was able to tell
that they were ticketless because they were waving money at him.

Apart from the fact that it might be difficult to make the jump from
say the conversation in the pub mentioned above and execution of the
plan^there is the added problem of the fact that there were so many
people outside the turnstyles that day. Even if there was such a
conspiracy it may not have needed to be implemented. I assume that in
a conspiracy it might be possible to aggregate the activities of
individuals as they are acting together. I would be interested to
hear whether you think that^ given that the evidence is as stated    v
above, whether this would be an example of Cunnj^ham recklessness     v
rather than Caldwell or Lawrence. I would also value your view on
whether^ given that the evidence is as above^ it would be appropriate to
give a Cunningham direction to the jury in respect of this.

Assuming for a moment that for evidential causation or aggregation
reasons it is not possible to consider a verdict of unlawfully killed
against one or more of the fans^then their presence must nevertheless
have played a part in the disaster as it is difficult to imagine any
deaths occuring if fans had not been present.
I will now turn to the heart of the matter but before I do so I
want to make it quite clear that it is not part of my function to
achieve one verdict as opposed to another. I am conscious of the fact
that on the one hand there is a body of opinion which is keen for the
jury to return a verdict of unlawfully killed whilst of course there
are others who would prefer another verdict. I am also conscious of
the fact that notwithstanding that no party may be named in the
inquisition and that it is no longer the case that anyone is
immediately in peril as a result of such a verdict^nevertheless it is
a very serious matter to record such a verdict in a high profile
inquest such as this. Further more^because the numerous
individuals and companies involved (even if we exclude the fans) and
because of the rule against naming an individual in the inquisition^
such a verdict will have a blunderbuss effect notwithstanding ex
parte Gray. It is for this reason that I am most anxious to try to
ensure that the jury are properly directed. This will have the
additional advantage that th43=£verdict whatever it may^Will carry
perhaps that much more weight.                           '

D.
1. It seem to me that( except as mentioned above in respect possibly
of what is known as the conspiracy theory) a finding of unlawfully
killed would have to be based on manslaughter by neglect or? put
another w a y }lawful act manslaughter and that consequently we start off
with the law as propounded in
                            R v Caldwell  1981 1 All ER p 961
                            R v Lawrence  1981 1 All ER p 974
                            R v Seymour   1983 2 All ER p 1958
                            R v H.M. Coroner ex parte Gray case book on
                                     coroners page 97 1986
                            Kong Cheuk Kwan v The Queen Privy Council
                            case  1985

In addition one has to consider the Lacuna referred to by Smith and
Hogan in their sixth edition as well as the application of mistake
as described on page 63 and page 85 et sec

I would value your opinion as to existence of the lacuna or whether
it is not merely another way of saying that the facts have to be
be taken as the defendent (interested party) believes them to be.

I would like to draw your attention in the           Lawrence case to p 978
at   cwhere L. Hailsham    d e s c r i b ^ ^ the use of the word reckless *
 He states that it evidences a state of mind stopping short of
deliberate intention and going beyond mere inadvertence which he there
equates with the word "carelessness". He also on the same page at f /g
states
  Since the dayiof Noah the effects of alcohol have been known to
produce a state of mind described as recklessness and not to inhibit
it and for that matter to remove inhibitions in the field of intention
and not to destroy intention"

At p 981 "j" Lord Diplock says " One does not speak of a person acting
"recklessly" even though he has given no thought at all to the
consequences of his act unless the act is one that presents a real
risk of harmful consequences which anyone acting with reasonable
prudence would recognise and give heed to.

At page 982 "g" the direction is set out beginning with "In my view"
and ending "to take it". Two further para follow in one of which he
                                   Page 10
states that in deciding whether the risk created by the manner of the
driving was both obvious and serious and that the jury should apply
the standard of the ordinary prudent motorist as represented by
themselves. In the next paragraph he makes it clear that before
drawing the inference that the person being considered is in one of
the state^of mi n d ^ described they have to take the totality of the      ^
evidence including any explanations which may displace the inference.

Presumably this could include mistakes of fact, eg it might be claimed
that the officers on the tracfe<believed initially that people were not
distressed or that they did not hear cries of help or;if they did hear
them^ interpreted them incorrectly in the light of previous experience
or training.
               ..(j c £                         y                          v
 Similarly, if it- were fee be claimed by say the match controller that;
when he became aware of the crowds outsid^ €hat it would be possible
to get them in on time either, becSese of lack of experience or                7
incorrect advice or indeed for any other cause or that; on looking at
the pens he did not form an impression of dangerous overcrowding or
that he thought the scaling of the pitch fences was the beginnings of
a pitch invasion notwithstanding that others might and did take a
different view . Whether the jury believe the accounts or what weight
they put on them is o^course a different matter.

This brings me to the second pointy that the Lawrence direction as it
stands in the text on p982 does not refer to the exclusion of
inadvertance unless possibly one were to read it down to the end of
"j" p982 or read it subject to what L Hailsham said about the meaning
of Recklessness. In Kong Cheuk Kwan there is no reference to
inadvertance or carelessness (see L Hailsham above) whilst in ex parte
Gray,which seems the latest case and one specifically dealing with
coronal matters,Lord Justice Watkins^but only in the divisional court, x
re phrases the direction "Without having given any thought to the
possibility of the^r being any such risk" by stating" that acting      "v
recklessly the police officer having regard to his duty was
indifferent to that risk" and by adding expressly

     "It should be emphasized however that a failure to appreciate
     that there was such a risk would not of itself be sufficient to
     amount to recklessness."

This seems to me to put a rather different emphasis on the
definition and yesr view on this would be appreciated.                     ^

My understanding of the cases is that the Batemen test has been
abolished and that establishing gross negligence is not enough.
This also seems to be the view of Prof Zanders as reported in
the Times some time ago when commenting on the acquittals in the
Zeebruggen prosecutions he says :

 " But in three cases in the early 1980's the House of Lords ruled
that proof of gross negligence was not enough. The prosecution must
also show that the defendants were reckless in regard to an obvious
and serious ri s k " .

This again puts it slightly differently but is in line with ex parte
Gray I think.

 If that is so am I right in thinking that in order to
make out the offence of lawful act manslaughter one has to be
                                   Page  11
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that there is a duty of care, breach
of that duty, and damage.  Once that has been established one then
applies the test of whether the act or ommi^Lon so established falls
within the two limbs of the Lawrence test but making it clear that
mere inadvertance or carelessness ( is this not the same as negligence
) is not sufficient. In addition are the jury to be directed that in
determining the state of mind of*the party they have to take into
account any explanations which he has to offer to determine what in
fact his state of mind was. I.e(he may have been negligent but was he
reckless taking everything into account including the activities of
other .

I now move onto the next point which again arises out of Kong Cheuk
Kwan ( I realise this is a Privy Council decision and thus only of
persuasive authority). Having quoted Lord Diplock from his speech      ^
in Lawrence Lord Roskill goes on to say:

"Their JLordshipSemphasisethat. in this passage Lord Diplock was
speaking of an obvious and serious risk of causing physical injury
created by the defendant. He was not there concerned to deal with
cases where the conduct complained of was of a defendent reaction
to such a risk created by another person".

 and again just before the end he says:

"Their Lordships did not find it necessary to hear counsel for Kong on
the issue and it would not be right for them to offer any detailed
comments upon the facts beyond observing that the summing up does not
seem to have distinguished between an obvious risk created by those
navigating!each hydrofoil by their own navigation and the response by
those on board one hydrofoil to any obvious risk created by the
navigation of the other".

Applying these passages to the present problem? —

 The officer on the field may not have been aware either of the crush
outside the turnstyles nor the decision to open the gates (Radio was
on "talk through"   so he might have heard the messages though
reception was apparently terrible and in any case the messages would
not necessarily have impinged on his mind as they were not directed to
him) nor would he have been aware of any action or inaction in
relation to the tunnel. He was then confronted with a pen which was
full but which received in a short time a substantial extra number of
people. Does the passage quoted mean that in such circumstances the
test of recklessness does not apply or applies in some modified way
and if in what way?

In most major   disasters eg Zeebruggen, Kegworth, Clapham, Marchioness,
as well as in   RTAs involving say reckless driving^the victims and the
survivors are   helpless and entirely in the hands of for example the
traidriver or   the pilot etc.

 What distinguishes Hillsborough from these examples is that there is
an interface between^ shall we say for simplicity^ the police and the
fans. It is quite clear from say the evidence^^of Mr. Marshall that at
about 2.30 pm he knew he had a substantial no, of people there but felt
that they could be coped with. By 2.45. or so the position had so
changed with regard to the fans^both with regard to their location j
attitude^response and behaviour generally^that not only had it led
to loss of control for a period but also created such a dangerous
                                    Page 12
situation that unprecedent^action had to be taken to open the Gates^
notwithstanding that this was against normal practice and also had the
potential of creating further problems inside. Needless to say another
point of view is that the situation within the turnstyle area had
been allowed to develop because of poor policing both in planning and
and in execution and that the behaviour etc.of the crowd^whilst perhaps
not helping^was not the cardinal problem.

In the end this is a question of fact which the jury will have to
decide on.  I suppose it depends on where one starts but if one were
to take the view that the initial fault lay in not recognising the
situation at 2.30 or in having a defective operational plan is it open
so to speak to shelter behind a loss of control and poor behaviour of
the fans.

A further example is connected with the tunnel which was not sealed
off when the Gates were opened. It has been suggested that the
commander had plenty of time to make the necessary arrangement for
this to be done as a period of 4 minutes had passed from the first
request to open the gates to implementation. However this assumes that
the decision to open the gates was taken at the first request. What if
any are the implications in the fact that the request( for
Hillsborough) was unprecedented;  the fact that the commander had
responsibility for other parts of the stadium not just Leppings Lane,
and that this was his first major match since taking commnand.

There is another matter that troubles me about the Lawrence direction
in connection with the Hillsborough disaster . It must be evident that
not every action which carries an obvious and serious risk of injury
and which is taken deliberately could be classified as reckless* For
example if £ a surgeon were to carry out a major operation which had
say 30%-50% risk of failure and death even when properly carried out.
If the patient dies and one were looking simply at the Lawrence
direction it could be argued that the criteria of the definition had
been met and the surgeon was liable to be charged. It is true that if
one were to apply the ex parte Gray test;ie.was there negligence a n d ?
only if the answer were yes^to apply the Lawrence direction?then the
result would make more sense but the danger then is that one is
creeping back to the Bateman test. Counsel's view on this would be
appreciated.

I have already mentioned my understanding re aggregation and have
raise two problems with regard to it in relation to the fans.

A further difficulty that presents itself to me is not the question of
aggregation inter parties but aggregation intra party. In other words
to what extent if at all is it correct and permis^.ble to add together
perhaps relatively minor breaches of the same p a r t y . Presumably
the activity or ommision forms part and parcel of one contim&fe*-5
activity the whole of it can and must be looked at as one. Your view
on this would be appreciated and in particulai^if you agree that this
is the correct way of looking at where one should draw the line.

I will now turn to the question of corporate manslaughter. I
understand that the directing mind and will of the corporation has to
fulfil the appropriate criteria and that it is likely that it is not
possible to aggregate the acts and ommisions of top company employees
or directors so as to establish corporate guilt.

One of the parties who appears before me is counsel for the Chief
                                   Page  13
Constable of S.Yorkshire. As I have mentioned to you already on the
phone I am puzzled as to whether in law the Chief C o n s t a b l ^ could
take personal criminal responsibility for the act and ommiSjlons of
officers serving under him in the South Yorkshire Police. I believe
the Police Act makes provision for the cheif feonstable to take
vicarious liablity for the civil liablity of officers analogously to
an employer with his employees but I am not aware that either that
Act or any other provision would make him criminally responsible. I
presume that if he were to have such a liability it would be not in a
personal capacity but as a corporation sole but I am not aware that
that is in fact his status.

If we now look at the South Yorkshire Police forc e? what is its legal
status^and in particular does it have an identity which could be
fixed with criminal responsibility . I find this difficult to believe
as the force is made up of individual officers all of whom hold a
commision as constable which is the basis of their power and authority
though for practical purposes they are structured into a hierarchical
structure.
                                                      9~
The only other body that I can think of is the Policy- Authority which
is of course a^local authority committee. If that is the ultimate
authority then one would have to shew that they were fixed with the
necessary degree of recklessness - a very difficult task as Chief
Constables are very anxious to ensure that they have operational
freedom from their authority.

I wonder if you have any thoughts on the    above points relating to the
police.

These instructions to advice are sent to you with the consent and in
the name of Rotheras.

It is regretted that they are lengthy but as you will have already
noticed I prefer to set out my understanding and argue out some of the
points. Although this no doubt means that it takes logger for you to
read^I hope that its effect is to actually save you some time in
considering the matters.

You may feel that it would be easier in the first instance to advice
in conference and then to restrict your written advice to core matters
and this may prove to be both q u i c k e r simpler and cheaper.  If you
feel that a conference would help I could come down for late Friday
afternoon or if that were not convenient sometime on Saturday.
Unfortunately on other days we tend not to finish till 4         clock or
later, though I suppose if it were essential I could try         arrange
an early finish at say 2.pm on some other day.

There is an element of urgency as I need your advice well before I
approach the summing up which no doubt will be preceded by legal
submissions by the interested parties!legal representatives.     v
TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH MICHAEL POWERS

RE:   DRAFT DIRECTION TO JURY


Michael had a few comments on the draft direction. On the whole
he appeared to be quite satisfied with it. He preferred the term
"unlawfully killed" rather than "unlawful killing". He reiterated
the absolute need for making clear that we were concerned with
establishing how certain people died, not who was responsible.
He did not like the second sentence in the second paragraph of
Page 5, dealing with the balance of probability as it might imply
gradation. He preferred to use the term "safety" rather than
"health and welfare", and thought this could easily be explained
to the Jury.

On Page 8 under Causation, he had a small textual amendment -
should read "injury which led to the death",

On Page 9 - 1 2 dealing with Lord Diplock's and Lord Hailsham's
definitions, he thought were too complicated and should be left out.
Page 13 - he wasn't happy with the heading "Breach of Duty". He
preferred to say "failure to do what should have been done" or
"something which was done and which ought not to have been".

Page 15 - he wanted the sentence "if a person is faced with an
emergency then the degree of care may vary with the circumstances"
deleted. He felt it was unnecessary and confusing.
Page 18 - he suggested deleting the sentence "distinguishing between
obvious and serious and reasonably foreseeable".

Page 19 - second paragraph beginning "Firstly in considering these
aspects..." down to Page 20 "where recklessness is an element in
the offence charged", should be deleted. With some consequential
amendments to the next paragraph, the last three lines on Page 20
should read "in other words he would not have been indifferent to
it and having decided there was either no risk at all or that the
risk was not obvious as serious, he could not be described as
having seen it".

Page 21 - delete paragraph starting "One of the interesting factors,
down to "....within or on the terraces".

Page 22 - Insert "any more" before the words "need to spend time"
at the bottom of the second paragraph.

He did not think that I should retain the section on corporate
manslaughter on Pages 23 - 24.


                                                        /continued.
MICHAEL POWERS

We spent a little time discussing the mens rea in relation to
recklessness and the measure of the professional man. He drew
my attention to Maynard of West Midlands Regional Health Authority
where the dictum of Hunter and Hanley was briefed.

He did not think we should exclude anybody so long as it was clear
understood that it is a decision on how people got killed, not who
is responsible, i.e. were they unlawfully killed, never mind who
did it.

He felt that to include corporations, unless I thought there was
very strong evidence against them, would not be helpful. Bearing
in mind that the only two corporations are Eastwoods on the one
hand, where we have Dr Eastwood anyway, and Sheffield Wednesday,
where we heard from Mr Mackrell. It is questionable whether
anything would be gained in complicating matters for the Jury,
for if they were minded not to find unlawfully killed against
these two, they clearly cannot against the companies which were
behind them, and if the converse were the case, nothing would be
gained by including the companies who, as already stated, are
behind them.
FRIDAY, 22 MARCH 1991

I telephoned Michael Powers again after having spoken to him on
W ednesday at length about the legal submissions, and raised with him
the problem of Sgt Goddard who I called in order to establish what
had happened in the control room but who on reflection is in a
similar position to both Murray and Duckenfield (although at a lower
status and with different responsibilit y for decision-taking) but
who nevertheless made it quite clear that it was not obvious to him
that diversion was needed and that he would have certainly advised if
asked and probably acted if he had realised. I was a bit concerned
because I had not given him any warning because at the time we were
questioning him it did occur to me that he might finish up in the
frame, so to speak, but I could see the problem if I were to exclude
him and leave the others in.


Michael said that this simply confirmed his fears of excluding people
by name because (a) it focused attention and (b) it ran the risk of
me sifting the evidence. I explained to him that one of the big
problems was that counsel for Sheffield Wednesday had conceded that
Mr Mackrell was the embodiment of the company. It would therefore be
impossible to exclude the companies as we had previously discussed
without also excluding Mr Mackrell. Once I excluded him there was no
good reason why I should not exclude anyone else who I thought might
not fall within the frame.   Michael still felt that there was a real
risk with excluding people and that it would be preferable not to do
so in his view and maybe rely on strong direction.


He suggested that maybe one should look again at the deceased rather
than the individuals and from that he developed the thought that what
was required was a list of those causes which I thought could in law
be methods which they could consider in respect of certain individuals.
Ipso facto that would exclude any and everybody including all the
corporations who did not meet those criteria but it would leave to
the Jury those persons w h o m they might wish to consider and would avoid
unnecessary identification.
FRIDAY,   22 MARCH   1991   (c o n tin u e d ...2 )



After some discussion I thought this did sound quite a good idea,
particularly as it fitted in with some of the arguments relating to
movas actus. I said I would think about it further.


We also discussed the issue of the fans and agreed that whilst their
conduct collectively might well have been a substantive cause because
of the rule against aggregation the finding could probably not be made.


Michael liked this approach because, as he correctly pointed out, the
Inquest is to establish how the people died, not to apportion blame.

A few moments later I rang him back and asked him whether in fact what
he was saying wasn't in fact causation, i.e. that earlier matters such
as the construction of the stadium etc. were not causation and
substantial causes within L.J. Watkins' definition. He agreed and
thought that would be a useful way of tackling it.
 FILE NOTE

 MEETING WITH MR JUSTICE SIMPSON ON 6 MARCH 1991


Mr Justice Simpson very kindly called in so that we could discuss
procedural aspects relating to long cases and juries. He said he
felt that it was wise to send a Jury out on a Monday, or at the
latest Tuesday, to give them ample time. He confirmed that he
thought that the Crown Court administrators would assist us as
they had arrangements with hotels and knew what was required. He
also thought that they might provide us with Jury Officers. I
aksed him what he thought about the Jury discussing the issues
away from the court. He said the practice differed.    Apparently
in Leeds they provide a room for them for discussion in the
evening. In Sheffield they expected the Jury to just relax.
Provided they were on their own, which they would have to be
anyway, he could not see any objection if they talked amongst
themselves about the case.

With regard to the Jury Officers he thought it would be preferable
not to use officers w h o m we were using as Coroners' officers at
the moment. Generally speaking everybody had to remain in the
precincts in case the Jury wanted further direction. Everything
should be done in open court. His practice was usually to listen,
go out, write down, and come back with whatever was necessary.

We discussed general format of a summing up. He agreed with my
understanding of it being a summing rather than a summary. He
thought narrative format was often very useful but backed up by
"proof texts", i.e. specific reference to named witnesses. He
agreed that there was no reason why every single witness has to
be mentioned. We discussed intervention during the summing up.
By and large he did not permit this unless it was some correction
of an obvious error, say, misnaming of a location or person. He
agreed with me it was perfectly proper for me to guide the Jury
and to draw to their attention for their consideration any
inferences which I thought were appropriate.

We discussed briefly what should happen if there was disturbance
in the court and he agreed with the steps I had in mind, namely,
warning, adjournment, asking people to leave and only then as a
last resort, contempt.

He very kindly offered to discuss any further issues which might
worry me. He can be contacted until the end of the month at
Beverley Crown Court:
     Beverley 0482 867073.


SLP
TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH DR MICHAEL POWERS

THURS, 28 FEBRUARY 1991

I rang Michael and asked him three questions.


1.   Re statement of Mr White. He agreed with me that it would be
     impossible to introduce this statement under Rule 37 if I took the
     view, which at the moment I do, that it contained items which might
     be disputed. He was very much against the idea of allowing the taker
     of the statement to in fact give evidence of its contents, although
     he agreed that hearsay was permissable, he thought if in an inquest
     such as this and with possible prejudicial comment, I would be very
     severely criticised if I allowed it. He agreed with me that if
     Mr Murray's solicitor accepted the comment then that would remove t
     the objection and it could be used. The alternative would be to call
     the witness. (Another possibility which has just occurred to me is
     to read the statement but exclude that paragraph).

2.   I then discussed with him the draft direction to the jury and mentioned
     that I had a copy of a draft prepared by Mr Birts QC and that he had
     simply repeated the points contained in ex parti Gray. Fortunately
     I had already started drafting my summing-up and I was encouraged to
     see that I too had in fact done that, but I have gone somewhat further
     because I was trying to deal with what he meant.
     (N.B. Mr Birt's draft maybe defective anyway because he refers to an
     unlawful act which is not in Mr Watkin's judgement and also he refers
     to manslaughter by neglect, which is not in fact in that case but
     may not necessarily be the right term).
     I said I realised there wasn't much time (Michael is going to America
     today) but I wanted to read to him how I was dealing with, for instance,
     duty of care and breach of duty. I explained that the drafting was
     still very inadequate but I really wanted to obtain his view on the
     principle of the elaboration. I first of all read to him my paragraph
     on duty of care (Page 14 (1)) of the draft. He thought that on the
     whole it might just confuse the jury a bit, particularly as the issue
     of duty of care might not actually be disputed by anyone, but he did
     not object to it on any other grounds.
                                                      / c o n t i n u e d __
FILE NOTE (continued...)

- 2 -

TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH DR POWERS - 28 FEB 1991


     I then read to him my paragraph on breach of duty (Pages 14-15),
     he agreed with the approach and in fact said he liked it. He
     had some criticism of individual phrases, e.g. he thought that the
     words "then you will no doubt also feel that it is impossible to
     consider it in respect o f . . . . . " were probably too weak as one
     had to get through all the hurdles and if one wanted to do it,
     then that was the end of the matter. I read to him my paragraph
     on dilemma or crisis situation. He thought that was absolutely
     right but again thought that I was putting it too weakly when I
     said " does not necessarily mean that the person was negligent".
     He felt that if the person had acted reasonably then one could
     state straight out that he wasn't.
     We discussed for a few minutes Lord Roskill's and Lord E d m o n d 7
     Davies' comments which basically bore out that contention.

     He felt in principle that my approach was right and that ex parte
     Gray needed fleshing out.


3.   I then discussed briefly with him excluding various individuals from
     a possible verdict of unlawfully killed. I felt it unlikely that it
     would be possible not to leave this verdict with the Jury but that
     obviously in respect of some of the people whose conduct had been
     called into question, the evidence was very much weaker than in
     respect of others, and indeed in respect of some, possibly n o n ­
     existent (e.g. Sgt Lomas).
     I asked him whether he thought one could in effect say to the Jury
     that they could not consider that verdict in respect of anyone
     other than say, X, y and Z. I reminded him that in a RTA where
     say only one driver was involved and where such a verdict were left,
     it inevitably followed that if it were returned, even if not named,
     it was obvious who would be in mind, but that provided the person
     was named, that seemed to be OK 7 a legal fiction but there it is!

                                                            /continued.
FILE NOTE (continued...)

- 3 -

TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH DR POWERS - 28 FEB 1991

    Nevertheless Michael thought it would be highly undesirable to do
    this in these particular instances. If there was no evidence to
    go before the Jury then it would be better not to specifically
    w i t h d r a w names but to make it clear in the summing-up what the
    standards and bruden of proof were and to indicate, possible quite
    strongly, the evidential difficulties and to indicate that they
    may quite quickly be able to eliminate a number of people from
    their consideration.


That concluded the conversation.




S L POPPER
                                                  7 March        91




Our Ref:   SIP/LL



Mr P I Rothera
Rotheras
solicitors
2 Kayes Walk
Stoney Street
The Lace Market
NOTTINGHAM
NG1 1PZ

Dear Ian

I enclose for your information a copy of the Instructions to Counsel
with enclosure, which I have today faxed to Michael Powers.
I hope you are keeping well.
Kind regards.

Yours sincerely




S L/POPPER
FURNIUftL HOUSE               TE L:0742731433                                                       24 Jan 91                            11:59 N o . 004 P . 01




                                  HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS
                                           FAX MESSAGE
         For the attention of


                                                                               FAX No                                                          - 3 .1 ^


          From                                                                Coroners Support Team
                  S - L_. foPPeR.
                                                                              DATE           I ', , ?
          FURNIVAL                                                            Tei:
          Fumi                    TbuorJ Ha l L_                              Tel: 0742-..................
          S
                                                                              fa x :                Qiwmvm-
                                              m m v m n u ****’ t y M m i w n u-w tsiw h e



          Total number of pages sent, Including this page                                                                                            2-9
                                                                                                     ***..*(X     '   u         »   ‘.      i.*H /

          Remarks / Action required
           ^4M C m s ^ - b        pL£.P>S£.                   £T*vjt^                     iN ^ T R O C T

           “To      c o o s>ei_        ~ro
            PlA)S         ^ A F T            ^       ig-fcc-rtOfO                         ~~rO            -A QfeV                   /^2.S            fif\CyfeS\




           Authorised / Sent by..... . ^ . . . . . t r . . . . . . £ ? . . ^ . ^ . . . .
                                                 • ■ » "••Ilf--I*   yv.1;,- :' "   ' V•      . ..               I..       -IS
INSTRUCTIONS TO COUNSEL TO ADVISE



         MICHAEL POWERS
INSTRUCTIONS TO COUNSEL



Enclosed herewith is a draft provisional direction to the Jury
on the issues of the law, particularly as it relates to Unlawfully
Killed but also coverinq the various rules which need to be drawn
                                        t1~            . . . .
to the attention of the Jury as well a s (rule against incrimination.


Counsel is asked to advise as soon as possible whether the draft
correctly outlines the legal position or whether any material
changes need to be considered.

It is, of course, understood that this draft has been prepared prior
to any legal submissions in the Inquest and it may be necessary to
make adjustments in the light of what is then said.

Counsel has discussed the question of whether or not, if the
verdict of Unlawfully Killed is left to the Jury, any of the parties
whose conduct has been called in question should be excluded. It
is understood that counsel's view is that nobody should be excluded
if the verdict is left, notwithstanding that the effect of this
would be that if the Jury were to bring in such a verdict it would
have a "blunderbus" effect, a point deprecated in ex parte Gray.

Counsel's attention is drawn in particular to ex parte Higgins,
QBD 23 May 1988, with which counsel will be familiar. He will
recollect that the case seems to indicate that if a Coroner takes
the view that as a matter of law there is insufficient evidence
to sustain such a verdict, it should be withdrawn from the purview
of the Jury. This is stated very positively on Page 247 in "Case
Book on Coroners" of which counsel is co-author.


Counsel's attention is also drawn to ex parte Spooner et al QBD
6 October 1987, where Mr Sturt in effect withdrew the possibility
of corporate m a n slaughter from the Jury whilst leaving it in respect
of individuals.   See particularly "Casebook on Coroners" Page 215.

                                                       /continued.
INSTRUCTIONS TO COUNSEL

-   2


As you know, I am somewhat concerned about this because on the one
hand I can see disadvantages for anybody who is retained in the
frame but on the other hand it seems that if there is retention
of people who in law could not be held liable, there might be a
judicial review on the basis that ex parte Higgins was not followed.


There have been innumerable people whose conduct to a lesser or
greater extent has been called in question. In addition to those
there are, as I have already indicated to you, the following major
g r o u p s :-


        The   Club and senior staff.
        The   Engineer.
        The   local authority.
        The   Police, whatever that might mean.
        The   match commander, Chief Supt. Duckenfield.
        The   control room commander, Supt. Murray.
        The   ground commander, Supt. Greenwood.
        The    pitch perimeter gate officers (two gates, one officer each).
        The    outside commander at Leppings Lane (Supt. Marshall).
        The    fans or some part of them.

I think it is necessary that we sort out the point of principle on
whether withdrawing the verdict in respect of certain persons or
categories is appropriate before I take a decision on whether in law
there is sufficient evidence to leave the verdict in in respect' of some
or all of the above.


Please let me have your advice as soon as possible. If you wish to
discuss it with me, please contact me on 0742 736902.
DRAFT.




I am now going to turn to giving you a number of directions

on issues of law.         As you will see in a moment, a majority

of the time will be occupied with aspects relating to a

possible verdict of unlawfully killed.           You are not to

construe this as meaning that I am directing you either

towards or away from that particular verdict,           it is simply

that the legal concepts and aspects which have to be

considered are a.         numerous,   b.   complex   c- important and

d.   differ in certain respects from those applicable to
              x>&t*
some of the^verdicts which may be open to you.

However, before I get down to that, I wish to draw your

attention to the provision of the Coroners Act 1988 Section

II (5) (b).
Furthermore, see Section 6 of that Act.



As an aside I should perhaps mention that this amendment

was introduced in 1977 prior to that, it had been possible

for coroners '        juries to name people who they thought had

been guilty of murder, manslaughter or infanticide.

In addition to the Act of Parliament, there are also Rules

which apply to coroners and.the current rules are the 1984

coroners rules.
I therefore now draw your attention to Rule 36.            This rule




BAFAAG
reads as follows




The effect of this rule is that neither you nor I are

allowed to put on to the inquisition what used to be known

as 'riders' i.e., advice or comments.

I am also required to draw to your attention Rule 42.



It is essential that the provisions of this rule together

with the provisiions of Rule 36 (b) are strictly adhered to

by you and indeed by m e .



SELF INCRIMINATION.



I also wish to draw your attention to Rule 22.    This

reads s-

     1.    "No witness at an inquest should be obliged to

            answer any question tending to incriminate

            himself.
     2.    Where it appears to the coroner that the witness

           has been asked such a question, the coroner shall

           inform the witness-that he may refuse to answer".



This is an exceedingly important rule and is fundemental to




BAFAAG
the present system of justice in the United Kingdom.

You may have noticed that some of the witnesses were told

of the rule and of the privilege to which they were

entitled and some exercised their rights.    Put another way,

a witness has a right of silence.



RIGHTS OF SILENCE.



It would be grossly unfair and quite contrary to the

intention of the rule and indeed to justice if you were to

construe a refusal to answer a question under the privilege

as an admission or an indication of guilt.    To construe the

privilege in such a way would not only run contra to the

whole principle of the rule but would in effect place the

person who exercised the privilege in a far worse position

than if he had in fact answered the question.

The position is simply this:-   That you may not construe

silence as constituting any part of the evidence on which

your deliberations are based.   You have to be satisfied

from the evidence which you have heard and not from

evidence which you have not heard nor may you draw any

inferences from the exercise of the privilege.    Under no

circumstances must the privilege be turned into a noose.



VERDICTS.



 I now remind you of the possible verdicts which you might




 BAFAAG
                               - 4 -




be able to consider in respect of these inquests



     1.   Unlawfully killed.

     2.   Accidental death or misadventure (I will tell you

          now that in law,       there is no difference between

          these two ter ms .     We will deal with this in a

          little more detail later o n ) -

 ?   3.   A special verdict which again I will deal with a

            little later on.

     4.   What is known as an open verdict.



STANDARD OF PROOF.



In considering the evidence, you obviously will have to be

satisfied that the necessary standard of proof has been

achieved in order to enable you to reach one or other of

the verdicts which I have mentioned.         Different standards

of proof are required for different verdicts.         If I may

summarise first of all, in respect of the verdict of

unlawfully killed you have to be satisfied to the standard

which can be described as the criminal standard of proof.

In respect of accidental death or misadventure (or a

special verdict) the standard wou Id be that of the balance

of probability.     In the case of an open verdict there is in

a sense no standard for the- reasons which you will see

later on.




BAFAAG
CRIMINAL STANDARD.




Let us then deal in a little more detail with the standard

of proof required for unlawfully killed.    Before you are

able to bring in a verdict of unlawfully killed, you have

to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt (or to put it in

slightly more modern language, you have to be satisfied so

that you are sure) that the evidence which you have heard

and which you are considering,    satisfies you that both the

act and necessary mental state of the criminal offence

which you are considering has been made out.



In respect of the other verdicts except of course an open

verdict the standard of proof is the lower one normally

described as the balance of probability.     It will be

obvious to you therefore that a very much higher standard

of proof is required before you can bring in a verdict of

unlawfully killed.



ORDER OF CONSIDERATION.



As a direct consequence of this the order in which you

consider the verdicts becomes important.    In considering the

verdicts, you have to apply your mind to the verdict of

unlawfully killed first of all.     You have to consider the

verdict in respect of each of the deceased.     You have to

apply the facts within the context of the law as explained




BAFAAG
to you and you must apply it in respect of each of the

parties whose conduct you are considering based as I have

already said upon the evidence which you have heard.




UNLAWFULLY KILLED - INTRODUCTION-



What then are the legal parameters or requirements that

have to be met in the context of these inquests before you

are able to consider a verdict of unlawfully killed.

I do not propose to take you through the whole law of

murder or manslaughter but for the purposes of these

inquests the criminal equivalent of the verdict of

unlawfully killed is one of the forms of involuntary

manslaughter and by definition excludes what we know to be

murder or any other aspects of deliberate killing.     The

legal requirements for this type of manslaughter have been

considered in various cases and in particular a case known

as R - v - West London Coroner Ex parte Gray.   In that case

which dealt with an alleged unlawful killing by a police

officer by neglect, Lord Justice Watkins set out the

matters which a jury have to be satisfied on beyond

reasonable doubt.
Before I go through the points I should add that although

in that particular case the-issue related to neglect on the

part of the police, the fundamental principles of the

direction would apply in respect of anybody whom you might




 BAFAAG
                                7




be considering as falling within the purview of this

verdict.



You have to be satisfied of the following points in the

first instance:-



     1.    That the person whose conduct you are considering

           had a duty^to have regard to the health and

           welfare say safety of the deceased^. *1



     2.    That in the circumstances, there was a failure to

           do what should have been done^for the health and

           welfare, say safety of the deceasedj.                    ^



     3.    That that failure amounted to a substantial cause

           of death.



     4.    That the failure amounted to recklessness.



     5.    Recklessness means that there was an obvious and

           serious risk/to the health and welfare (safety)
                            ^       *2
           of the deceased^and that the person whose conduct

           is being considered having regard to his duty was



              a. Indifferent to such risk or


                                                        C o   '
              b. Recognising that risk qsfijtAd be present,

     *1    (a 1 iter:   not to c a u s e i n j u r y to the d e c e a s e d )

     *2     (aliter:    of i n j u r y to t h e d e c e a s e d )
BAFAAG
               deliberately chose to run that risk by doing

                nothing about it.



    6.    It must be clearly understood however that a

          failure to appreciate that there was such a risk

          would not by itself be sufficient to amount to

          recklessness.



     7.   You can only return a verdict of unlawfully killed

          if you can attribute these ingredients to a single

          individual whose conduct is being called in

          question. Such an individual should on no

          account be named or otherwise identified.




CAUSATION.



The next point that I think I have to mention is the issue

'Causation'.   You have to be satisfied that the act or

ommision complained of has actually caused the injury or

the death in this particular case.   Not every causative act

would give rise to liability.   For example it could be

argued that no-body would have died if the game of football

were not played in the United Kingdom or, bringing it

slightly nearer home, if there was no F.A. Cup competition.

All of these in one sense are causes, but with none of them




BAFAAG
I think would we have any difficulty in excluding them as

causing these deaths because they are obviously too remote.

In other words, you have to be satisfied that the act or

oramision which you are looking at is:-



     a.    sufficiently close, sufficiently related to the

           event as to be logically classifiable as causative

           of death and



     b.    is a substantial cause of death.



RISK & RECKLESSNESS.




Recklessness is at the heart of a verdict of unlawful

killing.    In addition to what I have already told you I

think it might be helfpul if I illustrated the legal

approach by reference to what was said in another leading

case which is known as R - v - Lawrence.      The details of

that case do not concern us but it may help to understand

what is meant by recklessness if I give you a couple of

quotes.



The first one is from Lord Hailsham.      He says when speaking

about the word reckless th a t :-



     "Unlike most fenglish words it has been in the English




BAFAAG
    language as a word in general use at least since the

    eight century         almost always with the same meaning

    applied to personal conduct, as a state of mind

     stopping short of deliberate intention and going

    beyond mere inadvertence".



Lord Diplock comments     "that the word has not acquired a

special meaning as a term of legal art but more its popular

or dictionary meaning of careless, regardless or heedless

of possible harmful consequences of ones act".     He goes on

to say:-



     "One does not speak of a person acting recklessly even

     though he has given no thought at all to the

     consequences of his act...unless the act is one that

     presents a real risk of harmful consequences which

     anyone acting with reasonable prudence would recognise

     and give heed to".



Lord Diplock also says:-




     "Recklessness on the part of the doer of an act does

     presuppose that there is something in the

     circumstances that would have drawn the attenti on of

     an ordinary prudent individual to the possibility that

     his act was capable of causing the kind of serious,




BAFAAG
       harmful consequences that the section which creates

       the offence was intended to prevent and that the risk

       of those harmful consequences occurring was not so

       slight that an ordinary prudent individual would

       feel justified in treating them as negligable.

       It is only when this is so that the doer of the act is

       acting recklessly if before doing the act he either

       fails to give any thought to the possibility of

       there being any such risk or having recognised that

       there was such a risk he nevertheless goes on to

       do it" .



Although as I say, the precise details are of no concern

of our s, you may be interested to know that it was a case

which dealt with the issue relating to reckless driving and

one of the aspects which the law lords were applying their

minds to was the distinction between an offence of reckless

driving and driving without due care and attention.

It seems to me that not every assumption of a risk can

therefore be described as being reckless for example, every

operation performed by a surgeon carries with it the

inevitable risk of injury as well as a risk of other

adverse consequences including in some cases, death.      This

risk in many cases is both obvious and serious and can

occur however competent the .operation is in fact carried

out.

The assessment of whether or not a patient should proceed




BAFAAG
to operation is made both by the surgeon and by the patient

by assessing this benefit^ equation and trading off the

advantages and disadvantages of operating or not.                    It

would however be somewhat surprising if say having

considered a risky operation and decided to proceed, the

surgeon having performed it competently were to be

prosecuted for manslaughter because in the events the

patient had died.



Summarising then again, recklessness is defined a s :-



     1.   There has to be an obvious and serious riskCto the

          health and welfare of the deceased^                    If that has

          been established then,



     2.   That the person whose conduct was called in

          question either,



          a.   Was indifferent to such risk or



          b.   Recognising the risk has decided to go on

               and take it.



Before however coming to the        definition of recklessness in

this type of   case, as I have already indicated there are

three preliminary steps which you have to consider and

which we will look at in a little more detail now.


          * (aliter:   of i n j u r y to the d e c e a s e d )

BAFAAG
    1.   That there has to be a duty of care.    That in many

         instances is not too difficult to determine.      As a

         general rule if somebody undertakes to perform a

         task e.g., stage a football match or organise it

         or supervise it, they can be assummed to have a

         duty of care towards the people with whom they

         come in contact.   Slightly more difficult, but

         I think still relatively straightforward is the

         issue of whether or not fans who attend also have

         a duty of care to each other.    I can see no reason

         why if road users have a duty of care to others

         upon the road, pedestrians and fans attending do

         not also have a similar obligation towards each

         othe r.



    2.   Breach of duty i.e.,



         Failure to do what should have been d o n e .   This

         may require more thought.



Simply because something goes wrong does not mean that

there has been a breach of duty.



There are two major aspects which you need to think about




BAFAAG
Professional

Person.



    fi   i. a.   You have to be satisfied that in the case

                 of a professional who is required to

                 exercise special skill, knowledge or

                 experience the standard of care which he is

                 expected to achieve is that of an ordinary

                 skilled member of that profession and which

                 such ordinary skilled person would have

                 exercised or professed to have had in respect

                 of that special skill-   We are not talking

                 about some paragon of virtue nor of somebody

                 who is particularly bad, it is an ordinary

                 average member of that profession or class.

Ordinary

individuals.



            b.   In respect of people who do not profess to

                 have special skills you apply the standard of

                 an ordinary prudent person as exemplified by

                 yourselves.

____________Tf when you apply this test you were to come

                 to the conclusion that there has been no

                 breach of duty in respect of the person who

                 you are considering, then there is no need to

_____________    consider the other points in respect of him.




 BAFAAG
  fj   J2.   The second aspect is what I would describe as a

             dilemma or a crisis situation.     If• a person is

             faced with an emergency then the degree of care

             may vary with the circumstances■     In an emergency

             the fact that in the events a wrong decision is

             taken need not constitute a breach of duty

             provided that the decision was not unreasonably

             taken in the circumstances gr a t i n g which

             prevailed and taking all the aspects into account.



If you come to the conclusion from the evidence that there

was an emergency situation you then have to decide whether

the response to that situation was not unreasonable.



You may of course come to the conclusion that there was no

emergency situation at all or alternatively the situation

itself had been caused or precipitated by a breach of duty

by the person whose conduct you are considering.             You must

have it clearly fixed in your minds that breach of duty has

to be proved beyond reasonable doubt from the evidence, and

as— I— have— a-3r3ready n>entionedr»i< iidoal with in more-detail 7

that it must be attributable to one individual and not                  A

v^ersumation of the acts of different p e op le .^ The third

point is that the failure amounts to a substantial cause of

death.       This is an important point because we have in the

course of this inquest been-looking at the activities of

all kinds of people including some junior officers or as

has been mentioned 'small cogs in a big machine'.             There




BAFAAG
may well have been some failures by very many people but it

should not take you very long to exclude the vast majority

of the people from your deliberation.



The word 'substantial' should be given its usual meaning.

It is an ordinary English word and J. am sure that you

understand it.



If the person whose conduct you are considering does not in
                                                         p z x > < - B £ ~ c ^


your view meet the^criteria you do not have to porccive" to

consider the issue of recklessness in respect of him.

it does meet the criteria the most that you have in fact

established would be that he had been negligent.                   It is

even possible that you may feel that he was very negligent

or grossly negligent but that is not as the law is at the

moment, sufficient ground for you to bring in a verdict of

unlawfully killed.       It simply seems to me to be in this

particular type of unlawful killing, the opening of the

door which enables you to consider the heart of the matter,

namely whether or not there has been recklessless as

defined by the judges.       I remind you again that you have to

be satisfied on three basic matters in respect of

recklessness.



      1.   That there is an obvious and serious risk of

           in ju r y .                           tr tr c r a r ;    c i r a fc—irS


                                                 -e-f— ther-jxrdges-




 BAFAAG
              Vy.t- thoy lT^fa it in        samp qanfin .in I have



              rlflcpasprl   or thp safphv of t.hg— deceased .    The

              definition includes two words:-



              a.   'obvious




              b.                'serious'



and you have to be satisfied on both.



In considering this, you have to put yourself into the

position of the people with their state of knowledge on the

15th of April 1989 and exclude the benefit of hindsight,

and you have to ask yourself the question, whether on that

day there was an obvious and serious risk of injury.



In a recent case in the Crown Court arising out of the

Zebrugge disaster, Mr. Justice Turner in one place said

"obviously we are talking about a risk and no-body denies

there was a risk.            It is the application of the word

'obvious' that is troubling me and has been troubling me

for a long time.            Obvious if it operates that it will be a

serious risk I quite follow -but obvious that it will occur

is the problem".            If you think about it that is precisely
         i-    ---—.
                   —a                                 '
the




BAFAAG
problem which you are faced with.     You may feel that the

word 'obvious' means something like 'perfectly evident,

staring one in the face, immediately apparent"and indeed

these terms were canvassed before Mr.     Justice Turner.     Mr.

Justice Turner also clearly distinguished the word

'obvious' and 'serious'    wpan being mere synonyms of

reasonably foreseeable .^You may ask obvious to whom?

Clearly in the first instance the person whose conduct you

are considering, but in assessing that you apply the test

of the ordinary skilled professi£onal , as I have already

described or if you were thinking of a non-professional

person, an ordinary prudent individual as exemplified by

yourself and who might find himself in that position or

condition on that day.    I also want to make it clear to you

that obviousness on its own is not enough.     The definition

clearly includes the word 'serious' and you have to give it

appropriate weight.   In other words there must be an

obvious and serious risk of injury.     If you were satisfied

that there was an obvious and serious risk you are not yet

home and dry   because you have to ask the next questions

namely, was the person whose conduct you are calling in

question indifferent to the risk or having recognised the

risk decide to go ahead and take it.




In order to avoid any misunderstanding Lord Justice Watkins

then adds that it must be emphasised "that mere failure to




BAFAAG
recognise the presence of such a risk is not sufficient.

In other words, he is drawing the distinction as I see it

between a person who may well be negligent and in that

sense liable say to civil penrt 11 ias—     damage^ but whose

state of mind does not need the criteria required for

recklessness which despite the repetition is either a

recognition of an obvious and serious risk and decision to

take it or indifference to such risk.       There are two

further points to this.



Firstly, in considering these aspects of recklessness there

is a very interesting case which was decided by the Privy

Council and in which one of the Law Lords, known as Lord

Roskill gave the leading judgement (explain that Privy

Council judgements are not binding in English courts but

clearly has persuasive authority).        This particular case

involved the collision of two hydrofoils in Hong Kong in

bright clear daylight.    Lord Roskill having quoted

extensively from Lord Diplock*     L o r d ■Piplock- whom I have

already mentioned goes on to say "their Lordships

emphasised that in this passage Lord Diplock was speaking

of an obvious and serious risk of causing physical injury

created by the defendent.     He was not there concerned to

deal with cases where the conduct complained of was of a

defendent's re-action or lack of re-action to such a risk

created by another person".




BAFAAG
 You will see that this passage in some way mirrors what I

have already indicated to you regarding crisis situations

or emergency i.e., you are entitled and indeed must take

into account all the circumstances.        This point is backed

iip to a certain extent by another Lord, Lord Edmund Davis

who in R - v - Caldwell says "in the absence of exculpatory

factors the defendent's    state of mind is therefore all

important where recklessness is an element in the offence

charged".    In other words,   if there are no excuses which

are legitimate and proper then the state of mind is an all

important factor.

Finally on this point it is possible to imagine a situation

where a person perceives a situation, assesses it as not

constituting an obvious and serious risk situation at all.

a»d Indeed to a certain extent this seems to be the case in

respect of nearly all the parties who immediately before

the incident if asked, would have— I— thirtk, would have said

that they felt the use of the stadium was reasonably safe

for the admission of spectators to the semi-final match.

This may have been based on various assumptions as to what

or would not happen but it forms a basis of their belief.

If you were to find that this applied then that person

would not fall within either of the two limbs of the

definition of recklessness because he would have applied

his mind    to the risk situation.   In other words he would

not have been indifferent to it and having decided that

there was no risk could not be described as having seen it,




BAFAAG
                          -   21 -




deliberately went on to take it




One of the interesting features of the Hillsborough

disaster from a legal point of view is the difference

between this and many of the other disasters which have

unfortunately occurred in recent times.   For instance you

think of the Zebrugge Disaster (passengers killed on a ship

which sailed with open bow doors or the Kegworth Disaster

when an engine caught fire and the wrong engine was

switched off or the Lockerbie Disaster where a bomb was

placed on an aircraft or some of the train accidents which

have recently occurred or the Manchester Air Disaster).      In

all of these the people who were killed were in a sense

entirely helpless.   They had nothing whatever to do with

the flying of the planes, running of the trains, the

sailing of the ship, operation of the bow doors.   In the

Hillsborough Disaster the position is slightly different

in that there is a very active interplay between all the

parties involved, and at least the situation outside the

turnstile area and possibly even the situation within or on

the terraces.

Finally before   you can bring in such a verdict, you have

to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the

recklessness which you are considering is attributable to

one single person.   What this means is that you may not

aggregate or add together the acts of different people and




BAFAAG
then attribute say the failures of several■persons to just

one particular individual.



Each person stands on his own and you have to be satisfied

on the evidence that the ingredients have been made out.

This is not to say that y ou cannot in fact have more than

one person who might be liable to the finding of unlawfully

killed.   For example,   if two or three people attack one

individual and they all individ.uallly inflict wounds which

are sufficiently severe as to constitute a substantial

cause of death, the fact that there may be three wounds,

each one of which on its own would have been sufficient to

kill the victim does not absolve two of the assailants.

All three for their individual act may be held responsible,

because each one, taken on its own would satisfy the

definition of the offence of murder or manslaughter as the

case may be    Finally, and I no not need to spend time on

this, if you were to find the verdict of unlawfully killed,

under no circumstances must you name or identify the

person.



You are dealing not with persons to be blamed but with an

inquest and you have to decide not whether someone is to be

charged with some offence or other but whether the death

was occasioned unlawfully. .You are looking at the victims

but to reach the verdict,     you have to find that some

person whose conduct you are considering meets the




BAFAAG
requirements which I have tried to outline -for you.   If you

decide that the verdict of unlawfully killed is

inappropriate   in respect of some or all of the deceased,

then in respect of those you will then have to proceed to

the other verdicts.

Before I discuss these I should just mention one other

point and that is the question of corporate liability.

There has been a lot of argument as to whether it is

possible for the company to have acted in such a way that

the verdict of unlawfully killed be returned in respect of

its conduct.

To a certain extent these arguments have been settled and

the present position is that if a company is to be liable

the directing mind of the company ^fulfils the criteria of

unlawfully killed in exactly the same way as if the company

were an individual.    It follows that the only issue which

you have to decide is what or who is the directing mind of

the company.    The position seems to be that not every

employee of the company would fulfil that term but that a

director or senior manager who has the running of the

affairs of the company would fulfil those criteria.       As it

happens in this particular inquest, we have different forms

of companies which I do not think you need to be too

concerned about but by way of example you might be prepared

to take the view for instance that Dr.    Eastwood whose

company is known as Eastwood and Partners would constitute

such a person in respect of his company, probably Mr.




BAFAAG
Mackrell in respect of Sheffield Wednesdays

I am very much more doubtful as to whether it would be

possible for you to reach the conclusion that Mr. Bounds

was sufficiently elevated to constitute a directing mind

and will of Sheffield City Council^        ou should also

remember that all the rules which I have outlined

apply    including the rules against aggregating.

If you come to the conclusion that unlawfully       killed is

inappropriate then you may go on to decide whether a

verdict of accidental death or misadventure is appropriate.

In this case the burden of proof is entirely different.

You may bring in such a verdict if you     are satisfied on

the balance of probabilities.     In other words,   if you are

satisfied that it is more likely than not that the

deceased's death was due to accident or misadventure.

There is no difference in the meaning of these two words.

You may chose whichever you     prefer, but I would advise you

that if you    were considering these verdicts,,    if you can

not make a decision on which word you prefer, you may feel

that you could safely decide on the word 'accident'.

You should understand »e quite clearly that the       word

'accident' straddles the whole spectrum of events from the

force ma jyaeur*- or act of (§od where most of us would take the

view that no-one can really be blamed to a situation where

you are satisfied that there has been carelessness or

negligence to a greater or lesser extent and that someone

would have to make for instance, compensation payments in a




BAFAAG
civil litigation.          In other words bringing-in this verdict

does not mean that y ou absolve each and every party from

any measure of blame, '^/ou are of course not entitled to say

which party or who is to be                blamed because the rulejfs

quite clearly say that we are not to decide aspects of

civil liability^b«t W h a t does accident or misdadventure

mean.    It means an unforeseen event or accounts arising out

of a situation which was intended to occur.                         Most of us

understand the word without too much thought.                          We may for

instance wish to wash a glass and whilst doing so drop it

in the sink.        It breaks, it is an accident.                   Whether there

is any culpability would depend on all the circumstances,

for example, you were washing up glass as carefully as you

could and one slipped out of your hand because of soapy

suds you might feel that y ou couldn't be blamed.                            On the

other hand if you decided to do it in total darkness you

might think to yourself, well perhaps that wasn't very

wise.    Tf y n n   Hppi’H p that- fhg>_ .maxrdict.— of- i m 1 a w f u l l y k i l l e d

is   inapprnpriat-p y r m       nan   thpn move on        to-tlhe other— — —

possible verdicts etc.




BAFAAG
                                                  22 January         91




Our Ref:      SLP/LL



Mr P I Rothera
Rotheras
2 Kayes Walk
Stoney Street
The Lace Market
NOTTINGHAM
NG1 1PZ

Dear Ian
As agreed on the telephone last night, I am sending the Instructions
to Counsel direct to Mr Powers and enclose a copy of what has been
transmitted for your use.
I am most obliged to you for your co-operation and for the sake of
good order confirm that these instructions, although sent direct,
go as i f .from you.

Yours sincerely




S L POPPER
H M Coroner
                                                            18th Dece m be r   90


         SLP/JT.
         RBH/CAR.




         Rotheras,
         Solicitors,
         2 Kayes Walk,
         Stoney Street,
         The Lace Market,
         Nottingham. NG1 1 P Z .


         Dear Sirs,

         Re; Hillsborough Inquest - Crown Office Subpoena

         Thank you for your letter of the 11th of December.  You will be pleased to
         hear that Mr. Lackey turned up and there were no problems.

         I am very much obliged to you and Richard Hammond for your help in this
         matter.

         I have got a feeling that the Crown Office Subpoena return has to be filed at
         court but I take it that Richard knows all about it and will deal with it
         it.

         Yours sincerely,




         S .Li.ropper,
         H.M.Coroner.




BAEAAE
                                                                                                       2 Kayes Walk
Rotheras                                     R. W. Hall B. A.
                                             C. C. Hodson LL.B., (Notary Public)
                                             P. I. Rothera (Deputy Coroner)
                                                                                                       Stoney Street
                                                                                                       The Lace Market
                                             A. G. Priest B.A.                                         Nottingham NG1 1PZ
Solicitors - Commissioners                   Janice M. Stewart M.A.
                                             J. McMullen M.A.                                          Telephone:(0602) 414415
                                             J. D. Allen M.A.                                          Fax:(0602)410105
                                             Jane E. George M.A.                                       MDX No. 10,028 Nottm.



                                             Consultants:                                              Partnership Secretary:
                                             P. J. D. McCraith M.C., T.D., D.L. (Notary Public)        J. R. Dugard F.C.A.
                                             S. J. R. Pattinson




                                             Our Ref.                     Your Ref.                    Date


                                          RBH/CAR                                                 11th December 1990


    Dear Sir,


    Re:        H illsborough Inquest - Crown O ffice Subpoena


    We enclose a copy of th e Crown Office Subpoena, together with a copy of the
    Enquiry Agents A ffidavit of S e r v ic e . Please let us know whether th er e are
    any problems with th is w itn esses attendance on Wednesday the 12th December.


    Yours f a i t h f u l l y ,




    Dr. S. L. Popper,
    146 Melton Road,
    West Bridgford,
    Nottingham.
    NG2 6ER.


    Enc.




                                  Regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of investment business
I l l THE IIIGI1 COURT OF J U S T I C E
QUEEN'S BENCH D IV IS IO N




                         INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF Tin: VICTIMS

                                                                 F c r - s -,-LL STAPIDil
                         DISASTER ON THE 1 5 t h A P R IL 1 9 8 9




I,    G o r d o n C a s s i e o f I_____________________________________________ I i n                   x:ne
C o u n ty o f M e r s e y s id e ', P r o c e s s       S erv er,      ^AKL^OATH a n d s a y a s

fo llo w s:

1.     T h a t I am o v e r s i x t e e n y e a r s o f a g e a n d r e c e i v e d
in stru c tio n s       in   th is   m a tte r    from M e s s r s . R o th e r a s ,         S o lic ito rs

o f 2 K a y e s W a lk , S t o n e y S t r e e t ,             T he L a c e -M ark et, N o tti n g h a m

HOI 1PS t o           effect   se rv ic e    o f a S u b n o e n a o n D a v id A n tn o n y L a c k e y

 of    .                                             ,     .            -               — I

 2.        That I     d i d a t 2.20.p.m. o n t h e 5 t h d a y o f D e c e m b e r 1990

 a tte n d a t
 s e r v e D a v id A n th o n y L a c k e y w i t h a s e a l e d co p y o f S u b p o e n a . T h a t

 at   th e    tin e    of se rv ic e -th e       sum o f £ 3 0 c o n d u c t m o n e y w a s t e n d e r e d

 a n d a c c e p t e d b y t h e V i t n e s s who s i g n e d t h e r e v e r s e            o f th e   copy

 Subpoena a s h a v in g done s o .

 3.        A tru e    copy o f th e      Subpoena i s               now p r o d u c e d t o   me a n d m a r k e d




 - V-OPJ'I b y t h e a b o v e n a m e d                   %
 3 o r d o n C a s s i e a t 1?*+ H o y l a k e R o a d ^
 M o r e t o n , V.’i r r a l , i n t h e C o u n t y o f ;
                                                           )
 M e r s e y s id e t h i s 7 t h a a v o.
 D e c e m b e r 1990
                                                                                                    -   ___>\J      \i<LO\.VJs'vl~                     -1*     \ * s \ L >   ' x~/

                                                                                       V ^ 'O
                                                                                                                                                                       </ yj-r\
                         IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

                                 QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION



-       :
                                                      C Q U f i r



                                                                                  TS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE VICTIMS OF THE
■rPf^
                                                                                      LSBORQUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM DISASTER
t   m


                                                         /99q                     *            ON THE 15TH APRIL 1989


                                                      OlV'••:■
                         ELIZABETH" THE SECOND b y                                              the       G race of       G od,    of    the      U n ite d    Kingdom of Great
^ ■ 1
                         B ritain                   and        Northern                Ireland      and      of    Our     other        realm s     and       territories            Queen,
■fs»&
                         H«ad o f t h e C o m m o n w e a lth ,                                Defender of the Faith:

=#f*

                         To P a v id                    Anthony L a c k e y



                         W» com m and                               you      to       attend    before        Her       M a jesty 's     C oroner       fo r     South        Y orkshire
                                 -4-         .
                         {W est                    D istrict)             at T h e C o r o n e r ' s C ou rt,            Th e C ouncil C h a m b e r s ,             T h e Town Hall

■           ■
                         P ir isto n e                 R oa d ,           S h effield ,        South        Y orkshire            on     W ednesday            the      12th      day    of

                         December                        1990           at     i|      o 'clo ck        In t h e    forenoon       to    g ive     ev id en ce        in     respect     of

                         IN * ^ i ll S & o r o u g h                         F o o t b a l l Stadium D i s a s t e r on t h e            15th A p r i l 1989.



                         WTFMESS- THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD MACKAY OF CLASHFERN LORD HIGH
                    *       -Vi*' ;i
                          -? \


                         CHANCELLOR OF GREAT BRITAIN, t h e     d a y of D E C . 1990.
                'v-"■*
                W.-?.•                **

                         X ssyed o n t h e                          '                  d a y Q f C ^ C *1990 by
        ^                n rS > 5 C l5                       S K A ( \.P £             P R IT C H A R D            OF
              rti?Ar^ETH                                             H O O S C
              FuUf^OOO
        K£**t*p                                                     PLACE ,                               U/CIV          6HC-

                    ' A g e n t s f o r R o t h e r a s of
                                     2.              K a y e s Walk,
                         -,'sH S toney S t r e e t ,
                                              Lac* M a r k e t,
                      .         I *, N o t t in g h a m .
                    •
                    i£r ^ a N 6 1 .1PZ,
                                                   S o lic ito r s             for       Her       M a jesty 's         C oroner         for      South        Y orkshire             (West
                                                   D istrict).
                          !      i-    •*   1* i

                                            -* '



                           ■
                               •
                                 *' -J1
                          >'>'*?£'? -'I'
!



    T h is i s t h e e x h i b i t m ark ed-"A "
    re fe rre d to in th e a f f id a v it
    o f G o rd o n C a r-sie sw o rn t h i s
    7 t h d a y o f^ JD e c e m b e r 1 9 9 0

               ' " b e f o r e m e ._______




                             K                 ^   O   S   S   O       j       f       i       T       H




                          ^ 50UQTOIIEMPOWERSj
                            T    °   A D M I N I S T E R           O       A       T       H       S
                                        R. W. Hall B. A.                                           2 Kayes Walk
Rotheras                                C. C. Hodson LL.B., (Notary Public)
                                        P. I. Rothera (Deputy Coroner)
                                                                                                   Stoney Street
                                                                                                   The Lace Market
                                                                                                   Nottingham NG1 1PZ
                                        A. G. Priest B.A.
Solicitors - Commissioners              Janice M. Stewart M.A.
                                        J. McMullen M.A.                                           Telephone:(0602) 414415
                                        J. D. Allen M.A.                                           Fax: (0602)410105
                                        Jane E. George M.A.                                        MDX No. 10,028 Nottm.



                                        Consultants:                                              Partnership Secretary:
                                        P. J. D. McCraith M.C., T.D., D.L. (Notary Public)        J. R. Dugard F.C.A.
                                        S. J. R. Pattinson




                                        Our Ref.                     Your Ref.                     Date



                                          PIR/JS                                                  Vth December 1990


    Dear Stefan

    re :    The Hillsborough Inquest

    I have now received Counsel's Opinion upon the various matters of
    evidence which you raised in your recent Instructions.  A copy of
    Counsel's Advice is enclosed.

    As indicated in our telephone conversation on Thursday evening, the
    Sealed Crown Office Subpoena was served upon Mr. Lackey on the 5th
    December, requiring his attendance at the Inquest on Wednesday next,
    12th December, at 11 a.m.       A Sealed copy of the Subpoena is
    enclosed.    I am awaiting a Sworn Affidavit of Service from our
    enquiry agent.

    Incidentally, I do not know how you are dealing with the question of
    payment of witness expenses, but it may be that you are paying each
    witness on the day.      Richard Hammond checked the position and
    established that the return train fare from Liverpool to Sheffield
    was £13.00. Allowing additional taxi fees and subsistence expenses,
    Mr. Lackey has been paid the sum of £30. 00, in cash, by way of
    conduct money.  This of course does not take any account of loss of
    earnings.

     I enclose a copy of the latest fee notereceivedfrom Counsel's
     Clerk, and I would like to settle Counsel's fees to date.   A portion
     of this fee note (£365. 00) was incorporated in my interim account
     dated 8th November last, which is still awaiting        payment.   Of
     course, there is no hurry for settlement of my own fees, but it
     would be helpful if you could put me in funds to the extent of
     £1,437.50, so that I can settle Counsel's fees.

     I have this morning spoken on the telephone to your secretary, and
     in order to get a copy of Counsel's Opinion to you at the earliest
     opportunity it has been agreed that I should send one copy of this
     letter and its enclosures to Mrs. Taylor in Sheffield and one copy
     direct to you at home in West Bridgford.


                                                                                                  Cont/d




                             Regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of investment business
                                               Continuation Sheet No
From        Rotheras
T o ..................................




       Kind regards

       Yours sincerely                   y f




               . S .L .^P-gfppe




       c.c. Mrs. J. Taylor
            Secretary to Dr. S.L. Popper
            The Medical Legal Centre
            Watery Street
            Sheffield
            S3 7ET




        FIRST CLASS
                                                                                                      v c . c \ v > £ i_            o    C         r   r    ^    x    S    S   r    O   r        f ^ v




   IN          th e        h ig h
                                      y
                                      c   6u4     t          of     ju s tic e

           Q U E E N ’ S BENCH D I V IS IO N




       '/ < $ '               / ,y ^ v y > K TS IN T O                         THE      DEATHS OF                   THE      VICTIMS           QF          THE

   (L  J<r                                   3HJi. LSBOROUGH F OOTB ALL                                       S TA D IU M         D I S A S TE R
       ?                                     -                                                                                                   --
                                                                          OK       The       15T H A P R IL             1989
                 o - T ^ , >0



   ELlZAL}L.Tff'*r^THL                       SECOND                 fc>     th e       G 'ace         of    God,        of       the     United            K ingdom                 of        Great

   B -Ite i-               en c      Syr th e'r                   Irelan d      a x         of      Our       othe-          r ealm s        end       ter-ito -ies                         G;->eer-.,

^^ri& ac            o*     the       Co m m o n we a l th ,                De*ende-              of    th e     Faith:




   7       c    Dev i d           Ant n o n )          LecKe>




   We          command                you        tc          a tt e n d    before            H e-      Majesty ' e               Cor one-        for            So ut h            Y orksh ire

    (We?:             D istrict)            et        The          C o-one-'s              C o j-t,        The       C ouncil           C he-b e-s,                  The        Tew-           Hell

   PinEV^ne                   Rose.          S he'-'ielc,                 5 o jf           Yorkshire                  o-         fcedoesse >               the            *2 '-         des        o*

   De r e ' t>e-               1?9C         e\        '■ i     c'clock          i 1-    tne         fcrenco-           tc        c;ve     evloenct                   ir        ’■e 5o ec *         c'

   m t          h   : ^ s d c >- o ^ o -         Foo'.bsi:              S te c ij-         D .stste-          o*-    the         tStr    Ac-ri;        *95r.




^ ^ :tn e s £                 the;     r:g h ’               h o n d jra b -e           th e          lo rd         v a :k a v o r           c la s h fe r*.                   lo r:          h :g -

   c h a n c e llo r                 or      grea"                 b r:ta :k ,         me        \~ J            dt>        of      Dec .          ’ 99c.



   Issuer.               o-    tne        S'*'--                  cc>     oO    Q      C     ,    9K        t,

                                                              fn-tTcKATvD or
   Fu<Z.*^ETh1                           K O . 1^
   Fu L ^C 'C -D                       T wA-^E , L C - ^ D O *                         iv C iv             0 Kt C,

   Apents              to"        Rcthe-es c-'
                       2       Keyes
                       Sto'>e> S : - e e t ,
                       The l ece v . c - * e t ,
                       Notting-.s" .
                       NG ’ t P2 .

                       S o iic iic -s             fo-              He-       K 's 'e s ty ’ s          Co-one-               fo-         South             Y o rk s h ire                    ( West
                       D t s : r i c t ).
        Professional Fees of MR.MICHAEL POWERS




          DX : MDX 10028 NOTTINGHAM                                           1 Paper Buildings,
                                                                              Temple,
          Messrs Rotheras.,                                                   London,
          24 Friar Lane,                                                      EC4Y 7EP
          Nottingham,                                                         Tel : 071 583 7355
          NG1 6DW                                                             LDE : 80
          Attention: Mr.Rothera                                               FAX : 071 353 2144


Solicitor Ref. No. PIR/JC                   Date   06 DEC 1990      Case Ref. No.   MJP/ROTHER/1



W -Coroner for South Yorkshire West District
    The Hillsborough Football Stadium Tragedy-


20   DEC 89 Advice in Conference

09   APR 90 PAYMENT RECEIVED WITH             THANKS

19   JUN 90 Instructions Received

02   JUL 90 Advice          in Conference

06   SEP 9 0 Advice         on Telephone

19   NOV 9 0 Advising on Telephone            (2 hours in total)

23   NOV 90 Advice on Telephone
            Advice on Telephone

     DEC 90 Advice          on Telephone

05   DEC 90 Advice          on Telephone

06   DEC 90 Advice




                                                                      TOTAL FEES £

                                                                      TOTAL VAT         £

                                                                      TOTAL DUE         £




VALID ONLY WHEN RECEIPTED
                                                           PLEASE QUOTE CASE REFERENCE NO. ON ALL CORRESPONDENCE
                                     ADVICE


1.          I am     asked     to    advise        on    two    matters       of    evidence,
            namely the extent to which (if any) the transcript of
            Taylor    L J 's enquiry may be used                    in evidence          in the
            Inquest presently being conducted into the deaths of
            football      fans at Hillsborough,                 and    the    rule       against
            self-incrimination.


The Transcript


2.         In a coroner's inquest evidence may be admitted only
            in the following ways:


            A      Oral      evidence        on    oath:       S.11(2)       Coroners       Act
                     1988;
            B      Documentary         evidence           falling      within        rule    37
                     Coroners Rules 1984.


3.         The    question      then     is       simply whether            the    transcript
            falls within 2[b].


            The    coroner      is     not    obliged          by    rule     37    to     admit
            documentary        evidence           - even       if   there     is   no     person
            within Rule 20(2) who objects to it.                           Furthermore, the
            coroner    is given        an over-riding               discretion       to admit
            evidence      in documentary form where                    the maker of the
            document      is    unable       to    give    oral       evidence       within    a
            reasonable period.           The instant case is certainly not
            one    where       the   coroner            would       wish    to     admit     the
            transcript in the face of the objection of one of the
            parties.


            In my opinion the transcript                       should not be admitted
            in evidence in whole or in part to the jury.


            How else then may the transcript be used?                              The answer


                                              1
           is    in    cross       examination,           Here    I will        outline       2
           courses of action:


           Course 1
           Simple       cross-examination           of     the   witness        as    to    the
           former statement made by him on the subject to the LJT
           enquiry must be permissible.                     The procedure            in S s .4
           and    5 of the Criminal               Procedure      Act     1865     should     be
           followed (see later).                 The previous statement does not
           have to have been on oath or in his hand                             (writing )-
           but it does have to have been reduced into writing.


•   8*
           Provided the requirements of the sections are met, the
           cross-examiner will be bound by the witness's answer
           unless the statement is then put in by being read out
           to contra-dict the witness.                   Indeed it cannot be said
           that       the    statement      does     contra-dict         the      witness's
           evidence unless it is put in.


    9.     Course 2
           I could          see    no objection      to    the    following          line    of
           questions which goes              around      the     above    situation         and
           which probably places the witness under some greater
           pressure to accept what it is recorded he said on the
           earlier occasion:


    10 .   "Is it correct that you gave evidence on this matter
           before       the       enquiry    held     by    Lord       Justice        Taylor
           on....?"
           - Yes


           "Look at this document.                   It is a transcript               of the
           evidence you gave on that occasion.                         Please read from
           . . . . to       ....      Do    you    accept      that     as   an      accurate
           record of what you said on that occasion?"


           - Yes.


                                             2
       [If necessary now a warning about self-incrimination]
       "Would     you    read    out       the   answer         you     gave    to    the
       question ....?"


       - Yes .....


       "Is that your evidence before this enquiry as to what
       happened?"


       - Yes.


11 .   By such    a device the evidence                   is    admitted       on oath.
       Whether    or    not     this       changes    the       character       of    the
       evidence or not is immaterial to the purposes of the
       inquest,    but in my view it does change the character
       as this evidence is both given on oath and with the
       warning against self-incrimination.


12.    So what if the witness on looking at the transcript
       denies that it represents what he said at Taylor L.j's
       enquiry?        A denial that the transcript is an accurate
       account may give rise to a suspicion that the witness
       (now)     sees    his     recorded           answer       as     being     self-
       incriminatory.          On the other hand there may be some
       minor    inaccuracy.           The    latter       may     be    clarified      by
       questions without the body of the evidence being given
       (or read)    by the witness until it is in a form with
       which he is content.


13.    If the     transcript      is       denied    in    substance,          then   the
       issue becomes one of credibility.                       At this stage, once
       the witness has been given the "warning" required by
       ss 4 and 5 of the Criminal Procedure Act 1865,                                 the
       c ross-examiner          may    then      read          out     the   previous
       statement, thereby challenging the witness to admit or
       deny it.



                                       3
The    previous       inconsistent             statement          then      goes     in
evidence only on the issue of the credibility of the
witness.           The jury     need     to be       aware       that      in these
circumstances,        the previous statement is not evidence
of its contents,           but only that he said it. That will
end the matter         - unless for some                  reason the witness
falls within the 5 exceptions to the rule that there
may    be   called         no   evidence        on    contra-diction                on
collateral matters.


This    is quite a difficult                area     of    evidence         and,     to
assist,       I    include      a    photocopy        of     a       few   relevant
paragraphs          from    the      1990      edition          of    Phipson       on
Evidence.         In summary I advise that the transcript of
the LJT enquiry should (and indeed can) only be used
in the;examination of witnesses.                          Neither it nor any
part of it should go before the jury unless:


A       all the parties and the coroner agree that that
        part of the document is not in issue and may go
        before the jury; or


B       the witness admits that he made the statement on
        the previous occasion (in which case there is no
        need       for the actual statement                 to go before the
        jury       any more than any other                 oral statement of
        the witness - it will have been read out as part
        of his oral evidence on oath); or


C       the witness denies that he made the statement-
        in which case (subject to the provisions of Ss 4
        and       5 of the Criminal Procedure Act                          1865)    the
        statement may be read out to the jury (by way of
        contradiction               to   the   witness)           and      the     jury
        should be told (in the summing up at least) that
        the       statement     is not evidence              of      its content-
        merely        of    the      fact      that       the     witness          said
        something else on the earlier occasion.
Self-Incrimination


16.         I do not believe that the learned coroner needs                      any
            further guidance on this matter.           The relevant rule is
            Rule 22 of The Coroners' Rules 1984.             Some guidance is
            also    to   be obtained    in paragraph       19.42    of    the   3rd.
            Edition of     Thurston's    Coronership.        I have reviewed
            the relevant law and the statement of the law set out
            in Coronership from the citation of the judgement of
            Lord Denning MR in Rio Tinto Zinc and the observations
            generally in that paragraph is trite law.


17.         I feel therefore that I may answer the questions (i ),
            (ii), and (iii) in my instructions respectively no, no
            and yes.       Questions    (i v ) and   (v)   I hope    already      to
            have dealt with in detail.


18.         I shall no doubt be speaking with Dr. Stefan Popper on
            the     telephone    shortly       when    I    shall        have   the
            opportunity to speak about the contents and import of
            this advice.




                                                            Michael J. Powers

5 December 1990
1 Paper Buildings
Temple
EC4Y 7EP
es o f    E   v id e n c e                                                      T h e E x a m in a tio n o f W itn e sse s                                         12-24

wton J. ruled th a t his denials'!                 lo k     cross-examined o n h i s r e a s o n s f o r r e f u s i n g t o b e i n t e r v i e w e d a f t e r
h a t th e re fo re th e r e was n o ;             caution.'"''
follow th e re fo re th a t th e m a p j              The ext ent     to which evidence m ay be called to contradict a witness on
’ th e a a s s tio n s. L a w to n J. stati                              is discussed, p o s t, § 1 2 - 3 3 . F o r the rules on th e calling of
                                                   matters o f c r c d i t
 o f c r o ^ R x a m i n a t i o n as to ere       evidence to re-establish the credit of a witness, see post, § 1 2 - 3 8 . F o r the
x believed on o a th , th e matter,.               n},|,i of a co-defendant, but not of the prosecution, to cross-examine on
:te to his likely sta n d in g aftera              an e x e lu d e d confession, see p o s t. § 2 7 - 2 2 .
lich is trying him o r listening^                     In Ireland it s e e m s t h a t q u e s t i o n s u n d e r t h i s h e a d a r e o n l y a d m i s s i b l e if
  be asked to draw inferences ■pS                  they d m r i l y i m p e a c h c r e d i t ; t h u s , in a l i b e l a c t i o n w h e r e t h e d e f e n c e
le th e r a police officer masquerad               alleged that t h e l ib e l w a s p u b l i s h e d , n o t b y t h e d e f e n d a n t , b u t b y a t h i r d
 eting. w en t th e re “ as a spy”                 pcisoii. called at t h e trial a s a w i t n e s s f o r t h e p l a i n t i f f , t h i s p e r s o n w a s n o t
:f admissible to discredit them35}                 allowed to b e c r o s s - e x a m i n e d a s t o h i s u s e o f o t h e r w o r d s a g a i n s t t h e
npelled to answ er w h e th e r h e J              plaintiff, e n t i r e l y d i f f e r e n t f r o m t h o s e in t h e l i b e l 43; in a n o t h e r l i b e l c a s e ,
ect him to p en a ltie s34; n o r questio          () lin en    J. d i s a l l o w e d a q u e s t i o n p u t in c r o s s - e x a m i n a t i o n t o a m e d i c a l
 h e court on th e ir co n d u c t ortestin        witness called by t h e p l a i n t i f f , a s t o w h e t h e r t h e w i t n e s s h a d n o t b e e n
id an t be asked in cross-exa                      summoned at p e t t y s e s s i o n s f o r a n a l l e g e d a s s a u l t a n d t h r e a t e n i n g l a n -
iiscreditable d e fe n c e , e.g. infaric          fiuage" and q u e s t i o n s a s t o t h e p r o f e s s i o n a l i d e a s e n t e r t a i n e d b y o n e
n in g A c t, for he is entitled to i              doctor about a n o t h e r , a s w e l l a s t h o s e i m p u t i n g t h a t t h e w i t n e s s ’s d i a g n o ­
Ff w hat are th e p articu lar te r                sis has be e n c h a l l e n g e d in o t h e r c a s e s , h a v e a l s o b e e n d i s a l l o w e d 45; n o r
 b e e n b ro k e n , for this also is fori        was a c o n s t a b le a l l o w e d t o b e c r o s s - e x a m i n e d a s t o w h a t p a s s e d b e t w e e n
is be told w hat o th e rs have said \             himself and his s u p e r i n t e n d e n t in r e f e r e n c e t o a c r i m i n a l c h a r g e . 46
itrad ic ts th e m 36; n o r is it allowable.!
scing ^ f c n p t i o n s c o n tra ry to fart,
L w h<^W he issue was whether /
                                                                              (e)     Previous Inconsistent Statements4/
3, B was not allow ed to be askedjjgi
d advertised th e g o o d s in q ue stio n * ,
n t .39 So, w h ere A s u e d B for <
held m ost irregular a n d improper fiij           Im ( kimi nal P r o c e d u r e A c t 1865, ss. 4 a n d 5^
 w h e th e r he w as in s u r e d .40 Wher^
ross-exam ination w as to injure he ^                Under section 4 . 4ti                                                                                                      12-24
ciior. it was d isa llo w e d .41 A                       “II a w i t n e s s , u p o n c r o s s - e x a m i n a t i o n a s t o a f o r m e r s t a t e m e n t m a d e
d. even by the ju d g e , fo r the PurPc^ g i £           ll> him r e l a t i v e t o t h e s u b j e c t - m a t t e r o f t h e i n d i c t m e n t o r p r o c e e d -
: will usually be w ro n g fo r a d e fe n o S ^          1n” - and i n c o n s i s t e n t w i t h h i s p r e s e n t t e s t i m o n y , d o e s n o t d i s t i n c t l y
                                                          admis th a t h e h a s m a d e s u c h s t a t e m e n t , p r o o f m a y b e g i v e n t h a t h e

R. 316, 320.
                                                        1lu-rcareproposalstochange thelaw:seeReport ofthe WorkingGroup on theRights
>oug. 590, 592.                                    "•Silrncc (198y)
:rBramwell and Amphlett JJ.;R■v-               ~     v         v Massey, 31 Ir.L.T.J. 184.per O'Brien J.
■J.;though such questions are often                  . <,Jl1 ' Cork Herald, ibid.
                                                     . v Hennessy. 31 Ir.L.T.J. 165.
                                                       *      ' Herhhy. 32 lr.L.T.J. 38.
■.April 24, 1895, perCave J.,exrel.                  v P<>st.Appendix for the provisions of the Civil Evidence Act 1968.
isborough' ,Mart & Co. [1893] 2Ch. 3811            *Ppl       Sect'ons (*) re-enact ss.23 and 24 ofthe Common Law Procedure Act 1854; (2)
                                                   thej.10k’tficiviland criminal cases (sees.l).For civilproceedings, see,too,ss.3and 7 of
                                                        iv,1F-.vidence Act 1968, post. Appendix. The 1865 Act issometimes referred to as
:i Cirinhsrr:\ . Davies j 1919] 2 K.B- 249.         >'"'sAci.
8 L.T. 776                                         (,           declaratory of the common law, see Devlin J. in R. v. Hart (1958) 42
’.A.);   R. v. Stubbs (1982)   1 W.L.R-               ■PP R.47. 50 and Cron-Icy v. Page (1837) 7 C. & P. 789.

1254]                                                                                                     [2 5 5 ]
           12-24                     C h . 12— R   ules of     E   v id e n c e
                                                                                                                                                                  The E      x a m in

                did in fact m ake it; but before such p roof can be given, the cireum
                stances of the supposed statement, sufficient to designate the partic                                              lot  be said th a t the depositio
                                                                                                                                       it is p u t i n .54
                ular occasion, must be mentioned to the witness and he must b e
                asked w he th e r or not he has m ade such s ta te m e n t."                                             *!■
                                                                                                                     E v i d e n t i a l s i g n i f i c a n c e o f state m e
                he o p era tio n o f this section is not confined to statem ents previously
                  on o a th o r in a d e p o sitio n .^ T h e general application of the provj                       ' In criminal proceedings the in,
          lio n Was Further emphasised in R. v. O 'N eill.'' M. and O. were trie*                              j, . earlier statem ent c a n n o t be tre
          to g eth er, M. having pleaded guilty to the first of the two counts in th e                        ^ c o n t e n t s .55
          indictm ent, to which O. had pleaded not guilty, M. gave evidence on his                          «         Incivilproceedings, by virtue f
          own behalf and in cross-examination was asked w he th e r O. had commit                             I admissible under sections 4 an d 5 c
          ted with him the offence alleged in count one. U p o n M. denying ( ) s
          involvem ent M .’s verbal statement to the police in which he said the                            M       m          iS ? *                °f     w h ic h   d'™         «
          opposite was put to him under section 4. The Court of A ppeal held that
          such a course was p ro p e r as was the exercise of the ju d g e ’s discretion m
          allowing it.                                                                                                                 (f) General Observations
             U n d e r section 5,                                                                       r

                “A witness may be cross-examined as to previous statements made                                   |w >ere contradictory statem ents ai
                by him in writing or reduced into writing relative to the subject-
                                                                                                                                       - f m '.            W h e r e 3 w « t n e ss h
                m a tte r o f the indictment or proceeding, w ithout such writing being
                shown to him 5:; but if it is intended to contradict such witness by the                            Ifflff!c
                                                                                                                        /
                                                                                                                            onsistentw,thana
                                                                                                                              in rePJy by the
                writing, his attention must, before such contradictory proof can be                                   jected on the ground that the
                given, be called to those parts of the writing which are to be used for                             exam in ation to discredit the w,
                the p urpose o f so contradicting him; provided always that it shall be
                c o m p e ten t for the judge, at any time during the trial, to require the                     f e i ° r fi,e d ,n a n 0 th e r c ^ r t sTc
                production o f the writing for his inspection, and he may thereupon                                     fn t rpO Sedoutoft“r n ’so
                m ake such use of it for the purposes of the trial as he may think fit."
             Irhe term s o f th e proviso do n o t enable a judge to treat a witncss'i
      Jfcariier sta te m e n t as evidence o f the truth of its contents .53f n som e cases il
      g i s w K e for the ju d g e to permit only parts of such a sta te m e n t to be shown                     f e * » * e m .»Inbankrj c;                                       ^
      g-to t h e ju r y .5,3                                                                                     f,, x                       -------

12—25        A lth o u g h a witness may be cross-examined as to what he said, for
                                                                                                             f c ^ ( 1 8 6 6 ) 4 F . & F                        964    A-    u .
         ex am ple, before the magistrate (and the deposition may be put in his                              *^ons between a wnne„ . ^ ;;^ v-H ^ ( ,
        h a n d for that p u rpose) without reading it as a part of the evidence of the                     U *Wo 7 T ' 13Cox 17],j73         andh-
        cross-examining party, the cross-examiner will be bound by the w itnes s s                          % £ Co         b   ^   U     C   h   .     ’               ame’^onhAu
        answ er unless the deposition is put in (i.e. read out) to contradict him It                             Beckett ]M & d l' .     ^ee a*so cases
                                                                                                                         8               Cr.App r i3 3C
                                                                                                            ft*Burnellv. British T
            50R. v. Harr. ante.                                                                               “ Act 1938. Note            lC°mmmion
            51 [1969] Crim.L.R 260.                                                                           fcilityofevidenceastofh *     the 1968 A
            5‘However, the cross-examiner mas! have the document available; R v .-Wr”"*                     I* s'4who isnot called ^            ofthe„
         (1929)21 Cr.App.R. 178. and see R. v. Yousry(1914) 11 Cr.App.R. 13.For thepos"'""*'                                         aWItneSS-
         common law, see The Queen'sCase (1820)2 Br. and B. 287. referred toinR v.AnJrrsi*L                 Ptmmingv.Maddick L R 7 ^ ,
                                                                                                                    action o f the iud’op                              395. In R v *
         ante, at p. 181. The witness cannot demand to see the writing before answering;■/*'
         Australian TerritoryLtd. v. Goldsborougk, Mori c£ Co. [1893]2 Ch. 381.358-386;.VW                  §?■*«■             ;z
                                                                                                            ^»atenally from tk L
                                                                                                                                   i t gtothe*
                                                                                                                                     her evidence sb
         v. Sergeant, 1 F. & F. 322.                                                               ..       B^submittedthaf de^ SIti°n but neither
           53R. v. Birch (1924) 18 Cr.App.R. 26; ft. v. Colder. R. v.Jones, ft. v. P o r r itt [IWl
         W.L.R. 1169.                                                                                       E l **    witness as»?  a”d lnsofarasth,
           53aR. v. Beattie(1989) 89 Cr.App.R. 302. 306 (C.A.).                                             ff >*followed now.     Ctrecord of ^at s

                                                    [256]                                                       '                                           Co- v- Goldsborough.
                                                                                                                                                                        f257J
                      T   he   E   x a m in a t io n o f   W   it n e s s e s   12-27

ca n n o t be said that the deposition does contradict the witness s evidence
unless it is p u t in .54

E vidential significance o f statements p u t in under sections 4 and 5

    In criminal proceedings the inconsistency goes to credibility and the
earlier sta te m e n t cannot be treated as evidence of the truth of its
c o n te n ts.55
    In civil proceedings, by virtue of section 3(1) of the 1968 A ct statem ents
admissible u n d e r sections 4 and 5 of the 1865 Act will be evidence of any
fact therein o f which direct oral evidence by the m aker would be
adm issible.50


            (f) G eneral Observations on Inconsistent Statements


   W h e re c o n trad ictory statem ents are proved, witnesses may be called to
disprove t h e m .57 W h e re a witness had m ade a statem ent to the defen­
d a n t’s solicitor inconsistent with an affidavit filed by him on behalf of the
plaintiff, an affidavit in reply by the solicitor setting out such statem ent
was rejected on the ground that the evidence was only admissible on
cross-exam ination to discredit the w itness.58 W here the writing is lost,
d estroyed o r filed in an o th e r court, secondary evidence will be admissible
and may be in te rp o sed out of turn; so, also, p ro o f m a y b e given that it is in
the h a n d s o f th e o p p o n en t, who has had notice to produce it but has
refused. A lth o u g h , how ever, a witness, w he th e r a party o r not, may be
cross-exam ined as to previous inconsistent statem ents m ade by himself,
he m av n o t b e told w hat third persons have said or sworn and asked if he
contradicts t h e m .59 In bankruptcy the rule is that if the b ankrupt called as


   * R.v.Riley(1866)4 F. & F.964;R.v. Wright(1866)4 F.& F.967.As tothesignificance
 ofvariations between awitness'sstatement and hisevidence atthetrial,see Cockburn C J
 inR. v. Wainwright, 13 Cox 171, 173.
   55R .v. O'Neill,ante:R v.Birch,ante;North Australian TerritoryCo. v. Goldsborough.
 Mort & Co (1893) 2 Ch. 381, 3S6. See also cases cited § 12-53 (authorities on s.3): and
 Wrightv.Beckett. 1M. & Rob. 414 (Lord Denman); Ewerv. Ambrose,3 B. & Co. 746. but
 cf.R. v. Williams, 8 Cr.App.R. 133.
   56See Burnell v. British Transport Commission [1956] 1 O.B. 187. a decision on the
 Evidence Act 1938. Note that s.7 of the 1968 Act contains provisions relating to the
 admissibilityofevidence astothecredibilityofthe maker ofastatement admitted by virtue
 ofs.2 or s.4 who isnot called as a witness.
   57R. v. Whelan, 14 Cox 595.
   56 Hemming v. Maddtck, L.R. 7 Ch. 395. In R. v. Garner(1S89) 61 L.T 699 the C.C.R
 upheldthe actionofthejudge inreadingtothejury'duringhissumming up thedepositionof
 a defence witness inconsistent with her evidence, she having admitted that her evidence
 differed materially from the deposition but neither side nor the judge having put it in
 evidence. Itissubmitted that,unlessand insofarasthedepositionhad already been readto
.and agreed by the witness as acorrect record ofwhat she had previously said,thisdecision
;would not be followed now .
    59North Australian Territory Co. v. Goldsborough. Mort & Co.. ante, at p. 385.
         1 2-27                             C h . 12— R      ules o f   E   v id e n c e                   s



        a witness gives evidence inconsistent with the statem ents he m ad e in his
        public o r private exam ination, th e party calling the b a n k ru p t may put
        such sta te m e n ts to h im .60
            F o r discussion of the use of inconsistent statem ents to discredit a
        p a rty ’s own witness, see, p o s t, §§ 12-49 et seq.


        Re-examination; examination by judge and jury


                                                        (a) Re-exam ination


12-28       T h e right to re-exam ine exists only when there has b e e n cross-exam­
         ination, and m ust be confined to the explanation of m atters arising
         th e r e o n .61 This rule was not abro g a te d by the provisions o f th e Evidence
        A ct 193862 and the position u n d e r the Civil E vidence A c t 1968 may
         there fo re be assumed to be the sam e. Thus, if the witness has admitted
        m aking a fo rm e r inconsistent sta te m e n t, he m ay in re-examination
        explain his motives for so d o in g .63 So, w here on a criminal trial a witness
        in chief swore to a certain fact, and in cross-examination a d m itte d h e had
        n ot m entioned it in his sworn inform ation, he was allowed o n re-exam ­
        ination to state that he had included it in an earlier in fo rm a tio n .64 U p o n a
        charge of rape on a child, the prisoner's counsel having elicited on
        cross-examination o f the child that the act had not caused h e r any pain,
        the prosecution was allowed to ask, in explanation, w h e th e r the prisoner
        had done the sam e to h e r on fo rm e r occasions.65 E ven if inadmissible
        m atters are introduced in cross-exam ination, the right to re-examine
        the re o n re m a in s.66 M atte rs not properly explanatory, o r new facts, can­
        not, how ever, be introduced in this way. T hus, w here a certain conversa­
        tion had been adm itted in cross-exam ination, distinct m a tte rs occurring
        in the sam e conversation were not allowed to be p ro v e d in re-exam ­
        ination67; and an accomplice, having adm itted on cross-exam ination by
        the p riso n e r’s counsel that he had com m itted two o th e r robb eries on the
        night in question, was not allow ed to be asked on re-exam ination in
        w hose com pany he was, in o r d e r to criminate the prisoner, th e question
        not arising out of the cross-exam ination.'’1' N ew facts m ay, how ever, by
        leave of the judge, who m ay put the question himself, be elicited in


           6"Re a Debtor (1944) Ch. 344.
             The Queens Case. 2 B . & B . 284. 297; R. v. Si. George. 9 C. & P. 483.
          fCCartwrightv. IV. Richardson & Co. Lid. (1955] 1W.L.R. 340.
          65 R. v. Woods, 1Craw. & D. 439; The Queen'!. Case. 2 B. & B. 284, 294.
          w R. v. Coll (1989) 24 L.R.Ir. 522. For tht admissibility of previous consistent state­
        ments. see generally §§ 12-55 etseq.
          * R. v. Chambers, 3 Cox 92.
          ry Blewettv, Tregonning. 3A. & E. 5 5 4 ; b u t c/\ R. v, Cargill[!913]2K.B.271 ( T e b u t t a l of
        irre lev an t e v id en ce n o t allo w ed ).
           r Prim? v. Soma (1838!7 Ad. & El. 627; cf Shan- v Robcm. 2 Stark. 455.
             R v. Fletcher. ILew.C.C. 111.
                                                              [258]
                       T   he   E x a m in a t io n   of   W   it n e s s e s     12-29

re-exam in atio n ; and the opponent may then cross-examine the re on. In
re-ex a m in a tio n , leading questions may not be ask e d .69
   R e-ex am in atio n does not enable a party in effect to cross-examine his
own witness. W h e re in re-examination counsel is p erm itted to invite a
witness to refresh his m em ory from a docum ent, he should go on effec­
tively to cross-exam ine his witness as to which of two versions given is
likely to be m o re reliable.70

                       (b) Exam ination by Judge and Jury

    A judge m ay p ut all such questions to a witness as the interests of
 justice re q u ire 71; and these questions may be based, not only on m atters
 arising in th e case, but on his own local or scientific k n o w le d g e.72 It is not
sufficient for him to rely on a docum ent, the contents and source of which
 are u nk n o w n to the parties, and merely ask explanation of some of the
 statem ents in the docum ent 7-1 A lthough he is entitled to use his dis­
 cretion, it is undesirable that he should interrupt exam ination in chief by
 questions which am ount to cross-exam ination,74 no r should be put
iquestions which suggest that he, the judge, is satisfied that the prisoner is
 guilty.71 N o r by his intervention should the judge deprive the defendant
of the o p p o rtu n ity o f developing his defence under the guidance of his
 counsel.76 T h e C o u rt o f Appeal will not interfere directly on the ground
 that the ju d g e has been guilty of discourtesy, even grave discourtesy, to
counsel.77 b ut will do so if the conduct of the judge am ounts to “an
invitation to the jury to disregard what was being said and active, positive
interference with counsel in pursuit of his task .”78 In a later c ase,79 the


   w Ireland v. Tavlor[1949] 1KB. 300. 313.
   70R. v. Harman (1984) 148 J.P. 289 (C.A.).
   71R. v.Hopper [1915) 2K.B. 431,R.v.Remnant, Rus. & Rv. 136;R.v.Watson,6C. & P.
 653; R v.Jameson. The Times, Julv 24, 1896; R. v. Cain (1936) 25 Cr.App.R, 204; R v.
 Clever (1953) 37 Cr.App.R. 204; R v. Hamilton (1969] Cnm.L.R. 486 (C.A.); R v.
 Hickman, ibid. 1502 This statementofthe law appearing intheeleventh edition ofPhipson
 at§ 1561 was apprtned by theCourt ofAppeal inR v.Fotheringham[1975]Crim.L.R. 710;
 1!9 S.J. 613, in which the judge's direction that a co-defendant giving evidence for the
 prosecution who said he could not remember what happened next be shown a statement
 which he had made to the police 22 days after an offence of rape, was upheid.
   ^ R v. Antrim [1895] 2 Ir.R. 603; cf.Shorn v. Robinson. 63 J.P. 295.
   'JR. v. Architects'Registration Tribunal[1945] 2 AH E.R. 131.
i '4R- v. Cain. 25 Cr.App.R. 204. 205; R. v. Gilson, 29 Cr.App.R. 174, 181; R v.
►8aieman, 31 Cr.App R. 106;R. v. Williams[1965] Crim.L.R. 609;Jonesv.N.C.B. [1957] 2
 O B 55. R. v. Clewer (1953) 37 Cr.App.R. 37; R. v. Perks [1973] Crim.L.R. 388; R. v.
 Browningand Others [1974] Crim.L.R. 714.
   75R. v. Rebbctt (1931) 23 Cr.App.R. 112.
   16R. v. Gunning [1980] Cnm.L.R. 592.
   ” R. v. Ptophopoulos 11968] Crim.L.R. 52; R. v. Leggettand Others [1970] 1Q.B. 67.
   ^ R. v. Leggeti. ante;R v. Ciewer. ante. R. v. Wilson [1979] R.T.R. 57 (C.A.).
     R v. Hulusi; R. v. Purvis(1973) 58 Cr.App.R. 378, For another example, see R. v.
 Browningand Others, The Times, September 14, 1976 in which the Court of Appeal held
that the judge did not depart from his proper province. See also R. v. Matthews and
Matthews(1984) 78 Cr.App.R. 23 (C.A.).
12-29                      C h . 12— R   ules of   E   v id e n c e                                                          T   he   E   x a m in e


C o u r t o f A ppeal quashed a conviction w here the judge's interventions                      allowed when the p a rty ten d ei
w e re such as to invite the jury to disbelieve evidence for the defence so                      surprise.90
strongly that the effect could not be cured by telling the jury that they
w ere judges of fact. T he jury may, to a limited extent, ask que stio n s.8(1 In                C r i m i n a l P r o c e e d i n g s 91

practice the jurv should be asked to form ulate their questions and the                             A similar rule o btains in crir
ju d g e should question the witness.                                                            defence, gives evidence o f fresh i
   M agistrates in domestic proceedings must if necessary examine or                             foresee. Thus, in an old ease o n ;
cross-exam ine a witness (or cause that to be d o n e ), if a party is unable                    the prisoner had bought the propt
effectively to do so.'''                                                                        allowed to deny the p ris o n e r’s stat
                                                                                                not to add that he had “seen the
                                                                                                confirmatory of the original charg
Evidence in rebuttal; evidence on matters of credit                                             that by Tindal C.J. in R . v. F r o s i
                                                                                                      “T here is no d o u b t that the
                               (a) Evidence in R ebuttal                                              begins its case like a plaintiff
                                                                                                      support their case by calling fi
                                                                                                     certain evidence th a t contrac
C iv il P r o c e e d in g s                                                                         dence they have given. T h ey n
                                                                                                     begins; b u t if any m a tte r ax
    E v id en ce in reply, whether oral or by affidavit, m ust, as a general rule,
                                                                                                     ingenuity can foresee, o n the
be strictly confined to rebutting the d efe n d a n t's case, and must not
                                                                                                     prisoner in a criminal case, t
m e re ly confirm that of the plaintiff.82 T hus, w here the latter had closed
                                                                                                     m atter which so arose ex i m p r c
his case without calling a defendant w ho did not a p p e a r, the plaintiff was
                                                                                                     evidence on the p art of the Ci
n o t allowed to call him in reply.83 So, in an action on a bill, where
in d o rse m e n t to the plaintiff was in issue, his case resting on m ere proof of             The court held that as in that cast
th e ind o rser's handwriting, and the d efendant, denying knowledge of the                    rebuttal was only m arginally relev;
tran sactio n , or authority to sign, had tendered evidence that the plaintiff                judge’s exercise of his discretion tc
w as to o po o r to give value, proof by the plaintiff to rebut this was                      sion of the Crow n which is clearly r<
ex cluded as being merely confirm atory.84 M oreover, where the issues on                     as part of the p ro s e c u tio n ’s case ar
th e claim and counterclaim are identical, evidence in rebuttal cannot be                     evidence for the defence: R . v. L e i
called, as it must necessarily be confirm atory.85 W ith the ju d g e ’s leave,               court had in m ind that th e re are
re b u ttin g evidence may be called by the plaintiff in answer to evidence of                possession of the Crown beco m es o
th e d e fen d ant in support of an issue, the p ro o f of which lay upon him                 tance once the defence has been re
T h e discretion m ay still be exercised in the pla intiffs favour where the                  whether it was reasonable for the Ci
n a tu re of the defence became apparent during cross-examination of his                      as part of its case on the g ro u n d s tha
ow n witnesses.87 T he judge, how ever, has a discretion to admit further                     or doubtfully re le v a n t. A s to how
evidence either for his own satisfaction or w here the interests of justice
re q u ire i t ,88 and confirmatory evidence in rebuttal will generally be
                                                                                                 n B arfcer V. Furlong, supra; Rogers v. M a t
                                                                                                n Bigsbyv. Dickinson, 4Ch.D. 24; Buddv.
                                                                                                K For rebuttal in magistrates' courts, see K
  m R. v. Lillyman [1896] 2 Q.B. 167, 177.                                                          *V‘Stimpson (1826) 2 C. & P. 418. Fo:
  81 Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, s.73.                                                      i P 7 oq°lPhlpson'            v. Priestley (1910
  82 Gilbertv. Comedy Co., 16 Ch.D. 594; Trimtestown v. Kemmis, 9 C. & F. 749. 781.           &R          nV- ^ea,^ey(1915)5 D.L.J. 332;p
  10 Barkerv. Furlong [1891] 2 Ch. 172.                                                         n 'tir’ c T.V'Bnggs (1839)2 M. & R. 199
  w Jacobs v. Tarleton. ante.                                                                 (19311V/tn              ac*°Pted inR. v.Harris
  85Green v. Sevin, 13 Ch.D. 589.                                                  ^          Cr A 24Cr A PP-R 95, 97;R v.Liddle(192*
  86 Williamsv.Davies, 1Cr. & M. 464: Wrightv. Wilcox, 9C.B. 650: Penn v.Jack,L.R -
Eo. 314.
  47Shaw v. Beck, 8 Exch. 392.                                                         ' f-    w ^ 566)   50 C r.A p p .R . 198.
  88 Doe v. Bower. 16 Q.B. 805; Budd v. Davison, 29 W.R. 192.                                      • v.Levyand Tait,ante, at p. 202.
                          The E x a m in a t io n   of    W   it n e s s e s
                                                                               12-32

allow ed w hen th e party tendering it has been misled* or taken by
            Q()
surprise.
C r i m i n a l P r o c e e d i n g s '1
                                                                                         1 :-3i
     A similar rule obtains in criminal cases w henever the accused, in
defence, gives evidence of fresh m atter which the prosecution could no
foresee. T h u s, in an old case* on a charge of theft, the defence being that
the prisoner had bought the property from A . A , called as a                        ^
a l l o w e d t o d e n v the priso n er's statem ent for this w as strictly rebut g
not to add that he had -se en the prisoner steal i f ’ for this was m er
confirm atory of the original charge. The classic formulation of the rule is
that by T indal C .J. in R. v. Frost (1839)93:
       “T h e re is no doubt that the general rule is that w here the Crow n
       begins its case like a plaintiff in a civil suit, they cannot afterw ards
       su pp o rt th e ir case by calling fresh witnesses because they are m e t by
       certain evidence th at contradicts it. They stand or fall by the evi-


•
       d ence they have given. They must close their case before the defence
       begins- b u t if any m atter arises ex im proviso, which no hu
       ingenuity can foresee, on the part of a defendant in a civil suit, or a
        priso n er in a criminal case, there seems to be no reason why the
        m a tte r which so arose ex im proviso may not be answered by contrary
        evidence on th e part of the Crown.”
                                                                                            12-32
     T h e court held that as in that case the evidence sought to be ad duced in
  rebuttal was only marginally relevant they would not interfere with the
  judge's exercise of his discretion to admit it. All evidence in the posse
  sion of th e C ro w n which is clearly relevant to the issues must be adduced
  as part of th e p ro secution’s case and cannot properly be adm itted after
  S e e for the defence: R. v. Levy and T a U ” It is subm itted th a t he
   court had in m ind that there are m any cases w here evidence in the
   possession of th e Crown becomes of much greater relevance and im p o r­
   tance once th e defence has been revealed. T h e test would a p p e a r t    ^
   whether it was reasonable for the Crow n not to have called that evidence
   as part of its case on th e grounds that it was only “marginally, m inim ally,
   or doubtfully rele v a n t.”95 As to how the rule applies when the judge calls


         1Barkerv. Furlong, supra; Rogers v. Manley, 42 L.T. .•>&>.       . or B 650
      - Bigsbyv. Dickinson,4 Ch.D. 24;Buddv. Davison, ante;Wrtghrv WWaw. 9 ■ ■ ■ •
       91For rebuttal in magistrates courts, see Magistrates ours u       t r i617of the
       « R. v.Sampson (1826) 2 C. & P. 418. Further .Uustrauons are set ou at § 617 of th
    11thed. ofPhipson, viz,R. v. Priestley(1910) 5 Cr.App.R^ I*.;R. v.Hilda h 83.) 5 C.
    & P.299;R.v. Wheatley(1915)5D.L.J.332.percontraseeBnggsv.Aynsworth (1838)_M .
    itR. 168; R. v. Briggs (1839) 2 M. & R. 199-                                McMahon
        939C & P 129 159.adopted m /?.v.Harris(19-,)20Cr.App.R. 86,89,         ■
    (1933)24Cr.App.R. 95.97;/?. v. Liddle(1928)21 Cr App.R.                  ■£>£££ ?
    Cl.App.R. 168. 172. The rule was applied m R v. Cleghorn [196/} - Q-B.
    J o s e p h (1971) 56 Cr.App.R. 60.
         * (1966) 50 Cr.App.R. 198.
         55R. v.Levy and Tait.ante, at p 202.
                                                [ 261 ]
 12-32                   C h . 12— R   ules o f   E   v id e n c e



 a witness, see infra. L ord G o d d a rd , c o m m e n tin g 96 on th e rule laid down
 bv T m dai C .J., said that it is probably in wider language than would be
 used at the present day.
      “In Crippen9 the court said in term s that they did not p ro p o se to
      adopt the language of that judge and they c o n sid ered that the rule
      laid down in these term s might in som e cases place an unfair bu rd e n
      on counsel for the prosecution and that it was a q uestion for the
      judge . . . to d eterm ine in his discretion w h e th e r th e evidence, not
      having been te ndered in chief ought to be given as abetting
      evidence.”9*
T he Court of A ppeal in R. v. M illiken99 described L o rd G o d d a r d ’s
observations as a valuable pro nouncem ent upon this so m etim es u nneces­
sarily thorny topic. 1 In M illiken2 the trial ju d g e 's ruling to allow an
application to call evidence in rebuttal was upheld. W in n L,J. said':
     “W here the evidence sought to be in troduced in reb u ttal is itself
     evidence probative of the guilt of the d e fe n d a n t an d w hen it is
     reasonably foreseeable by the prosecution that som e gap in the p ro o f
     of guilt needs to be filled by evidence called by the pro secu tio n , then
     generally speaking the court is likely to rule against th e closing o f any
     such gap by rebuttal evidence4; but . . . the evidence h ere was not
     evidence in any sense probative of the guilt of the d e f e n d a n t , since it
     really consisted of no m ore than denials of the accusations of conspi­
     racy and concoction of the charge m ade by the d e fe n d a n t in his own
     evidence . . . the evidence was to disprove the truth of th e defence
     which itself consisted of an affirmative a ttack up o n th e credibility
     and honesty of the police officer.”
Sem ble that this decision does not offend against th e rule prohibiting
contradiction on collateral m atters (§ 12-33) because th e m a tte rs alleged
a m o u n te d to bias. O therw ise the defence should not have b e e n allowed
to prove them.
   The C o u rt of A ppeal has again considered th e expression “ex im pro-
viso” and has reiterated that the proper test is w h e th e r the prosecution
could reasonably have foreseen that the particular piece of evidence was
necessary to prove the case; it is a m atter for the discretion of th e trial
judge w hether that test is satisfied. ' The prosecution are expected to react
reasonably to pre-trial warnings of matters likely to be raised, but n o t to


 * In R. V. Owen [1952] 2 Q.B. 362, 366.
 57(1911) 5 Cr.App.R. 255.
   PerLord Goddard in R. v. Owen, ante 36 Cr.App.R. 16. 19.
 * (1969) 53 Cr.App.R. 330.
  1Ibid. At p. 334.
  'Ante.
                          T   he   E   x a m in a t io n   of   W   it n e s s e s   12-33

ta k e notice of “fanciful and u nreal” statem ents, even, as in one case, in
the form of a letter from the d e fe n d a n t to the D .P .P . before tria l.6
    W h e re proceedings are not upon indictm ent the general principles set
out in the authorities will, of course, apply. In trials upon indictm ent, the
calling of evidence in rebuttal of alibis is now g ov erned by the Criminal
justice A ct 1967, s. 11 (see § 11-14, ante).
    T h e d e f e n d a n t is less often entitled to give reb utting evidence since,
know ing the w itness’s statem ents o r depositions, he can give it in defence.
A s in civil cases, however, the judge m ay, when the interests of justice
require i t , adm it evidence in rebuttal although it was available in chie f.' In
a case in which the R e co rde r called a witness after the prosecution closed
its case, it was held that he was w rong to refuse the defence an a d jo u rn ­
m ent to enable rebuttal evidence to be called,8
    W h e re a r eb uttal of relevant evidence has been im properly refused in a
civil case, a n ew trial may be g ra n te d .9 Sem ble that in a sum m ary trial of a
 criminal case this would give the prosecution th e right to appeal by case
 stated. R e b u tta l of irrelevant evidence will not be a llo w e d ,"1
     For the principle that the prosecution should call the evidence on which
 it intends to rely before the close of its case and omission to call technical
 evidence, see §§ 11-22, 11-28 to 11-29.


       (b) N o C ontradiction on Collateral Matters; Five E xception s"


(i) T h e P r i n c i p l e
  A party m ay n ot, in general, im peach the credit o f his o p p o n e n t’s
witness by calling witnesses to contradict him as to m a tte rs of credit or
oth e r collateral m atters, and his answ ers th e r e o n will be conclusive.12
This rule is n o t absolute. T he test w h e th e r a m a tte r is collateral or not is
this: “if the an sw er of a witness is a m a tte r which you would be allowed on
your own p a rt to prove in evidence— if it had such a connection with the
issues, tha t you would be allowed to give it in evidence— then it is a m atter
on which you m ay contradict h im .” 1’ Thus, w h ere an Irish witness, who
gave his evidence through an in terp re te r, de nie d on cross-examination
that he had spoken English to two persons in court, it was held that his
answer could n o t be contradicted by calling those p e r s o n s . 14 O n a petition


    bR. v. Hutchinson (1985) 129 S.J. 700.
    7R. V. Crippen [1911] 1 K.B, 149: R. v. Smith, 11 Cr.App.R. 230.
    8R. v. Coleman, The Times, November 21, 1987 (C.A.).
    9Maclaren v. Davis. 6 T.L.R. 372.
   10R. v. Cargill[1913] 2 K.B. 271
   11 Some writers list“previous inconsistent statements” as a further exception. However
 both sections 4 and 5 of the 1865 Act refer to the “former statement made by him [i.e. the
 witness] relativeto the subject matterof the indictment or proceeding." See ante,§ 12-24.
   12Harrisv. Tippett(1811) 2 Camp. 637. See. too, Palmerv. Trower (1852) 8 Exch. 247.
   13PerPollock C.B. inAtt.-Cenv. Hitchcock (1847) 1 Exch. 91. 99.
   14R. v. Burke, 8 Cox 44.
 12-33                    C h . 12—   R   ules o f   E   v id e n c e
                                                                                            I
 to revoke a p a te n t by reason of an act of prior user a witness w ho p ro ved           <
 such an act having stated on cross-examination that there were also o th e rs              s
 was not allowed to be c ontradicted, such oth er acts being irrelevant .1' So,             |»
 though a female witness, who had denied on cross-examination th a t she                    %
 was the kept mistress of the party calling h e r , was allowed to be co n tra d -           §
 icted, yet it would have been otherwise had the question been w h e th e r                  -f
she was a c o m m o n pro stitu te, since the form er fact w ent to show b ia s ,16          £
while the latter w'as merely collateral.17 Similarly, it was held befo re the                5®
Sexual Offences A m e n d m e n t Act 1976Ifi tha t the denials of a prosecutrix
in a case of rape as to her connection with m en o th e r than the p riso n er
cannot be c o n tr a d ic te d iv (although evidence could be called to show tha t
she is a p rostitute since this went to c o n s e n t,2<! or sem ble that she was of
prom iscuous h a b its 21); nor those of a defe n d a n t in an action for ind ecent
assault as to im proprieties with o th e r fem a le s .22 A witness's denial on
cross-exam ination, th a t he had ever expressed his opinion that the party
calling him had no case, cannot be c o n tra d ic te d .23
   N o r can a w itness be contradicted by inadmissible do cum en ts; thus,
w here a female witness had m ade statem ents in chief as to h e r life a b r o a d ,
and the opposite counsel cross-examined h e r from a d o c u m e n t which he                   '
did not put in (it w’as inadmissible), but which he suggested to the ju ry was
a foreign police re p o r t d etrim ental to the witness's c haracter, this course
was held highly im prop er. W hat he should have d o ne was to say to the
witness, “L ook at this paper: do you still ad he re to your a n s w e r ?"-4
W h e re c on tradictory m a tte r affecting credit, m erely, has come to light
since the trial, leave to cross-examine the witness th e re o n m ay be given
on appeal, even th o u g h , had it been know n, witnesses could not have
been called at the trial to prove it.25 In m any cases, how ever, a new trial
will be o rd e re d , as th e best way to resolve the m a t te r .2'’
   T h e difficulties which the question of w’h e th e r a m a tte r is relevant or
merely collateral m ay cause is illustrated by R. v. B u s b y 27 T w o police


   15Re Haggenmacher's Patents[1898] 2 Ch. 280.
   16See § 12-34. infra.
   17 Thomas v. David, 7 C. & P. 350.
   iKSee § 12-22. supra for s.2 of that Act and Ihe present position.
   IvR. v. Holmes (1811) L.R. 1C.C.R. 334; though ahtcr(!) Inaffiliationcases when such
connection may affect paternity, (2) whetc she denies previous voluntarv intercourse with
thedefendant 7?.v.Riley(1887) 18Q.B.D. 481 See alsoR \.Bashir[1969] 1W. L.R. 1303.
Leeds Assizes (Vealc J.): R.v. Kraus: (1973) 57 Cr.App.R. 466 and authoritiescitedpost.
5 18-60.
     R. v. Bashir,ante;R. v. Creatbanks[1959]Cnm.L.R. 450; R. v.Holmes (18711L.R. 3
C.C.R. 334, 337per Kelly C.D.
  21R. v.ftrausz. ante.
  ~ Tolman v. Johnstone, 2 F. & f. 66.
  • Elton v. Larkins. 5 C. & P. 385. 390.
  J R. v.Seham Yousry, 1JCr.App.R. 13. 18,see alsoR. v. Treacy[1944] 2 All E.R. 299;
as to the admissibility of policy reports, see R. v. Labouchere (1880) 14 Cox 419.
  25R. v. Hamilton,13 Cr.App.R. 32; Ladd v. Marshall[1954] 1 W.L.R. 1489.
  2KPiotrowska v. Piotrowski [1958] 1 W.L.R. 797
  r (1982i 74 Cr.App R 79 cf. P. \ Marsh (I9W'i s'3Cr.App.R
                                T   he   E   x a m in a t io n o f   W   it n e s s e s   12-34

    officers w ere cross-examined in that case with a view to establishing that
    they had fabricated remarks a ttributed to the defend an t and had th re a ­
    ten ed a potential witness to stop him giving evidence. They denied the
    allegations. W h e n the defence sought to call the witness, the prosecution
    o bje c te d to his giving evidence ab ou t the police visit. The judge ruled that
    the evidence w ent to credit only and excluded it. The court of Appeal
    held th a t this ruling was wrong. T he C ou rt said that the evidence went to
    an issue to be tried, namely w hether the police officers were prepared to
    go to im p r o p e r lengths to secure a conviction.

    (ii)   E x c e p t io n s


    (1) Bias o r partiality

        Facts showing tha! the witness is biased or partial in relation to the                    12-34
     parties o r th e cause may be elicited on cross-examination: o r. if denied,
     independently p ro ved2*; e.g. that a female witness is the kept mistress of
     the pa rty calling h e r ,*9 or that the witness had suborned false witnesses


•
      against th e opposite pa rty .1*1 or has had quarrels with, or expressed
     hostility tow ards, h im .31 So. the fact that the witness has accepted a bribe
     to testify m ay, if denied, be prov ed ,3' though a previous admission by the
    witness that he had been offered a bribe c a n n o t,33 and a denial by the
    accused s d au ghters that they had been “schooled” by their m other to
    give evidence against him upon a charge of incest will render admissible
    evidence to the contrary w
        In R. v. M e n d y 33 the facts were as follows. D uring the course of the trial
    of the a p pellant on a charge of assault a man in the public gallery was seen
    by a constable in court to be taking notes while a prosecution witness was
    giving evidence about the assault. T h e man then left the court and the
    sam e constable and a court official saw him speaking to the ap pellant’s
    h usb and , a p parently describing the witness’s evidence to him. W hen the
    husband gave evidence he denied that the incident with the man had
    occurred. T h e prosecution were allowed to call the constable and the
    court official in rebuttal. The Court of A pp e a l upheld that decision. The
    husband, the evidence suggested, was p r e p a re d to learn what a prosecu­
    tion witness had said so that he could the m ore convincingly describe how


L * Att.-Gen. v. Hitchcock, j Exch. 91; Dunn v. Aslett(1838) 2 M. & R. 122■R v Shaw
(1888) 16 Cox 503
  ^ Thomas v._David, amc
  31 The Queen sCase, 2 Brod. & Bing. 311-315; An.-Gen. v. Hitchcock, ante.
fry v Shaw-16Cox503;R. v.DenlevandOthers[1970]Crim.L.R. 583 (BristolAssizes)
(ttrabinJ.).
       Att.-Gen. v. Hitchcock, ante.
     33Ibid.
    ,     v'Phillips(1936) 26 Cr.App.R. 17. The wording ofthe judgment appears toimply
     a thecontradictoryevidence willbe receivedasevidence ofthetruthofthefactsstatedin
     35 (1976) 64   Cr.App.R. 4.
                                                     [265]
 12-34                     Ch .32—     R u le s o f E v id e n c e


  th e appellant was not responsible for the assault a n d th e r e b y le n d himself
- to a schem e to defeat the p urpose of keeping prospective w itnesses o u t of
  c o u rt.
      T h e court s a id ’” “It has always been permissible to call e vidence to
  contradict a witness's denial of bias o r partiality to w ard s o n e of th e parties
  a n d to show tha t he is prejud iced so far as th e case b e in g trie d is
  c o n c e r n e d .”

 (2) P revious conviction
     A witness (o th e r than a d efen d a n t in a criminal c a se )37 m a y be cross-
 ex a m in e d as to w hether he has been convicted o f any crim in al offence;
 a n d if he e ith e r denies or does n ot adm it th e fact, o r refuses to a n s w e r, the
 cross-exam ining party may prov e such con viction,38 t o g e th e r w ith the
 circum stances u n d e r which it to o k pla c e .39 T h e conviction m a y be rele­
 v ant only to credit and be otherw ise wholly irrelevant to th e is s u e .*
    T h e rule is subject to the provisions o f the R e h a b ilita tio n o f O ffe n d e rs
 A c t 1974 which forbids the qu estioning o f a “reh a b ilita te d p e r s o n ” a b o u t
 “s p e n t ” convictions (s.4(1)) unless th e co u rt is satisfied th a t “justice
c a n n o t be d o ne in the case” e xcept by re fe ren c e th e r e to (s.7(3 )). Section
4(1) d oes n o t apply to criminal proceedings (s.7 (2 )(a)) which a re the
su b je c t o f a Practice D irection issued by the L o rd C h ie f Ju stic e on J u n e
3 0 ,1 97 5. T h e Practice Direction re co m m end s th a t n o re fe re n c e s h o u ld be
m a d e to a spe n t conviction if it can reasonably be av o id e d a n d provides
th a t no reference should be m a de in o p en court to a sp e n t conviction
w ith o u t the autho rity of the ju d g e , “which a utho rity should n o t b e given
unless the interests o f justice so re q u ire ” (para. 6 ). A p e rs o n b e c o m e s
re h a b ilita ted for th e purposes o f the Act in respect o f a co nviction (which
is th e n sp ent) w hen he has com p le te d a period o f re h a b ilita tio n , the
len gth of which d e p e n d s on the seriousness o f th e offence. T h e r espective
rehab ilitatio n periods are set out in the A c t (s.5). Sentences o f im p riso n ­
m e n t fo r life and im prisonm ent for m ore than 30 m o n th s a re excluded
fro m rehabilitation.

(3) E vidence o f reputation f o r untruthfulness
    In d e p e n d e n t evidence may also be given th a t an a d v e rsa ry ’s w itness
b e a r s such a general repu tation for untruthfulness (o r, p e rh a p s , fo r m oral
tu r p itu d e generally) that he is unw orthy o f credit u p o n his o a t h .41 In

  * Ibid. at p. 6.
   ' As to whom, see Chap. 18.
   > Criminal Procedure Act 1865.s.6,which appliestoboth civiland criminalproceedings.
See Cliffords-. Clifford(Practice Note) (1961) ) W.L.R. 1274; Ward v. Sinfield(1880) 49
L.J.Q.B. 696.
     SeeH/'vT"Baker[1895] 1 O B. 797. 8<Ki.
  J<'Wardv. Sinfield(1880) 49 L.J.Q.B. (i96. liissubmitted that the principle laiddown by
Lawton J. in R. v. Sweet-Escon (ante. § 12-23) islikely to be approved bv the appellate
courts.
  41 R. v. Brown, L.R. 1C.C.R. 70: Stcbbings v. L. & N.W. /?>-.,63 J.P. 138; Toohey v.
CommissionerofMetropolitan PoliceJJ965] AC. 595. 606.
                                          [ 266 ]
                     T   he   E   x a m in a t io n   of   W   it n e s s e s   12-37

practice th e question is shortened thus: “From your know ledge of the
witness would you believe him on his o a th ? ” In R. v. Richardson and
L o ngm an ,*' E d m u n d Davies L.J. summarised the position:

         “ 1. A witness may be asked whether he has knowledge of the
     im pugned witness's general reputation for veracity and w hether
     (from such knowledge) he would believe the im pugned witness's
     sworn testimony.
         2. T he witness called to impeach the credibility of a n o th e r witness
     may also express his individual opinion (based upon his personal
     know ledge) as to whether the latter is to be believed upon his oath,
     and is not confined to giving an opinion based merely on general
     r e p u ta tio n ." 4'
   T he im peach in g witness, cannot, in direct exam ination, give particular
instances o f the oth e r's falsehood or dishonesty, since no man is supposed
to com e p re p a re d to defend all the acts of his life. But. upon cross-
ex am ination he may be asked as to his means of know ledge o f the other
witness, his feelings of hostility towards-him, or w h eth e r, in spite of bad
c haracter in o th e r respects, the impeached witness has not preserved his
repu tation for tru th ; and the answers to these questions cannot be con­
tra d ic te d .44 T h e impeaching witness should com e from the locality of the
o th e r, and not be a stranger sent expressly to learn the latter’s
re p u ta tio n .45

(4) M edical evidence affecting reliability o f witness's evidence

  In a p ro p e r case, if a witness is suffering from a m ental disability it may
be permissible to call psychiatric evidence to show that the witness is
incapable o f giving reliable evidence, but such evidence cann ot be called
when the p u rp o se is not to establish scientific fact but to establish or
challenge credibility and thereby take over the function of the jury. In
Toohey v. C om m issioner o f Metropolitan Police ,4 the H ouse of Lords
held that “ medical evidence is admissible to show that a witness suffers
from some disease or defect or abnormality of m ind that affects the
reliability of his evidence. Such evidence is not confined to general
opinion of the unreliability of the witness, but may give all the matters
necessary to show not only the foundation of and reason for the diagnosis




  42(1968) 52 Cr.Aop.R. 317.
  4iAt p. 323.
  44R- v. Gunewardene [1951] 2 k.B. 600: R. v. Richardson and Longman, ame.
    Mawson v. Heartsmk, 4 Esp. 103.
  46See Pattenden, “Conflicting Approaches to Psychiatric Evidence in Criminal Trials:
England, Canada and Australia" [1986] Crim.L.R. 92.
    Ante.
 12-37                  C h . 12—   R   ules o f   E   v id e n c e



 but also the extent to which the credibility of the witness is affec te d .”4* In
 R. v. Eades49 Nield J. allowed the prosecution to call in rebuttal a
 consultant psychiatrist to prove that the d e fen d a n t s account of how he
 had recovered his m e m ory after an accident was not consistent with
 current medical knowledge
    D ifferent circumstances prevailed in L o w ery v. R .%‘ T he Privy Council
 there held that evidence of a psychiatrist had been properly adm itted .
 T he psychiatrist had exam ined both d efen dants, K. and L. Both blam ed
 the o th e r for killing a girl a nd suggesting the killing. T he psychiatrist was
 called by K. and said th at L. was the more aggressive an d d om in an t of the
 two. T h e B o a rd said that in the special circum stances of the case the
 evidence was relevant and necessary for K . ’s case which involved negativ­
 ing what L. had said.51
    H o w ev er L o w e ry should be seen as a decision based on its own n a r ­
rowly defined facts. T h e C o u rt of A ppeal said in R. v. T u rn er"2 that
L ow ery was not “authority for the proposition th at in all cases psychol­
ogists and psychiatrists can be called to prove the probability of the
accused’s veracity. ”S3 In that case the court upheld a ruling that psychia­
tric evidence was not admissible in the following circumstances. The
defendant was charged with m u rd e r and his defence was provocation. H e
sought to call a psychiatrist to say that he was not suffering from a m ental
illness but that his n atu re was such that he could have been p ro vo ked in
the circumstances of the case. T h e court saw th a t issues both of p rov oca­
tion and credibility were for the jury to decide and they did not need the
evidence of a psychiatrist to help them decide if the d efen d a n t was telling
the truth.
   In R. v. M cK enn ey a n d O thers54 May J . ruled th a t the defence could not
call a psychologist to show' that the principal prosecution witness w'as a
psychopath and that lying is a characteristic associated with psychopathy.
T he learned judge held that if the witness was m entally capable o f giving
reliable evidence it was for the jury to decide w h e th er in fact he was doing
so.

(5) Crim inal Justice A c t 1988, Schedule 2

  W here a sta te m e n t is adm itted in evidence in criminal proceedings
under sections 23 o r 24 o f the 1988 A c t.Ui'




    To thisextent therefore. R. v. Gunewardene, amc, isoverruled.
 4“[1972J Crim.L.R. 99 (Nottingham Assizes).
 5,1(1974) A . C C i . A p p R 35. cited ante.§§ 17-27 to 17-29.
 M Ibid. (1974) A.C. 85 at p. 103.
 5:(1975) O.B, 834. 60 Cr.App.R. 80.
 ■"Ibid. [1975] O.B. 834 at p. 842.
    (1980) 72 Cr.App.R. 78.
     For s.23, see,ante, § 10-27 and for s.24. see,post, § 23-12.
                                        [268]
                         T   he   E   x a m in a t io n   of   W   it n e s s e s   12-38

        “ (a) any evidence which, if the person making the statem en t had
              been called as a witness, would have been admissible as relevant
              to his credibility as a witness shall be admissible for th at purpose
              in those proceedings:
          (b) evidence m ay, with the leave of the court, be given of any m atter
              which, if that person had been called as a witness, could have-
              been put to him in cross-examination as relevant to his credibil­
              ity as a witness but of which evidence could not have been
              ad d u c e d by the cross-examining party; and
          (c) evidence tending to prove that that person, w h e th e r before or
              after m aking the statem ent, made (w hether orally or not) some
              o th e r sta te m en t which is inconsistent with it shall be admissible
              for the p urpose of showing that he has contradicted himself.



                                  (c) Re-establishing Credit




•
       W here a w itness’s general reputation for veracity has been attacked,                 12-38
    his character m ay be sustained either, as we have seen, by cross-examin-
    ing the im peaching witnesses as to their m eans of know ledge, grounds of
    opinion, hostile feelings towards the other and the like; o r by in d e p e n ­
    dent general evidence that the impeached witness is w orthy of credit. It
    seems doubtful how far independent evidence of the latter description is
    admissible w h e re m erely particular discrediting facts have been elicited in
    cross-examination o r proved against a witness. Such evidence has, in­
    deed, been received in reply to proof both of s u bo rn a tion 5 and of
    previous conviction of crime56; but in a later case, where the character of a
    witness had b e en im peached on cross-examination, general evidence of
    this kind, te n d e r e d in rebuttal, was rejected .5' In any case, m ere co n tra d ­
    iction am o ng witnesses will not let in such evidence.5* n o r will proof of
    previous inconsistent statements let in. in general, c ontrary proof of
    previous consistent ones, although the inconsistent statem ents th e m ­
    selves may be disp ro v e d .5li (For statements rebutting allegations of recent
     fabrication, see po st. § 12-60).




      MtlSched. 2, para. 1.
      ss Anneslev v. Anglesey. 17 How.St.Tr. 1348: see also Durham v. Beaumont. 1 Camp.
    207.
      56R. V. Clarke. 2 Stark. 241.
      57 Doe v. Harris. 7 C. & P. 330, perColeridee J..see also R v. Wood [ 1953] 2 All E.R
     112 .
       58Durham v. Beaumont, ante.
       * R. v. Whelan,14 Cox 595.
                                                   [269]
        12-38                          C h. 12— R       ules o f       E   v id e n c e



          A n im peaching witness may, in his turn, be attacked eith er in cross-
        exam ination or by independent genera! evidence that he is unworthy of
        credit, but no further recrimination th an this seems allow able.“




                                      (d) The Civil E vidence A c t 1968




        W   it n e s s 's   P r e v io u s St a t e m   ent   ,   if   Pro    ved   ,   to     be   E   v id e n c e   of

        F a c t s St a t e d


12-39          “3.— (1) W'here in any civil proceedings—
               (a) a previous inconsistent o r contradictory statem ent m a d e by a
                   person called as a witness in those proceedings is proved by
                   virtue of sections 3 , 4 o r 5 of th e Criminal P ro ced ure A ct 1865, or

               that statem ent shall bv virtue of this subsection be admissible as
               evidence of anv fact stated th e re in of which direct oral evidence by
               him would be admissible. . . . ”61


        A d m issib ility o f E v id e n c e            as to     C re d ib ility         of   M a k e r, e tc . o f
        S ta te m e n t A d m itte d u n d e r S e c tio n 2 o r 4


12—40          “7 .— ( i ) Subject to rules of co urt, w here in any civil proceedings a
               sta te m en t m ade by a person w ho is not called as a witness in those
               proceedings is given in evidence by virtue of section 2 of this Act

                (a) any evidence which, if th at person had been so called, would be
                    admissible for the purpose of destroying or supporting his c re d ­
                    ibility as a witness shall be admissible for that pu rp ose in those
                    proceedings; and
                (b) evidence tending to prove th at, w heth er b efore or after he m ade
                    tha t statem ent, that person m a de (w h eth er orally o r in a d ocu­
                    m ent or otherwise) a n o th e r statem ent inconsistent therew ith
                    shall be admissible for th e purpose of showing tha t tha t person
                    has contradicted himself:
                   “Provided that nothing in this subsection shall enable evidence to


              R. v. Whelan, anle.
                  s.6(3)(fl)the provisions-of which relate totnc lartors to be ' on -:c; u w r. e
            6! Note
        ine the weight, ifany. to be attached to a statement admissible b\ virtue O- s . 3-.; >
                                                          [270]
Dr. Stephan Popper
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield
S3 7ET

&

Messrs. Rothera, Solicitors
FILE NOTE DATED 5.12.90. SHORT TELEPHONE CONFERENCE WITH

COUNSEL ON 4.12.90._________________________________________

I outlined the substance of the letter from Hill Dickinson

to him and also outlined the letter from Hill Dickinson to

him and explained to him that I was not intending to allow

LJT's report to be admitted.   I drew his attention to Mr.

Sturt's case and also a couple of the Rules.    I said that

it was my view that publication of the letter would be a

contempt but I would value his opinion.

Michael Powers said:-

a.   He agreed that it would be a contempt and in fact I

     think he said a serious contempt.

b.   He agreed that it would be impossible to put the letter

     before the Jury for the reason which I had given, and

     in addition, because if one wanted to introduce it as a

     document it would not comply with Rule 37 as I would

     not be in a position to form the view that it was not

     contentious.

     He thought that I should write a fairly short and firm

     letter stating the position.




BADACC
                                                           28th November,   90


         SLP/BW



         Mr. I. Rothera,
         RotherySs
         Solicitors,
         24 Friar Lane,
         Nottingham. NG1 6DW.

         Dear Sirs,


         As agreed on the telephone, I have sent Instruction for Advice to Counsel
         direct.  I enclose a copy of it for your file.

         Yours faithfully,




         S. L. Popper,
         H. M. Corone r




BADABP
         INSTRUCTION TO COUNSEL - DR. MICHAEL POWERS




                     TO ADVISE




BADABT
INSTRUCTION TO COUNSEL

Dr.   Popper would like to thank Dr.    Powers for his

assistance on Monday, 19th November, when we discussed

briefly Mr.    Isaac's submission to have his client

(^Superintendent Duckenfield) excused from attending and

giving evidence at the Inquest.

(Please note that the rest of this instruction is written

in the 1st person and refers to Dr. Popper.)

As Counsel will know, on Friday, 23rd November, I, in fact,

turned that application down.     Mr.   Isaac's application was

based upon Rule 22,Section 14 Civil Evidence Act 1968 and

case law that for the purpose of these instructions.         I

think I need only refer to the Westinghouse Electric

Corporation Uranium Contract litigation MDL Docket

No.235(No.2)   (3 All England Report 1977, page 717 onward).

In fact there were two hearings, one in the Court of Appeal

and the other in the House of Lords.     The House of Lords

Decision reported in All England Report 1977 page T*3 <1 >       £^2

I do not think it is necessary for me to set out all

quotations which were drawn to my attention, nor to recount

all the circumstances except to say that Rio Tinto Zinc

(RTZ) were resisting an application for the production of

documents in a case in Virginia on the grounds that

production of these documents would expos^/them to an

increased risk of prosecution by the Commission for breach

of Article 85 because of the existence of a Cartel.      I

think on the whole the position can be summed up relatively




BADABN
easily by just a few quotations.      At page 437 House of

Lords decision):-

     "(ii) The RTZ Companies were entitled to claim the

     privilege from the production of documents given by

     Section 14 (1) of the 1968 Act notwithstanding the

     Commission had knowledge of the Cartel and had not

     taken any action in respect of it for if the documents

     were produced under the letters Rogatory the RTZ

     Companies would be exposed to a greater risk of

     proceedings being brought against them by the

     Commission for recovery of a fine than they were at

     present since production of the documents might

     authentica t e   and support the existing information in

     the hands of the Commission and afford conclusive proof

     of a breach by the RTZ Companies of the prohibition

     against Cartels and might cause the Commission to

     decide to take action against the RTZ Companies".

Later on on page 445, Lord Wilberforce says at paragraph

(C )5 :—

     "I base that conclusion ..........     on the proposition

      that a tendency to expose to a penalty would be

      increased if the documents in question were to be

      validated and connected with the RTZ Companies by

      sworn evidence as opposed to being as they are now

      pieces of paper found in a file".




BADABN
 Mr. Isaacs then went on to say:-

         Sir, it won't have escaped you the difference between

     albeit the evidence that was given before Lord Justice

     Taylor was all taken down.     It was not evidence that

     was given on oath but, of course, the evidence before
     you would be given on oath".

 He then drew my attention to the part of the speech of Lord
 Diplock, page 465.

         I do not think that your Lordships are entitled to

     dismiss as fanciful the risk that if the documents

     relating to the Cartel were produced at the trial of

     the Virginia proceedings and came as they then would

     into the public domain, the resulting publicity in this

     sensitive political field might result in pressure on

    the commission to take against the RTZ Companies

    speedier and severer action than they might otherwise
    have done".

What Mr Isaacs, of course, was asking in his submission was

not that I should apply a rule against self-incrimination

(which I would in any event do and which I think he fully

accepted I would do) but for me to go one step further and

not call his client at all which is what, in fact, I
rejected.

However, in the course of his submission and perhaps in the

hopes that I might accede to what he was saying, he made




BADABN
 following suggestion:-

         I finally say this and I know I have been on my feet

     for quite some time and I do not want to weary you

     further - that if it be felt necessary by you and both

     you and I know, sir, that there are no PACE statements

     or interviews by Mr. Duckenfield that the Jury must

     hear something about what Mr. Duckenfield said about

     the day, then, sir, upon instructions - and it is only

     on this basis that I put this - I have no complaint

     with what Mr. Duckenfield said to the Taylor enquiry

     going before the Jury.    I say that because that is all

     above the line as opposed to anything new below the
     line".

The reference to above and below the line is explained
earlier by Mr. Isaacs as follows:-

     To use an expression that was mentioned to me some

    time ago and which I happily adopt.     The line was drawn

    and everything that has come above that line has meant

    that the Director has taken the view that there is

    insufficient evidence to prosecute.     My concern, so

    far as Mr Duckenfield is concerned is that there should

    be nothing below that line which might lead the

    Director to reconsider his decision".

For the sake of completeness, I think I should add that




BADABN
Counsel for a large number of the bereaved families in the

end said that on the balance that he was of the view that

Mr. Isaacs proposal was the lesser of two evils, he would

be content to have the transcript admitted and Mr.

Duckenfield not called.    As you already know, although this

in a sense meant that virtually everybody was in agreement,

I did not in fact accede to the request.

On the 30th October, before the Inquests were resumed I

held what I would call a Business Meeting with most of

the firms who are now appearing before me.    The object of

this meeting was to sort out procedural problems and try

and make the running of the Inquests a little bit

smoother.
In the course of that meeting there were several

references to the transcripts and I set out below some of

the points.     I said:-

    "With regard to Lord Justice Taylor's report,    if I can

    deal with that next, I do not intend to admit that

    report as part of the evidence at the Inquests.    The

    only way one could do that would be to read it totally

    and I don't think that would serve any useful purpose.

    Secondly, I perceive it is going to cause more problems

    than it is worth if I did that, so I don't intend to

    admit it.     Similarly, I do not intend to use the trans­

    scripts of the evidence of Lord Justice Taylor's




BADABN
     enquiry.   I am fully aware that you will have access to

     the transcripts, as indeed I have, and I would not be

     at all surprised if you looked through them with a view

     to seeing what people have said.   I would expect you to

     do that and I don't mind that provided your questioning

     is relevant to the Inquests.   What I would not permit

     is if, for instance, a witness were to exercise his

     right not to answer incriminating questions, I would

     not permit you to put to that witness quotations from

     the transcripts so that, in fact, he could then

    exercise his rights not to answer question but in fact

    you had put what he had said.    I am going to use common

    sense, I don't want to muzzle you, I don't want to

    prevent you asking all proper legitimate questions in

    order that at the end of the day as far as possible you

    Will feel you have had a fair chance so to speak but

    equally I intend to be fair to the witnesses as far as

    I am able to be so.   Although I don't intend to allow

    Lord Justice Taylor's report to be introduced as

    evidence, it is going to be very difficult not to refer

    to it from time to time.   Common sense will dictate

    where we draw the line.    I think it is also right that

    there may be the odd occasion where we will have breach

    what I have just said that we will have to use some of

    the transcripts but I think it will be a rarety."




BADABN
Later on Mr. King, who represents about 4 3 of the bereaved

families said this to me:-

      "Sir, if I could just clarify the transcript evidence,

      you would have no objection as I understand it within

      the rules you have laid down as to privilege, the

      transcript being used in cross-examination of a witness

      as putting it to him if it be the case a previous

      inconsistent statement."

      My reply:   "yes, within certain limits"

      Mr. King:   "yes, of course".

      The Coroner:   "The difficulty is that the public enquiry

      was done on, if you like, slightly different premises

      from my powers, if you like,      and those are the   way I

      intend to run these Inquests      and my main objective is

      to try and make sure we do things fairly which I am

      sure you would want also".

Mr King, of course, agreed with that.

Mr.    Isaacs who represents Mr.      Duckenfield spoke to me

with a comment on the transcripts.        He said:-

      Sir, may I ask you to clarify two points.       The first

      relates to the Taylor Report because as I understand

      what you said at the outset,      the Taylor Report   wasnot

      to be used at all save in-so-far     as my Learned    Friends

      and myself and other colleagues might actually agree

      certain facts that may or may not prove something that




BADABN
    can be done.     Assuming that that cannot be done, how

    far do you believe you will allow the use of the Taylor

    Report at all?     As I say, as I understand the answer,

    it was not going to be used but then I noticed when my

    Learned Friend Mr.     King was addressing you briefly,

    the impression I certainly got was that you were going

    to allow transcripts to be used for cross-examination

    purposes which was certainly not something I understood

    at the outset and would be something which - and I

    leave this to another time, I would make submissions

    against.

    That is the first point.     The second is this.......... "

This second point refers to video evidence.

I then dealt with the point of the Taylor Report and the

transcripts:-

    "The other point which you raised regarding Lord

    Justice Taylor's Report and the transcript.     I must

    confess I do find this quite a difficult problem.

    What I was trying to say is this.     It will be foolish

    of me to assume that you don't have the transcripts and

    that none of you are going to look at them because I am

    sure you are all going to do that, particularly as you

    no doubt have guessed, some of the witnesses are

    inevitable^ We have got to call them because they are

    key players, shall we say, in this matter.     In that




BADABN
     sense it is unavoidable, as I see it, that people will

     use the transcripts to prepare their cross-examination.

     What I am not very keen on doing is (a) I certainly

     will not allow the transcript to put things to people

     so that one puts them in the position when they say

     they will not answer that question.     If I have put it

     to them that it is an incriminating question, frhon they

     have exercised their privilege not to answer, then I

     will not allow whoever it is to pursue them on that

     point by quoting to them from the transcript because I
     would consider that to be oppressive.

     However, it may well be that in certain other cases

    matters which are not really controversial, or even if

    they are controversial,   which had been dealt with

    sensibly and properly, it might be easier to put to the

    witness something that he said which he could then

    agree with or otherwise as the case may be.     I want to

    be flexible in this and I may have to modify my stance

    as we go along because it is only right for me to tell

    you that I have never ever conducted an Inquest of this

    size or complexity and I have to learn, like most of

    us probably have to, as to how to do it correctly.

    In that sense I have to reserve the right that I too

    may have to modify what I do.

    Have I helped you in any way?"




BADABN
                               - 10 -



Mr. Isaacs:-

     "Certainly, you have sir".

He than went on to say-

     "As I understand it, that was the sort of example you

    were giving just a moment or two ago.     What I think my

    Learned Friend, Mr.    King, was saying was this.     That

    if a witness 'X' says 'X, Y and Z' and Mr King has a

    copy of the transcript which actually says 'A, B and

    C', that Mr.    King should be permitted to say to that

    witness,    'wait a moment, you are saying 'X, Y and Z'

    but eighteen months ago you said 'A, B and C'.       What is

    the position here?    That is something we are used to in

    the normal civil process but not in my submission

    something which is necessarily at home in an inquest

    such as is being conducted."
The Coroner:-

    "My feeling on that point is simply this.    That what

    we are trying to establish is the truth as far as we

    are able.    It will depend entirely upon what the 'A, B

    and C' and 'X, Y and Z' are'".

The Investigating Officer in his report to the D.P.P.

dated 30th March 1990 dealt with a lot of things.       Inter

alia, he made the following points with regard to the

statements of witnesses obtained in a non-CJA form.       Itwas

his view that the recollections and statements collected




BADABN
this way were an efficient method of collecting for a

criminal investigation.    There several reasons for these

and I pick out the ones which I think were relevant

(a) They were not protected by the Criminal Justice Act.

(b) They may have been subject to review and editing by

    other people.

He then goes on to say:-

    "A related issue centres on the evidence taken from

    individuals at the Public Enquiry".     (These transcripts

    are referred to frequently throughout this report.)

    As far as witnesses are concerned, their accounts as

    recorded in transcripts have not been converted into

    statements.     It is also worth noting that the method

    adopted to obtain the evidence at the oral hearings

    through examination in chief, cross examination and

    re-examination was not subject to the rigours of the

    rules of evidence...

    The latter point is particularly relevant in respect of

    those who could be considered culpable.     At no time in

    supplying a recollection did any person indicate that

    he/she had been formally warned with a caution against

    self-incrimination.     Furthermore, in giving evidence at

    the oral hearings no person was put on oath, nor was

    anyone warned about making statements which could




BADABN
     amount to self-incrimination, although it is

     appreciated that certain organisations did receive

     warnings in the form of Salmon letters.    This

     difficulty was possibly further compounded in the

     opinion of the Investigating Officer by legal

     representation at the hearings being afforded solely

     for the South Yorkshire Police and not to individual

     police officers or their representative bodies.    With

     all due respect to Queen's Counsel representing the

     South Yorkshire Police, there was clear potential for
     conflict of interests.

     Whilst there was no suggestion that in the absence of

     the administering of an oath, there was prevarication

     at the oral hearings/    Nevertheless, the admissibility
    of much of the evidence on which this report and

     supporting sections is based is to say the least

    questionable.   Indeed it is the opinion of the Investi­

    gating Officer that if a case is made out to undertake

    a prosecution based on the evidence so far adduced,

    much of it will have to be converted in some way in

    order for it to become admissible.    Without that being

    achieved - for example, an individual under caution

    refusing to answer questions or giving a different

    account - it is unlikely that the prosecution could
    succeed beyond committal."




BADABN
The comments thfffc proceed to raise other difficulties with

regard to publicity and so on.

As you will recollect from our telephone conversations,

the offer so to speak by Mr Isaacs in relation to the

transcripts made me think about the matter further in

perhaps greater detail.     I came to the following

conclusion:-

That although the RTZ case was very interesting and

relevant there was a difference between the documents which

were in the possession of RTZ, the contents of which had

merely kmre been disclosed to the Commission by, say,

'Friends of the Earth' and the transcript of the evidence

6n Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry which had been made:-

    (i)      In public

    (ii)    By Mr Duckenfield or other person involved,

            personally and in public, and
                            be
    (iii)   Possibly could^argued was already in the public

            domain.

    i.e.    it is already freely available and had, in fact,

    been made by the party himself whilst in the RTZ case

the arguments rested on the      fact that NO admissions had

been made by RTZ at all.

It therefore can beargued that the concession made       by Mr

Isaac is not a real      one and furthermore that all of us

probably fell into the trap of considering the Inquest in




BADABN
 an adversarial aspect which, of course, is not the case.

 On the other hand, I think one has to consider the
 following points

 (a) Is it necessary/right that these transcripts should be

     before a Jury bearing in mind that they may well

     contain statements which in the normal course of events

     would be considered incriminatory?   This situation, of

     course, always arises when a Police Officer reads or

     plays a PACE statement.   The person concerned may well

     make incriminating comments and no objection to this is

     taken but for the reasons outlined by the Investigati^u^

     Officer and set out above, these latter statements

     (i.e. PACE statements) have been taken with the

     protection of the appropriate cautions.   If an

     individual having been duly warned exercises his right

    to say something which may, in fact, incriminate him,

    then so-be-it.   The point about the statements made by

    the individuals of LJT's enquiry was that they did not

    receive such warning at any time as far as one can
    tell.

(b) I am also very conscious that despite the distinction

    which I have drawn between the RTZ situation and the

    individuals, it is possible to take the view that
    because of the evidential deficiencies of the

    transcript of LJT's enquiry referred to by the




BADABN
                              -IS'




    Investigating Officer that by obtaining or putting the

    statements to the witnesses in the Coroners Court      on

    oath and with   suitable warning, the replies would    fall

   within the comments quoted above, i.e.

         "might authenticate and support the existing
                                     tL
         information in the hands of -at Commission and afford

         the conclusive proof of a breach       " and that

         they "came as they then would into the public

         domain" (what I have in mind here is that they

         would come into public domain in a different format

         or with a different status).    "the resulting

         publicity in this sensitive political field might

         result in pressure on the Commission to take

         ......... speedier   or severer action".

You will see from the comments which were made at the

Business Meeting that I have been conscious of what I

consider to be a possible risk of self-incrimination if

matters which were admitted at LJT'S hearings were

re-admitted possibly at the Inquests.     Obviously if a

person is prepared to speak after suitable caution, that's

entirely up to him, or her.     What I am concerned about is

that I should get the legal position right with regard to

the use to which the transcripts of LJT's hearing could be

put.




BADABN
I am aware from my conversation with you that you have felt

that probably the transcripts could be used as part of the

cross-examination and you also felt that it was quite

likely that some of the people would, in fact, wish to

adopt them or to allow them to go in.    Alternatively, that

they could be proved by a shorthand-writer or someone who

heard them.    I agree with the latter point that that would

be possible but this still leaves me with the RTZ

difficulty or to use Mr.     Isaac's illustration, the

re-introduction of evidence which at one point is above the

line but which because of the different format, etc.,

becomes below the line.

Perhaps I should give you two more quotes on the various

judgments at page 721, paragraph (H), the Master of the

Rolls says:-

    "once it appears that the witness is at risk then great

    latitude should be given to him in judging for himself

    of the effect of any particular question";

and page 725, paragraph :-

    "The Court should be slow to deprive that party of his

    privilege against self-incrimination which the Common

    Law allow for some three centuries and Section 14 of

    the Civil Evidence Act 1968 accord to him. In the

    absence of bad faith to say that there is no risk of

    proceedings may in all but the plainest cases involve a




BADABN
       Court claiming for itself a degree of prescient

       foresight to which it would not be wise to pretend for

       its forecasts were wrong and if proceedings and

       penalties were to follow, damage may be done by an

       erroneous decision of the Court which it would not be

       easy thereafter to undo or redress".

In a nutshell, I want to put before my Jury all appropriate

evidence which may enable them to reach a true and just

verdict.    At the same time, I feel it is my duty to ensure

that witnesses are not inadvertently prejudiced by an error

of law with regard to the admissibility or otherwise of

these transcripts.     Or to put it another way to balance the

need to have the facts put before the Jury with the

rights of the subject against self-incrimination.        This

matter, of course, basically only applies to those

witnesses who are at risk of self-incrimination.

So in a nutshell:-

(i)      Are the transcripts in the same class as the RTZ

         documents?   If yes, presumably non-use.

(ii)     If there is a distinction between the transcripts and

         the RTZ documents, does the principle of the RTZ

         decision nevertheless apply.

(iii) Would the introduction of the transcripts which are

         in a weak evidential form elevate them into a

         different format and therefore increase the risk of




BADABN
       prosecution - another way of saying, would they be

       self-incriminatory.

(iv)   If the transcripts were introduced and read by some

       person who heard them would there be any point, as

       presumably they would not be evidence of the truth

       against the maker?    Would such introduction then not

       be merely highly prejudicial, and would it not be

       almost impossible to explain the distinction to the

       Jury?
(v)    Is there, in fact, a difference between a properly

       taken PACE statement which can be read out and the

       transcripts?



I would be grateful if I could hear from you with your

views on this as soon as possible.

Your help is greatly appreciated.

These instructions are sent to you direct with the consent

of Rothera, Solicitors.




BADABN
                                                      y   i




FILE NOTE DATED 12.11.90.TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH MR.

LIDSTONE.

I asked him if he could refresh my memory as to what he had

said with regard to the lacuna.   Mr. Lidstone's view is

that the lacuna does not really apply.   The issue is one of

mistake and he drew my attention to D.P.P. re Morgan in

which it was held that if a person makes a mistake as to

fact, it must be assumed that the facts as he saw them were

the true ones in deciding whether or not mens rea applied

so if a person looks at facts, decides that there is no

risk, then the issue from            point of view would be

lacuna but from Mr.Lidston's point of view would be a

question of whether or not if the facts were as he

understood them, he could be guilty of the particular

offence or not.

I then drew his attention to the sentence in Kong Cheuk

Kwan Page 25 in which Lord Justice         says "he was not

there concerned to deal with cases where the conduct

complained of was of a defendent's reaction or lack of

reaction to such a risk created by another person".           I

asked him what he thought that meant, bearing in mind that

there might be a reaction from some of the people involved

to situations which had been presented to them, and I asked

specifically whether that meant that the Lawrence

directions didn't apply.    As far as I was able to

understand it he felt that the other cases one might

contemplate was Dalby, Miller^and perhaps Dyson.          In the




BADAAS
latter case a police officer saw an assaualt but did not

intervene.   It was held that he had failed in his duty

though he was not of course responsible for the injuries

which had been caused to the person who had been assaulted

That seems to me to be rather outside the scope of the

Inquest.

The thing that I am concerned about is what the effect of

that sentence is on say for instance the officers on the

track.




BADAAS
FILE NOTE DATED 9.11.90 MEETING WITH MR. LIDSTONE SHEFFIELD

UNIVERSITY.



Telephone N o .

Mr. Lidstone very kindly spent about an hour with me to

discuss some of the aspects of Lawrence and Coldwells-

1.      He confirmed that           was a first rate text

        book and that it    in itself has been quoted in the

        House of Lords.He felt that it was perfectly proper

        for me to rely on it.

2.     He took the view that Cauldwell encompassed ........

        recklessness.

3.     He appeared to take the view that the definition of

        Cauldwell encompassed the thinking regarding

        gross negligence and that it was therefore

        inappropriate to refer to the abbatement test parti

        cularly in the light of Seymour and Kong Cheuk Kwan.

Hereminded me     that in   assessing the obvious and serious

risk of injury etc., the Lawrence direction, one had to

take into account any explanations as to the state of mind

which may displace the inferences which otherwise would be

dra w n .
I asked him whether he thought that the last election would

include omissions, because it seemed to me on the face of

it that it was drawn in a positive way.       On the whole Mr.

Lidstone thought that an omission could constitute      ....

and he gave several instances of people who had failed to




BADAAO
do certain things and had been held liable.   Indeed he

pointed out that the Herald case had proceeded certainly

from one point of view on an argument of omission i.e.,

that the bow doors had not been shut.   We spent a little

time talking about this.   It appeared to me that Mr.

Lidstone's understanding was that the ship had tended to

move through the harbour with it's bow doors open but that

these had always been shut before it left the breakwater.

That this had been done very many times with no danger and

it was on the basis of this that the judge felt that there

was no obvious and serious risk of injury.    The point is

important because of the possibility that one might have to

consider the implication of the rules through the alleged

failure to shut off the tunnel and divert people after the

outer perimeter gates were open.   The issue is further

complicated in that one had to consider whether the fact

that the immediate necessity to relieve the pressure

outside and therefore reduce the risk of injury could be

set against so to speak the failure to divert the people

who came in.   The issue is obviously very difficult for me

to assess.
Incidentally thoughout the discussions with Mr. Lidstone I

made it quite clear that I wasn't pre-judging any issues

but everything depended upon the evidence so that I was

trying to sort out in my mind what the legal provisions

were in order to try and give a proper direction to the

Jury at the end. This meant that I might well be advancing




BADAAO
propositions or scenarios but I was not taking the view

that these had been established or that they constituted

the correct answer.
I then asked him whether he thought the converse of the

situation could apply and in particular was it possible to

have a situation where it might be held that involuntary

manslaughter had occurred as the result of or caused by

recklessness by person or persons unknown.   He couldn't see

any reasons why not.
We then spent a little while discussing what Lord Justice

Taylor calls the "conspiracy theory".   Mr. Lidstone's view

seemed to be that if this were to be established, i.e., if

one could show that there had been a conserted plan which

was execxuted in a way which could lead to injury (he

wasn't very keen on the idea of unlawful act because he

thought that all the acts, lawful or unlawful would fall

very adequately within the Cauldwell/Lawrence cases).     In

any event he thought it was certainly not an impossible

point of view.
We then discussed the alternative, namely, not a conspiracy

but simply individuals acting on their own but pressing

 forward without regard for others, determined maybe to get

 in even at the risk of causing some injury to people in

 front i.e., no intention or malice, no conspiracy, no

 concerted plan.   In some way this is more difficult because

 one person pressing forward on his own is not likely to

 have had any effect but a hundred all doing it might well




 BADAAO
create a situation which would create an obvious and

serious risk of injury.   On the whole it seemed that

provided all the necessary ingredients were met by every

single individual so to speak involved, then they would all

be principals and whilst one couldn't aggregate their mind

the degrees of negligence, the combined effect of all of

their actions each individually falling within the

necessary definition might satisfy the criteria.

Mr. Lidstone confirmed that if I wanted to discuss the

matter further he would be very pleased to make some more

time available.

I also collected from the Librarian copies of a number of

cases.    I noticed on looking at Kong Chuek Kwan Page 25

that their Lordships emphasise that the passage of L o r d . ...

where he was speaking of obvious and serious risk causing

physical injury created by the defendent, it was not their

concern to deal with cases where the conduct complained of

was of a defendent's reaction or lack of reaction to such a

risk created by another person.     Unfortunately this

doesn't seem to take this case any further forward but it

does raise a very interesting thought namely, how is Lord

 ..........................in his judgement in fact saying

that the Lawrence direction does not apply where the

conduct complained of is re-action or lack of such a

re-action to a risk created by another person in which case

what is the true test in that case.     Quite apart from

anybody else, this may well be very relevant in saying the




 BADAAO
                                5



Smith and Illingworth aspects of the inquiry.     Going back

to the discussion, we talked for a few minutes as to what

"the police" were.      He didn't think that there were a

corporation so in fact he didn't think that the police

could be charged with anything, though individual officers

might be.   This was very interesting because the D.P.P.

seems to have ruled out any action against "the police" and

then specifically goes on to say that he doesn't think

there is any action against individual officers.      If that

is so, who or what was the D.P.P.      thinking about when he

used that term.   Mr.     Lidstone said it was an interesting

thought and that he would let me know if he had any further

ideas on it.   He also thought that I would probably be

assisted by all the lawyers who were present at the inquest

who would want to argue their corner so to speak.




BADAAO
Rotheras                                     R. W . Hall B. A.
                                             C. C. H odson LL.B., ( N o t a r y P u b li c )
                                             P. I. R othera ( D e p u t y C o r o n e r )
                                             A. G. Priest B.A.
                                                                                                                       2 Kayes W a lk
                                                                                                                       Stoney Street
                                                                                                                       T h e Lace M arket
                                                                                                                       Nottingham NG1 1P Z
Solicitors - Com m issioners                 Ja nice M. Stew art M.A.
                                             J. M c M u lle n M.A.                                                     Telep hon e:(0602) 4 1 4 4 1 5
                                             J. D. Allen M.A.                                                          Fax: (0602) 4 1 0 1 0 5
                                             J a n e E. G e o rg e M.A.                                                M D X No. 10,028 Nottm.




                                             Consultants:                                                              Partnership Secretary:
                                             P. J. D. M cC raith M.C., T.D., D .L ( N o t a r y P u b lic )            J. R. Dugard F.C.A.
                                             S. J. R. Pattinson




                                             O u r Ref.                           Y our Ref.                           Date

                                            PIR.SM                                                                     8th November, 1990

    Dear Stefan,

    Further to my telephone conversations with you on th e 7th November, I write
    to confirm that arrangements have been made for Dr Powers to be a v a ila b le to
    a d v is e you by telepho n e, if n e c e s s a r y , between 4 .0 0 p .m . and 6.00 p .m . on
    th e 19th November.

    I have confirmed th e s e arrangements to Dr Powers' c le r k                                                        in w riting,            and for
    information purposes I am enclosing a copy of my le t t e r .

    I am arranging for Richard Hammond to attend the opening of th e Inquest.                I
    accept that t h i s i s purely as a matter of in t e r e s t . O bviously, if he can be of
    any a s sis ta n c e to you on th e d a y , a ll w e ll and good.          If not, then I
    acknowledge that h is attendance w i l l be on a "no fee" b a s is .

    I also confirm that as far as I am concerned it w il l be p erfectly in order for
    you to see k a d v ic e , by telephon e, d ir e c t from Dr Powers, without coming
    through my firm.         No doubt if the need does a r is e for you to seek such
    telephone a d v ic e during th e course of th e Inquest, you w ill le t me know,
    because of course it i s my firm which w ill in th e f i r s t instance r e c e iv e
    Counsel's fee notes!

    Whilst on th e subject, I am enclosing another interim account, because I have
    r eceived another fee note from Counsel's c le rk relating to th e conference in
    July .

    Kind regards

    Yours sin c er e ly




     Dr S L Popper
     146 Melton Road
     West Bridgford
     Nottingham

                               R e g u la te d by th e L a w S o ciety in th e c o n d u c t of investm ent business
R o l h e r a s                         I'-'I- Mill:                     I’.,!:
                                -       i        Pa
                                 );mi< p M Sli-.viiM M.A
                                .1 M c M u lle n M.A                                                  I e k :p lK .'r ie . < c i( , 0 ? ! < l « M .
                                 I D. A lle n M A.                                                    Fr1x (OfiO?) 4 I d t 0 .,
                                Ja n e F. Georcje M.A.                                                MOV No 10,0?b MiiUir.



                                C o n s u l t a n ts :                                                Partneiship S e c r e c y
                                P. J. D. M cC ia i t h M.C., T.D., D.L. ( N o t a r y P u b l i c )   J R. D uq- ird F .<,.fl
                                S- J. FI P a t t in so n




                                f)iji Rt'l                              Yii11rRef                     (> 1<'

                                PIR.SM                                                                8th November, 1990

   Dear Sir,

   Our c lie n t: Dr P opper, H M Coroner for South Y orkshire West D istr ict
   The Hillsborough Football Stadium D isaster

   We refer to the w r i t e r ' s recent telephone conv/ersations with Dr Powers'
   c le r k .   We confirm that Dr P o p p e r's decision is that he does not require the
   attendance of Dr Powers on the opening day of the Inquest.             However, we also
   confirm our c l i e n t ' s request that Dr Powers be a v a ila b le , shouid the need
   a r is e , for a telephone consultation during the course of the late afternoon of
   the 19th November.

   You have kindly agreed that Dr Powers w ill hold him self a v a ila b le for a
   consultation with Dr Popper, from A.00 p.m . So that it should not remain an
   open ended commitment, we would suggest a time span of a v a ila b ility of
   between A.00 p.m . and 6 .0 0 p.m .

   In any even t, Dr Popper has agreed that he w ill telephone Dr Powers, during
   that period, e ith e r to seek a d v ic e or to confirm that he does not require
   a d v ic e .

   The agreed retainer is £ 1 25.00. C learly, if a good deal of lenghty a d v ic e is
   required, then we accept that there would have to be an additional fe e .

   You have also kindly agreed that, as n e c es s a ry , Dr Powers w ill be prepared
   to a d v is e on any points which might a r is e during the course of the Inquest.
   We also anticipate that the Coroner may wish to seek Dr Powers' a d v ic e with
   regard to the drafting of h is summing up to the jury on the relevant legal
   is s u e s .

   Thank you for all your co-operation in t h is matter.

   Yours faithfulW ?




   The Clerk to
   Dr Michael J Powers
   Counsel's Chambers
   1 Paper Buildings

    DX 80   LONDON
                                hy Hip I ;uv P>or io ty in thr- < onrltii. 1 nf
                                                                                                                            2 Kayes W alk
                                                            R. W. Hall B.A.

Rotheras                                                    C. C. Hodson LL.B., ( N o t a r y Pu b lic )
                                                            P. I. Rothera ( D e p u t y C o r o n e r )
                                                            A. G. Priest B.A.
                                                                                                                            Stoney Street
                                                                                                                            The Lace M arket
                                                                                                                            Nottingham NG1 1P Z

S o lic ito rs - C o m m is s io n e rs                     Janice M. Stew art M.A.
                                                                                                                            Telephone: (0602)414415
                                                            j . M c M u lle n M.A.
                                                                                                                            Fax: (0602) 410105
                                                            J. P. Davies M.A.                                               M D X No. 10,028 Nottm.
                                                            J. D. Allen M.A.
                                                            Jane E. G eo rg e M.A.



                                                                                                                            Partnership Secretary:
                                                            Consultants:                                                    J. R. Dugard F.C.A.
                                                             P. J. D. M cCraith M.C., T.D., D.L. ( N o t a r y Pu b lic )
                                                             S. J. R. Pattinson



                                                                                              Your Ref.                     Date
                                                            Our
       Dr S L Popper                               ^ IR /S M                                                                8th November,                         1990
       H M Coroner for South Yorkshire West D istrict
       146 Melton Road                                                                                                                                  P I R / l 9 9 0 / ' 3 > <2-'§'
       West Bridgford
       Nottingham                           INTERIM ACCOUNT
                       V A T RE GISTRATION NO. 1 17 0 7 7 0 88                                                              15437-1-2
                                                                                                                                  iA R G E S   AND                            i/ A T   AM(
                                                                                                                             d is b u r s e m e n t s



                                          To P ro fes sio na l C h a r g e s



                      relating to your further instructions to
                      a d v i s e and a s s i s t in connection with your
                      preparations for the hearing of the Inquest
                      into the deaths at the Hillsborough Football
                      Stadium tragedy; receiving your further s e t
                      of draft instructions to Counsel, submitting
                      th ose instructions to Counsel and making
                      arrangements for your attendance upon Counsel,
                      in conference, with our a rticled c lerk in
                      attendance; th er e a fte r , various telephone
                      attendances upon you, receiving your
                       instructions, lia isin g as appropriate with
                      Counsel's c le r k , and making a ll necessary
                      arrangements for Counsel to be a v a ila b le to
                       a d v i s e you, as n e c e s s a r y , at the commencement
                       and during the course of the Inquest, to
                       include a ll attendances, correspondence and
                       telephone c a l l s , a d v ic e and general care and
                       a ttention, to date

                        Disbursements

                        Counsel's fees
                        Travelling ex p e n ses (Nottingham/London return)




                        ADD VAT § 15%




                              \©|i


                         WITH COMPLIMENTS
FILE NOTE 18.9.90

Telephone conversation with Mr. Michael Powers clerk__


I asked him to tell Mr. Michael Powers that although I was aware that he
was going to be very tied up in a major case until the end of the year
I have in the end decided to recommence the inquests from the 19th
November.   I asked the clerk to explain to Mr. Powers that I   wasn't
sure when we would finish and it might well be that we will be running
in the new year in which case if we needed any help we could always
come back to him.   It might even be that he would be available to
advise whilst this other case was running.   I said that the main purpose
of my call was to try and make sure that Mr. Powers was kept informed
and knew what was going on.
                                                                 fj-

           1 E 1 ? I                                              y_>   ju a b *   /* < > * •



INSTRUCTION TO COUNSEL.


1.   Counsel is of course already aware that the Hillsborough Inquests
     have been resumed on a limited basis and in fact are scheduled
     to end on the 4th of May.      It is the intention of the Coroner
     to adjourn the Inquests to a date to be fixed and to await
     the decision of the D.P.P. which has not yet been made as far
     as the Coroner is aware.

     I am thinking about possible scenarios and the following possibilities
     have occurred to the Coroner


     1.     That the D.P.P. bringsno charges whatsoever.     In that case
            Section 16 has no application and the usual Rules regarding
     ■<:    Inquests would apply.
     2.     That the D.P.P. brings a charge of Manslaughter against someone
            in respect of all the deceased at Hillsborough i.e., 95 separate
            charges.   If that were to happen, it would seem that the
            provisions of Section 16 (l) (a) (i) would apply, and subject
            to being informed by the Clerk of the Magistrates Court under
            Section 17 (l) of the Coroners Act, the Coroner would have to
            adjourn.
            Another possibility is that a charge of Manslaughter would be brought
            but instead of bringing a charge in respect of all 95 deceased
            at Hillsborough the D.P.P. might select a few of the deceased
            as specimens.   It had been the Coroner's view that if this
            were to happen then provided he were notified by the D.P.P.
            tmder Section 16 (l) (b) and requested under that section not
            to proceed with the other Inquests, the Coroner would similarly
           have to adjourn under Section 16 (l) (a) in respect of the pBBsnn
            or persons charged then in respect of the others under Section 16 (l)
            (b).   This apart from anything else seemed to be a commonsense
           understanding of the provisions as it would appear that one of
            the main reasons for having Section 16 (l) (b) is to avoud
            evidence being given at a related Inquest which might complicate
            or possibly prejudice the criminal charge.     This view seems to
           be supported by the views of the authors of
            (i.e., the book of which Counsel is co-author) and where the application
           of this section is illustrated by reference to a terrorist bomb.
           The matter is also discussed in Jervis on Coroners - 10th Edition
           Paragraph 14.27 where the example used is of a person being charged
           with causing another death than that which is the subject of the
            Inauest but nonetheless connected with it.-^                    ^regarding
            the Marchioness Inquests.   He drew my attention to the fact
            that in-this particular case, the Captain had been charged not
           with Manslaughter but some lesser offence (i suppose in motoring
            terms the equivalent of Driving without Due Care and Attention),
  but that the D.P.P. had written requesting an adjoumement
  under Rule 27 (2 ) which 0(3 course is based on Section 16 (l) (b).
  The Coroner's initial re—action was to think that this was not
  possible but upon a closer study of Section 16 (l) (b), it
  would appear that Dr. Knapman may well be right and if lA
  fact required to adjourn in these circumstances where the
  charge relates to circumstances connected with the death of the
  deceased not being an offence within paragraph/a&ove.

  As a consequence, a closer look has been taken of Section 16
   and the Coroner is concerned about the construction of this
   Section as it relates to the Hillsborough situation if in the
   events a charge of Manslaughter were to be preferred against
   someone and if that charge were only to be made in respect
   of specimen deceased.
   The first point that arises is that the drafting of Section 16 (l)
   (a) is difficult to construe.      If onelooks at the feub-paragraph
   (i) that paragraph ends with a semi-colon, but sub-paragraph (ii)
   (iii) terminate with the word 'or'.


   The first question therefore that arises is whether in fact
   s u b -paragraph   (a) and (b) are alternatives so that if a charge
   is made which falls in Section 16 (l) (a)          the D.P.P. cannot
   exercise his rights under Section 16 (l) (b) in respect of those
   people whose Inquests are or are to be heard by the Coroner
   but in respect of whose deaths no Manslaughter charge has been
   brought.
   Counsel's particular attention is drawn to the peculiarity
   of the drafting with regard to the word 'or' and Counsel's opinion
   would be valued on whether (a) the point of the altemativeness
   of the two sub-clauses is a valid one in general and (b) if it is
   whether in fact this would apply to Manslaughter charges, bearing
   in mind what has been said above.
Incidentally if this is so, then one of the first examplesin the book
                       which refers to what sounds like a Reckless Driving
    situation would not be correct?
    If Counsel takes the view that it is possible to apply both
    Section 16 (l) (a) (i) and 16 (l) (b) in connected deaths as
    instanced above.       The next question which has to be addressed
    is whether in fact the provisions of 16 (l) (b) apply in a
    case where the charge brought against a person is in fact
    one of Manslaughter, as the section appears to provide that
    if the D.P.P. informs the Coroner that some person has been
    charged before examining             with an offence alleged to
  be«^ committed in circumstances connected with the death of deceased.
    Whether or not the death of any other person other than the
    deceased is involved then provided the offence is not
                          -   3 -



(break    in tape )




..... commits an offence killing two people say a and b.
If the D.P.P. were to charge b.with the offence of Murder
or Manslaughter he might well wish the Coroner to adjourn
the Inquest in relation not only to b. but also to a.
ifiy understanding had been that he would be able to require this
                                              c~v
under Section 1 16 (l) (a) ia respect of ifefe person who is
charged and under Section 16 (l) (b) in respect of tfae person
who is not charged but whose death is connected.

If however reconstruction postulated above is correct,
then this would not be open to the D.P.P. and the Coroner
would have to proceed with his Inquest in respect of the
deceased a. On the other hand if the D .P.P. were to charge
b. with some lesser offence say Section 20, then presumably
he would be able to request the Coroner to adjourn the Inquest
in respect of a.      The question then however arises whether
he would be able to request the adjoumement in respect of b,
though presumably the words "whether or not involving the death
of a person other than the deceased" is intended to cover this
contingency.

If this is a correct construction of this action, it seems
almost ludicrous in that a lesser offence would require the
Coroner to adjourn whilst a greater offence         as mentioned in
Section 16 (l) (a) would not.

If this is a correct construction then it would seem that I could
not adjourn the Inquests in respect of those cases which have not
been charged under Section 16 (l) (a).

Counsel is asked to advise whether in his view this is the correct
construction ^          -;r ]bin y i    a   w   *»■<■■■■■»"♦? mmut.i m iihm
or whether an alternative view could be taken.

If it is Counsel's opinion that the foregoing is correct, there
are two possible ways of avoiding the anomalous situation ........
a. That the D.P.P. takes outan indi-tement in respect of all
     95   deceased or

b.   That if he wishes to use specimens*- that in addition to
      the Manslaughter charge he also charges some lesser offence
     in order to be able to rely on that for the purpose of
     Section 16 (l) (b).

If that were to be done then that might be a way of overcoming the
difficulty, provided that the two sub-clauses are not to be
construed as alternatives and that the Manslaughter charge
precludes what in effect would be a device in order to achieve
what must have been the initial objectives of the draughtsman
of this section.


Counsel is asked to advise as quickly as possible on the
foregoing and generally in connection with this problem.
 FILE NOTE DATED 6.9.90. TELEPHONE CALL WITH DR. MICHAEL

 POWERS - 071 5837 355   MINIMUM DURATION OF CALL WAS 20

MINUTES STARTING AT ABOUT SAY 10 to 7 AND FINISHING ABOUT
 20 PAST 7.



I rang Dr. Powers at the Chambers, he was still there

working away. I said I wanted to ask him two questions

     1.       What did he think about running the civil

              proceedings before the Inquest and which hearing

              had precedence?   He felt that strictly speaking,

              the Inquests had precedence, but he couldn't

              really see any advantage in insisting upon going

              first, bearing in mind that they have already

              fixed a date but he thought that I would need

              quite a bit of time to prepare, but he would'nt

              be available until the New Year.   I should be

              thankful that they were going first.   I said

              the reason why I was asking was because I

              could see some problems particularly from their

              point of view, and also because evidence would

              be repeated but in a sense there was nothing we
              could do about that.

              The second question was to deal with the

              disclosure of the information to South Yorkshire

              Police by Leslie Sharp.   I asked him whether he

              had any thoughts on this. His view was that if

              this did happen that it did give the appearance




JOAAER
                             -   2   -



         of being unfair that there wasn't very much

         one could do about it.      His basic policy was

         that there should be openess, provided there

         was no breach of confidence.        He felt that it

         might be a good idea if one approached the

         people who had the information and pointed out

         to them that if it was disclosed, then it should

         be disclosed to all.

         I mentioned the possibility of discovery.        He

         thought that it would be difficult for the

         families to obtain discovery if there were no

         legal proceedings.      The position might be

         somewhat different between the parties to the

         civil proceedings.      In principle he thought that

         if one side had the information, it would be

         best if the other had           though of course I

         have no authority to disclose the information
         (Blair Peach).

         He then mentioned that he had gathered from

         Rothera that I thought          /       might well

         want to involve^.    I explained that I had not

         yet finalised my thinking ofvthis, I certainly

         didn't know to what extent if at all though

         I was expecting to be consulting him from time
         to time.

         I then said that one of the thoughts that had

         crossed my mind was that it would be good




JOAAER
                               -   3   -



          to have him at the end of a telephone so

         to speak, so that one could consult as I

         was doing tonight, and in addition, it might

         possibly be a wise thing if he were to come

         up at say crucial points of the Inquests

         e.g., when we re-opened, when I did the summing

         up and perhaps at particularly controversial

         points.   On the whole he thought that was not

         a bad idea.   The difficulty was that one would

         have to think through the legal basis on which

         this was done, because one did not want to get

         into a situation where he might be attacked,

         and I would have no answer, he obviously would

         not be able to defend himself.     He didn't feel

         that it would be right to act in rp.
                                            -t'&aj. counsel
         to the inquiry.   I agreed with this and said

         that this was definitely not what I had in mind.

         What I was thinking of more was that he should

         be available to advise generally on coronal law

         if points were made, not necessarily

         specifically to Hillsborough.     He thought that

         it might be that he could be there as a sort of

         expert on coronal law, though there was a

         technical difficulty in that the law didn't

         recognise experts in law, not English law

         anyway, as Counsel was supposed to be that.

         Another possibility would be that he could




JOAAER
                                 -   4   -




         come up so to speak ir^cognito, and would

         merely be available to consult with me or

         possibly even sit with me on the Bench so

         that we could have purely private conversations.

         Alternatively, he could be there to present an

         opinion on any particular point if he was

         invited to do so.
         I said that obviously this was a matter which

         I had to consider further but I very much

         appreciated his help and assistance.

         I think he suggested that if there were

         informal meetings where lawyers were present

         it would'nt be a bad idea if he was there.            I

         didn't specifically respond to this though I did

         say that I had it in mind to have fairly

         informal discussions with appropriate legal

         representatives in order to sound them out and

         give them an opportunity to indicate what they

         hoped to get from the Inquests and how they

         would like to see them run.         Michael thought

         that in the final analysis, one would have to

         play it by ear.     He also of course said that

         one could'nt necessarily assume that he would

         always be available on a specific day, if he

         was only coming up on the odd occasion.         I said

         I quite understood that and whilst I valued his

         help and advice, I wouldn't want to hold up or




JOAAER
         hinder his other work.

         He said whatever happened, he would^be free

         until the turn of the year because he has got

         a case which will be running for at least ten

         weeks, or till the end of the year anyway.

         He also asked how many days I would be sitting.

         I said five.     He wondered whether that might'nt

         be a bit much both for me and also for the Jury.

         He thought maybe one could perhaps rise early

         on the Friday.




JOAAER
                                                  OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR            MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                        WATERY STREET
                                                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                                        SHEFFIELD
                                                                (West District)
                                                                                        S3 7ET
               S T E F A N L. P O P P E R , LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                                       CORONER


                                             Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721
                                                                                        29th. Augu s t.....   19   90



        SLP/JT.
        TH/ATR.




        Mr. T. Hicks,
        Hillsborough Family Support Group,




         Dear M r . H i c k s ,

         HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER.

         Thank you for your letter of the 24th of August.

         I am somewhat astonished by some of the comments which you make, but I do not
         feel that any useful purpose would be served in responding to these.

         It seems to me that the points which you raise might perhaps be better
         addressed to your legal advisers.

         To avoid misunderstanding, I want to make it quite clear that the content,
         scope, form and procedure relating to the Inquests is a matter tor me.

         Once the D.P.P. has announced his decision, I will consider it and take
         whatever decision is appropriate in relation to the Inquests.



         Yours sincerely,
          ,_____ Z __ ,

             ■'P
          S .L‘
              .Pop p e r,
          H.M.Coroner■




R6606
BABACI
TH/ATR               Hillsborough Family Support Group             24 August 1990



Dr Popper
The South Yorkshire Coroner
Medico Legal Centre
Watery Lane
Sheffield
S3 7ES



Dear Dr Popper
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
On behalf of our Group I write to formally register our reservation upon
the Inquest Procedures past and future. In the light of recent events,
including Lord Justice Hiddens recent Liverpool High Court decisions, we
individually and collectively reserve our rights relating to the Inquest
into the deaths of our loved ones.
We co-operated with the arrangements made for the individual resumed but
"interim" Inquests and that they would be "non-co n t r o v e r s i a l " in nature,
due to the     DPP/possible criminal proceedings._     We were advised to
consider th em as predominantly an information exercise and thus
reluctantly    accepted a situation where selective and/or restricted
information was presented to the Jury and y o u r s e l f - without cross
examination and/or the right of challenge or reply.
Some families expressed openly their res ervations regarding the accuracy
of the "Summary" and the degree to which it reflected the fuller
evidence fairly and accurately.     Under this "agreement" contentious
matters (both individual and collective) were not challenged vigorously,
in the belief they would be attended to elsewhere and/or another time.
 Regretfully, we now find that such contentious matters as the "15-55
 seconds of crushing prior to death" can be presented in another court as
 "matters of fact" and influence matters accordingly.
 We wish to    record our intention, where individual families wish, to
 exercise the right to full and thorough Inquests, with all relevant
 information presented, all witnesses called and all contentious matters
 dealt with in Open Court.
Dr Popper                                           24 August 1990
The South Yorkshire Coroner


We would also seek your assurance that should this route become
necessary individual Inquests would be heard and the matters not merely
dispatched via a series of sample cases.
Your comments would be appreciated.
Yours s^rf^eryf.




Trevor Hicks
For and on behalf of
Hillsborough Family Support Group



Please reply to:-
                                                              90.




-LP/JT.




Mr. R. Sturt,
H.M.Coroner,
for the County of Kent,
36 Gastie Street,
Dover,
KENT. CT16 1PN.

Dear Richard,

I am most grateful for sending me copies of the exchange of
correspondence with CPS dated 16.1.90 and 12.1.90 regarding
Section 16 (l) (b) of the Coroners Act 1988,,

Your help as always, is invaluable.   Thank you.

Yours sincerely,



S. L.Popper,
3iS*t3gKSMS>.
         30     APR    ’ 90    15:21        M0W LL      M0W LL   DOUER                          PAGE.01
                      iv iu w n a i i i u h i i
                                                                   (\.,W          0 j£ *O -€ r a ti
      Sturt
                                 34 and 36 Castle Street
J A Spurrier                                Dover
J.R M*xw*U
P.O. PourxJ
                                       Kent CT101PN
R.OA. Bagley
T.Q, Umftfn
C.J. salmon
M.YV. D<om*d»
                                    T*!*ptiona; (0304) 440250
Consultant
J.5.3. Brigs*
                                     Fax Nat (0304) 340040
                                                                         ATTENTION OF
                                                                                                    ? o ^ r£ .
                                       DX Not 630? nov»f

IN REPLY PLEASE QUOTE;
                                                                         REP:                             1 1-f j
                                                                                        - 2
                                                                                          o
          your        fax     NUMBERS
                                                    0- 1 4 - 2                  “ ?             .

          NUMBER OF PAGES (INCLUDING THIS PAGE) i

          RE:



              MESSAGE:
                                                                          Q X W IQ jM




                                                                                            2
                                                                                        c




                        I? YOU DO NOT RECEIVE ALL THE PAGESr PLEASE TELEPHON,
                                             IMMEDIATELY*

                                                        DOVER (0304) 240250
                                                                                                 corom
                                       ju r y in                                               case
                                                         H is Lordship, in considering                  the issue, or w hether the crim
    Regina v Wolverhampton                                                                              jnal standard w as used, the
    Coroner, Ex parte McCurbin                        that question, had d erived assis­
                                                      tance from section 4(3) o f the                   result w ou ld a lm o st inevitablj
    Before   Lord    D on ald son o f                 C oroners Act 1 8 8 7 , despite its               b e th e sam e.
    Lym ington, M aster o f the R olls,               subsequent m odification Dy sec­                     H is L ordship w a s satisfied
    Lord Justice Stocker and Lord                     tion 5 6 (1 ) o f the Crim inal Law               that where it w as o p e n t o J i »
    Justice W o o lf                                  A ct 1977. T h e rsection m ade                   iurv to c o m e to a v e r d ic t
    (Judgment M arch 12]                              clear the im portance o f the                     unlaw ful Knilng. th e appropriati
                                                      decision o f the jury and the                     direction              given
 W here it was open to a coroner’s                    gravity o f the issues they had to                coroner w as the sim p le on e tha
 jury to find a verdict o f unlawful                  decide.                                            they should DC satisfied bey
 killing and death by m isa d v en ­                                                                     an reasonable u o u p i, or as w j
                                                          H is L o r d s h ip also co n s id ered
 ture, the coroner, in directing                                                                         so m e tim e s said, satisfied so tfia
                                                      th e d is tin c tio n b e tw e e n th e a p ­
 them on the appropriate stan­                                                                           they were sure.
                                                      p ro aches to th e b u rd e n o f p r o o f
 dard o f proof, should indicate                                                                            That provided clear guidanc
                                                      in c iv il a n d c r im in a l p ro ce ed ­
 that they m ust be satified so that                                                                     w hich the jury w ou ld be able ti
                                                      ings. In Hornal v Neuberger
  they were sure that there was an_                                                                      follow , and it w as not necessar
  unlawful killing, but that w here-
                                                      Products L td ( [1 9 5 7 ] 1 Q B 2 47 ,
                                                      2 5 8 ) L o r d Justice D e n n in g h a d         for them to be in v o lv e d wit
        were not so~ satisfied, they
^ K g h t a p p lv a less heavy burden                said th a t a lth o u g h there was                sliding scales w hich were mor
                                                      te c h n ic a lly a d is tin c tio n b e ­         appropriate for a judge than
    o f p ro o f, n a m e ly the_53ian ce oT
                                                       tw een the tw o stan dard s o f                   jury.
    p ro b a b ilitic s , to th e q u e s tio n o f
                                                       p ro o f, ju d g es — a n d , his L o r d ­           I f t h e iu rv also h a d to c o n s id e :
    m isadventure.
                                                       ship w o u ld a d d , a ll trib u n a ls —        t h y q u e s tio n ot d e a th b v m ii»
       Where, further, the coroner                     h ad to be c a u tio u s n o t to create          a d v e n tu r e ,   h a v in g — U is l— a t
    had in part m isdirected the jury,                 p ro b le m s f o r th e m s e lv e s b y         n r o a c h e d u n l a w f u l k i l l i n g _ j 5.
    but not so as to affcct their                      a p p ro a c h in g th e q u e s tio n in an      m d i c a t c 3 7 t h e y m i g h t , if th ^
    verdict, the court w ould not                      a r tific ia l m a n n e r .                      q u e s t i o n w a s still a p p r o p r i a t
    intervene by way o f judicial                                                                        c o n s id e r tnat m a tter bcarin
                                                         F r o m th e p ra c tic a l p o in t o f
    re v ie w .
                                                      v ie w w h e re a serious a lle g a tio n          m in d a leTs h e a v y s ta n d a r d 1
     T he Court o f Appeal so held                    was made., o h v io u s ly a high                  proof,       on ' the        basis' ot        tl;
   dism issing an appeal by Mr                        s ta n d a rd o f p r o o f w as re q u ire d ,    h a la n c e o f p r o b a b ilitie s
   D esm on d M cCurbin, brother o f                  h o w e v e r it was d e fin e d .                  H avin g consid ered the corc
   th e      d ecea sed ,   Clinton                                                                      n e r’s  directions both as t13
   McCurbin, from the dism issal                         H is Lordship also referred to
                                                       dicta o f Lord Scarm an in R v                  standard o f p r o o f and as to whi t
   by the Q u een ’s Bench Hi-
   visional Court {The Times July                    Secretary o f State fo r the H om e considered “ u n la w fu l killing
   18, 1989) o f his application to                  Department , E x parte Khawaja his Lordship was saiified th; t
                                                     ([1984] AC 74, 112 et seq) w ho                   although there m ight h ave bet n
   quash the verdict o f the W olver­                                                                  so m e m isdirection in that tl
 h a m p t o n Coroner’s jury o f                    had stated that although there
                                                     was a technical distinction be­                   coroner had referred irrel
j ^ a t h by m isadventure, and to                                                                     vantly to m anslaughter d u e
   order a new inquest into the                      tween the civil and criminal
                                                     standards, and, particularly in                   recklessness and gross n e t
   death o f C linton McCurbin.                                                                        ligence, it did not h ave ai
                                                     ju d ic ia l re v iew , that m ade it
      Mr Ian M acdonald, QC, for                     undesirable to use the crim inal                  bearing o n the jury’s verdict ai
   Mr McCurbin; Mr Patrick                           standard, from a practical point                  so did not affcct the outcom e.
   M cCahill for the coroner; Mr                     o f view the result w ould be the                     O n an application for judic al
   N ich olas U nderhill for PC                      sam e in the end w hichever                        review the rem edy w as d: s
   H obday and PC T h om as.                         approach was adopted.                          ^ cretionary. If the court were t
                                                         H  is   Lordship        referred    to  and    intervene in the present circui in­
        L O R D JU ST IC E WOOLK
                                                      approved         the    approach     ot   Lord    stances, it w ou ld be m isusi ig
     said that the deceased died from                                                                  judicial      review, w h ich was i e
     asphyxia during a violent strug­ Justice W atkins in K y tVesi.
                                                     T  e n don     Coroner.        E x parte   tirov   quired to put right a situati* >r
     gle when the police officers were
                                                                     >5 467. 477. 478).                 w hich had gon e w rong ' ai id
     attem pting to arrest him .                                                                        where an injustice required
        PC H obday had held him                           In different proceedings there                rem edy.                           f
     around the head and it had been                  were different considerations
                                                                                                           T here h avin g b een a prot er
     suggested that the. police c o n ­ leading to w hat was the appro­                                 verdict by the jury, the d i ­
     stable’s arm had g,one around                    priate     test   it w  as  useful  to  apply,
                                                                                                        vision al Court had rightly
     the deceased’s neck in the course having' regard to the d ecision ­
     o f the struggle.                                m aking b o d y w h o had the task                fused     relief.                '
                                                      o f reaching a c on clu sion o n the                 T  h e  M   aster o f th e  R olls afid
         M rM aicdonald had subm itted                                                                   Lord    Justice   Stocker    agreed.
     that in directing the jury o n the facts.
     question o f unlawful killing the                    W hether in at case o f a serious                Solicitors: B. M . B im berg &
     coroner^ had m isd ir e c te d . them            nature,      su  ch   as   unlawful    killing,,   Co;   G regory R ow cliffe & V il-
     on; the'appropriate stan dard!o f ’              th  e  standard         adopted    was    tech-.   ners     for F o w le r , Langley &
                           ___
            7 ? ^ a m e 1yi? t h e„s ____
                                      crim in a l: ^ nically .the c iv f l,standard, ele-'               W right,     W olverham pton;, R i,S-
i                           cJ1      i
                                     r» a w4'J.iiKv.
                    tfiifeiVil ' • ^ ‘d a r d ! ^ ^ V a t e d - ,b e t i A i i K i f the gravity of;
                                        A                                                                sell J o n e s & Walker; '              ,
         R-r, M.A.(CANTAB)                                   34 & 36 CASTLE STREET
        ' FOB COUNTYOF KENT                                           DOVER
                                                                       KENT
(CANTERBURY & DOVEH DISTRICT)
                                                                    CT1 8 1 PN
   TELEPHONE 0304 2402S0
                                                                       ALSOAT
      FAX CX304 240040                                             W CASTLE STREET
                                                                    CANTEflSUBV
                                                                        KENT
                                                                       CT12QB




            our ref I       RS/KB/CQRONERSHIP            12th January, 1990

            Dear Jeremy,

                                 Herald of Free Enterprise
                        Inquegt Into the Death of              - - -
                 The Inquest into the above Is due to be readjourned
            on Tuesday, and I think it is now appropriate for me to
            make a formal' application to you to enquire whether,
            under Section 16(1)(to) of the Cuxoners ' Act 1988, the
            Director of Public Prosecutions wishes to inform me that
            some person has bean charged before examining Justices
            with an offence alleged to have been committed in
            circumstances connected with the death of the deceased,
            but not being an offence of murder, manslaughter, etc.,
            of the deceased, or otherwise falling within Section
            16(1)(a) of the Ant.
                   Upon receipt of this information, I would intend,
             pursuant to Section 16(1), to adjourn the Inquest until
             after    the   conclusion  of  the    relevant criminal
             proceedings.
                                                Yours sincerely,




                                                R.H.B. Sturt
                                                H.M. Coroner for Kent
                                                (lanfcarhurv & Dover District

             J.J. Naunton, Esq.
             Crown Prosecution Service Headquarters,
             4/12 Queen Annes Gate,
             LONDON, SW1H 9AZ
                                                                  Deputy Director and. Chief Executive
              Director of Public Prosecutions
                            Allan Green Q.C                       D.S.GandyOBE^/
                                                                         1      ''            "



                                                                                  \     s.    *...........
                                      ptreccor of Headquarters Cusewvtk
                                                C. W. P. Newell


                                                                        Crown Prosecution Service
R.H.B. Sturt, M.A- (CANTAB)
H.M. Coroner for                                                        Headquarters
County of Kent
                                                                        4 /1 2 Queen Anries Gate
34 & 36 Castle Street
                                                                        London
Dover                                                                   SW 1H9AZ
Kent CT16 1PN
                                                                        Telephone 01*222-7944
                                                                                  Ext.



    RS/KB/C0RONER3IIIP ourRef:                        GCJN 3775/87                    Date;       16.1.90




Dear Richard
H ^ r n ld o f F r e e En t e r p r i s e
i n q u e s t i n t o t -hg D e a t h o f

 T h a n k you for your letter of the 12 January 19?°-
 r e f e r e n c e to our telephone conversation today X   *?2ion
 the Director of PubliS Prosecutions informs you, under Section
 i s m fbl v C the Coroners Act 1988, that a person has been
 charged before examining justices with manslaughter
 Sr gba»n committed



 proceedings.

iY&urs sincerely
                                                                  UfP
                                                                   (   A   i   M   ^




                                                   m   .


-ffTT.-R TJOTO-   TOT.'FiPHONE   CONVERSATION WITH POWERS - COUNSEL.



On Friday the 27th of April 1990•


I raised with him the point which had sprung to my mind following
my conversation with Dr. Knapman, when he said that he was going to
adjourn his Inquests under Section 16(lb) as the result of the
Caplin of the Bow Belle having been charged with the offence other
than Mans1aughter i.e., driving a ship without keeping a proper look-o
Having looked at the Section following my conversation with him,
it seemed to me that there was the possibility that the Section would
be construed as meaning that where somebody has been charged under
Section 16 (l) with say Manslaughter or indeed where a charge of
Manslaughter is brought against somebody itwab not open to the
D.P.P. to require the coroner to adjourn.                  If that is so, then of
course it would create very considerable problems in the Hillsborough
 situation assuming for a moment that the Manslaughter charge were to
be brought.
 Dr. Powers did not initially see the point but once he grasped
 he had got it, he could see that this was a difficult problem
 and he felt that it might even be necessary to go for a declaration.
 Both he and I agreed that if this was the right construction
 it would be almost ludicrous.            I asked him if he would start thinking
 about it and that I would arrange for instructions to Counsel to be
 sent to him as soon as possible.            He said that if I put any thoughts
 I had on the matter/&Swwould appreciate it.
