HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Maiestv*s Coroner)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

           1st February, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                                  Page
     P.M. HORROCKS Sworn

          By The Coroner                           1
          Cross-Examined  by Mr.        Payne      7
          Cross-Examined  by Mr.        King       8
          Further by The Coroner                   8
          Cross-Examined  by Mr.        Isaacs     8
          Cross-Examined  by Mr.        Russell    9

     N.K. STEWART Sworn

          By The Coroner                           9
          Cross-Examined    by Mr. King           18
          Cross-Examined    by Mrs. McBrien       19
          Cross-Examined    by Mr. Russell        21
          Further by The    Coroner               21

     M. HORROCKS Recalled

          By The Coroner                          23

     J . THOMAS Sworn

          By The Coroner                          24
          Cross-Examined    by Mr. Manning        35
          Cross-Examined    by Mr. King           40
          Cross-Examined    by Mr. Catchpole      40
          Cross-Examined    by Miss Sinclair      43
          Cross-Examined    by Mrs. McBrien       44
          Cross-Examined    by Mr. Payne          46
          Further by The    Coroner               46

     T.M. MOORE Sworn

          By The Coroner                          51
          Cross-Examined    by   M r . Payne      62
          Cross-Examined    by   M r . Isaacs     64
          Cross-Examined    by   M r . Manning    68
          Cross-Examined    by   M r . King       69
          Cross-Examined    by   Mrs . McBrien    69
          Cross-Examined    by   M r . Russell    74
     J. THOMAS Recalled

          Further by The Coroner                  77


PROCEDURAL MATTERS                                80
A

                      FORTY THIRD DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                       FRIDAY. 1st FEBRUARY» 1991

              THE CORONER:    Good morning.     Mr. Horrocks.
B
                         MALCOLM HORROCKS Sworn

                             By THE CORONER:

    Q. You are Malcolm Horrocks? - A. Yes.

    Q. Is it still                            Liverpool? - A. No,


    Q. I think on the 15th of April 1989 you and your brother
       Arthur and Keith and David Golding and a young girl
       called Nicola Stewart were going to the match? - A.
       That's right.                  6

    Q. Of course you lost your brother on that occasion? - A.
       That's right.
D   Q. I would just like to say, before we do anything else,
       that I am conscious of that and I am very sorry that
       happened.   Not just for you but for the whole of your
       family and I speak for everybody here.

         Mr. Horrocks, you decided to come to the match and you
         came by car? - A. By van.

    Q. It was just the family group, just the five of you in the
       van?  It wasn't a big organised party? - A. There were
       just six.

    Q. What time did you leave? - A. It was early in the
       morning.   About half past eight, nine o'clock.

    Q.   We will say nine o'clock.    Your job at the time as as    a
         labourer.   Is that still your job? - A. Yes.

    Q.   So you left at nine.   What time did you get to
         Sheffield? - A. We were at Oughtibridge at about ten to
         eleven/eleven o'clock.

    Q. What time did you get to Leppings Lane? - A. About
       quarter past/twenty past two.    How did you spend the
       time between ten to eleven and twenty to two? - A. We
       went for a pub lunch.

    Q. In Oughtibridge was it? - A. Yes.

    Q. Apart from eating did you have anything to drink? - A. We
       had a couple of drinks.




H
                                                        M. HORROCKS


    Q. More than that or just a couple? - A. Three or four.
    Q. Pints, I take it it? - A. Yes.
    Q. Did you drive to the ground?   Oughtibridge is a bit too
B      far to walk, isn't it? - A. We got a bus.   We parked the
       van up.

       So you came by bus to the ground and you turned up at
       what time? - A. About quarter past/twenty past two.

    Q. When you got there what was it like? - A. Chaotic.
    Q. In your statement you said you got to the ground at about
       quarter to three? - A. When I made the statement, I don't
       know how late it was but I had been in and out of places
       all day.

       You think your twenty past is more accurate now? - A.
       Well, that is right because we got inside the ground at
       quarter to three.

       Just describe to me in your own words what it was like at
D      twenty past, as far as you remember? - A. We got off the
       bus and we turned round the corner and went down to the
       ground.   We could see there were hundreds coming down
       Leppings Lane from the direction of the railway station
       so we had to dash quickly before they got there, sort of
       thing.   When we got there it was just a mass and we
       couldn't move anyway.

    Q. Have you been to the ground before? - A. Regularly.
    Q. So you knew the ground? - A. Yes.
    Q. Did you go to the 1988 match as a matter of interest? -
       A. Yes.

       What time did you arrive in 1988, can you remember? - A.
       Well, we got the train on that occasion and the train was
       a bit late so it was later.We arrived at     the ground at
       more or less the same time.

    Q. Yes.      You know the outer perimeter gates at the Leppings
       Lane...      Like park gates? - A. Yes.

    Q. When you got there were they open or shut, as far as you
       can remember? - A. Open.

    Q. Was the crowd on the inside     of those park gates or on the
       outside as well? -A. It was     in and out.

    Q. So you are saying it was covering the whole of the area?
       - A. Yes.




H
                                                                     3
                                                        M.   HORROCKS


Q. Did you see any Police horses? - A. I only saw one.

Q. Where was that? - A. He was just on the street side of
   the gate.

Q. You saw a column of people coming down the road? - A.
   Yes.

Q. You decided you had better get in ahead of them?    So did
   you manage to get through the park gates relatively
   easily or not - well, the perimeter gates? - A. Well, it
   wasn't easy but we got through them.

Q. Then did     you get into the turnstile area? - A. Yes.

Q. How long  did it take you to get through? - A. About
   twenty or twenty-five minutes.

Q. So that would take you to about quarter to? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you get through a turnstile or not? - A. Yes.

Q. You didn't go through an open gate? - A. No.

Q. Were you searched when you went through the turnstile? -
   A. No.

Q. When you   got through the turnstiles - you were inside the
   ground now - did you      see any gates open? - A. Well, there
   was a gate to the left as we walked towards the toilet.
   That was the other terrace.

Q. Sergeant Griffiths, could you point to that gate in the
   wall?   I think that is the one he means.   Are you
   talking about that? - A. Yes, that's right.

Q. Can you point to Gate C, Sergeant Griffiths?   Did you
   see that gate open at all? - A. No, that was closed.

Q. So having got through you went to the toilet? - A. Well,
   we all waited until we all got together and we went to
   the toilet and bought a programme.

Q.   Whilst you were there did you see that gate open        at   all?
     - A. No.

Q. Then I think you decided to go into the ground? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you go down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q.    Why did you decide to do that? - A. Well, we had been
     before so we knew exactly where we were going to stand.
                                              M.   HORROCKS


You wanted to be behind the goal basically, is that
right? - A. No, not behind the goal.   If you go down to
the bottom and right into the corner where the railing is
for the next section.

You knew exactly where you wanted to be? - A. Yes.

When you got into the tunnel did you look to see what was
going on on the pitch? - A. Well, you can't really see
because of the crowd.

So you didn't see anything.   Was there a crowd in the
tunnel? - A. There was no actual crowd in the tunnel.
There were just people walking in.

So you didn't have any difficulty getting through? - A.
Not through the tunnel.

I forgot to ask you something about the outside.   Whilst
you were outside trying to get in did you hear any tannoy
messages coming over the loud speakers outside?   I am
not talking inside now, while you were in the turnstile
area. - A. All I heard were people shouting and
screaming.   There were no tannoy messages.

Did you see a Land Rover at all? - A. No.

You didn't hear any messages from the back of you over
loud speakers or anything? - A. I seem to recall somebody
was shouting, "Get back.

By voice or by loud speaker? - A. It is hard to tell.
It was a madhouse.

You heard some shout about "Get back"? - A. Yes.

We are back in the tunnel now.   Getting through the
tunnel wasn't too bad? - A. Yes.

Were the six of you all together still at this point? -
A. No, one had gone into the stand.

When you got to the exit of the tunnel, you knew where
you wanted to go so you wanted to turn right, I take it?
- A. Correct.

Did you managed that or not? - A. Well, sort of.   I
mean, there was no way forward, as such, it was pretty
packed.   What you have got to do is edge your way over
and wriggle through.

Did you in fact do that? - A. I did, yes.
                                               M.   HORROCKS


What about the others? - A. I assumed they were behind
me.

So you were wriggling your way to the position that you
wanted to get at and you thought everybody was following
you.   Did they follow you, as far as you know? - A. Up
to a point they did and then it just got too packed and
we lost track.

When you got on to the terrace, just before you started
your wriggle, did you look to see what was going on on
the pitch? - A. Well, I did look up.   I saw the players
were out.   I just strained up.

Were the players getting ready  forkick-off at that
point? - A. Yes, they were kicking round.

Were both teams out?   - A. Yes.

Were they already in their playing gear? - A. Yes.

So when you got on to the terrace the players were
already out? - A. Yes.

You then proceeded to wriggle through.   Tell me what
happened then as far as you were concerned? - A. Well, I
couldn't get down to where we wanted to go.   It was just
too packed.   I turned round.   I couldn t see the
others.   I thought they were all right because they knew
what they were doing and where we were going.   There was
just a steady increase in pressure and you couldn't move
either way then so I couldn't get to where I wanted to
be.   I was stuck where I was.

Did you see the match kick-off at all? - A. Well, I saw
them playing but I never actually saw them kicking off.
It was just catching glimpses.

But you actually saw them play, yes.   When you got
stuck, as you put it, were they already playing? - A.
Yes.

You weren't near Arthur at that point?   At least, you
didn't know where he was? - A. I didn't know where he
was.

You have been to big matches before, obviously, if you
have been to Hillsborough several times.   I take it you
are a keen football supporter? - A. I have been going for
thirty-odd years.
                                              M.   HORROCKS


Tell me this, when you first got on to the terrace and
you were doing your wriggling - not when you got stuck -
how did that compare with other big occasions? - A. Well,
it was...   I have been at Anfield with 60,000 so it was
nothing unusual.




        Q. So at that point
                                             M.   HORROCKS


At that point it was pretty tight, but you weren't that
surprised, with it being a big occasion? - A. No, it
usually settles down after ....

Did you feel any surges?  Do you know what   I mean by a
surge - pushes? - A. Yes, I felt a couple.

A couple did you say? - A. Yes.

Where did those come, as far as you can remember?
After the players were already playing the game or
before? - A. No, it was after the ....

After the players.  How did you yourself get outinthe
end? - A. I dragged a lad out to the rails and there
was a young lad of 17 or 18 standing on top of the
railings, and he said, "Get him up".  I got him up and
he said, "Now you come up", and I said, "No, I'm all
right", because I was still looking for the other, you
know ....

Yes. - A. And I just put my arms out and he dragged me
over, or climbed - I ' m too old to climb, so ....

Would I be right in thinking then that although you
were squashed tight, you could not get any further, you
yourself were not breathless, or were you breathless? -
A. It was pretty tight, I was ....

We know that.  I am just trying to find out how you
.... - A. I was breathless but I have been in that
situation before so I wasn't panicking about it.

I understand.  What I would like you to do for me is to
put a cross on a plan, and show me where you managed to
wriggle to before you could not get any further.
(The Witness marked Exhibit C422) In fact, you almost
made it, didn't you? - A. Almost.

Just one point.  In fact, you saw Arthur being brought
out, didn't you? - A. Yes.

Well, as I nave already said, I am very, very sorry.
It must have been a terrible situation.

            Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Just help from your experience, please.  You started a
sentence by saying, "It usually settles down after
      -       just finish the sentence, would you? - A. After
the kick-off.
                                            M.   HORROCKS


             Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Mr. Horrocks, your experience of it usually settling
down at a place like Anfield, for example, is it right
tnat on the Kop at Anfield the crowd can spread out
right across the terrace, and there is nothing to
prevent them so doing? - A. That is true.  There is
only the crush barriers.

Tnere are no radial fences dividing up the terrace at
Anfield into individual sections, are there? - A. No.

               Further by THE CORONER

I forgot about the 1988 match.  You told us that you
arrived by train but you arrived at the ground about
the same time you would have thought.  Did you go to
the same place in 1988?  I don't mean that spot, but
were you aiming for the same corner in 1988? - A. Yes.

And did you make it that year? - A. Yes.

Just your experience, how crowded was 1988 compared
with 1989 - just your experience? - A. There weren't as
many people in that section.

Was it pretty tight or not in 1988, as far as you
remember? - A. Not really, no.  Behind the goal was
because that is where the young lads go but where we
were we had a fair amount of room.

I see, so what you are saying is within that same pen
there were pockets were it was not too bad, which was
where you were, and other areas where it might have
been a bit tignter? - A. That is true, yes.

One final question, do you remember what time you
entered the pen in 1988? - A. Well, with the
organisation in 1988 we came straight from the station,
and we were shepherded through the turnstiles, so it
was pretty quick.  We were probably in about half-2.

You went through the tunnel, I take it, in 1988? - A.
Yes.

            Cross-Examined by HR. ISAACS

Mr. Horrocks, you told Mr. Payne, in fact as you had
been telling the Coroner, that it usually evens itself
out after the kick-off.  You told Mr. King that the
crowd can spread out at Anfield, there are no radial
fences at Anfield, but of course you were aware that
there were radial fences here at Hillsborough from your
                                            N.    K.   STEWART


previous experience of going to the ground? - A. That
is true, yes.

Thank you very much.

           Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

You say you went to a pub at Oughtibridge? - A. That is
true.

Do you remember whether it was called the Cock Inn? -
A. No, it was the Pheasant, I think.

     THE COROWER:   I have got a feeling we have heard
of the Pheasant in this Inquest.  Mr. Horrocks, thank
you very much indeed.

         NICOLA KAREN STEWART Called (Sworn)
                   By THE CORONER:
Good morning.   Now, you are Nicola Karen Stewart, I
think, is that right? - A. Yes.

Have we still got your right address at
    ? - A. Ho, it has changed.

Tell us what the address is? - A.
            Liverpool 10.

You, in fact, went to this match in 1989 witn Mr.
Horrocks and I think your boyfriend, that is right,
isn't it? - A. Yes.

And various other people? - A. Yes.

You went in the van, is that right?   - A. Yes.

Do you agree with him that you stopped at Oughtibridge?
- A. Yes.

At some pub or other, and had lunch   and a few drinks.
What time do you think you left the   pub? - A. I think
it was about 2 o'clock.

Then you caught a bus, I think? - A. Yes.




          /Q. Did you have to wait
                                            N. K. STEWART

Did you have to wait any length of time for the
bus? - A. No, not really.

Are you a keen footballer as well or was it more to
be with your boyfriend and the football that took you
to Hillsborough on those occasions? - A. I go to the
home games, the Liverpool home games.

So you are quite keen? - A. Yes, but that was my
first away game.

Was it? - A. Yes.

The bus took you along towards Hillsborough.  It did
not drop you outside the stadium, or did it? - A. No.

How long was the bus journey would you say? - A.
About ten minutes.

How long do you reckon it took you to walk down to
the Leppings Lane end? - A. Between five and ten
minutes.

So what time would you say you arrived at Leppings
Lane? - A. About twenty past two.

What was it like as far as you were concerned? - A.
Getting down to the ground was not too bad but when
we arrived outside the crowd was building up and
eventually we were caught up in a crowd outside the
turnstiles.

Did you have an impression of the crowd outside? You
do not know the ground and so these big parklike
gates, the perimeter gates, do you remember those at
all? If you do not remember just say you do not
remember them? - A. No, I don't remember them.

You do remember being caught within a crowd outside
the turnstiles themselves, is that right? - A. Yes.

As I understand it there was quite a bit of jostling,
pushing and movement in the crowd, is that right? -
A. Yes.  I was frightened outside the turnstiles.

You were frightened? - A. Because I have never been
in anything like that before.

Of course, you were with your boyfriend and the
others which helped a bit, did it not? - A. Yes.

Did you see anybody who was distressed in that
area? - A. Yes, there were quite a few people.
A
                                                                     11
                                                       N. K. STEWART

    Q. Quite a few people? - A. Yes.

    Q. Indeed you yourself were a bit bruised and shaken up,
B      so to speak? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you see any children being passed out of the
       crowd at all? - A. No.

    Q. Things went on like that for a little while and
       eventually you did make it to a turnstile, is that
       right? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you, as a matter of fact, see any Police Officers
       outside the turnstile area? - A. I saw two Policemen
       on horseback but only one that was actually within
       the crowd.

    Q. Where was the other one? Can you remember? - A. He
       was as we were approaching the crowd.

    Q. He was further away? - A. Yes.
D
    Q. When you were in this crowd, getting towards the
       turnstiles, did you hear any tannoy messages? - A.
       No.

    Q. Did you by chance see a Police Land Rover at all? -
       A. No.

    Q. Did you hear any loudspeaker messages coming from the
       back at all? - a . N o .

    Q. You did hear these cries and calls, did you not? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. Tell me what you heard? - A. Some of the supporters
       at the front of the turnstiles were pushing back and
       telling the crowd to get back obviously to relieve
       the pressure.

    Q. Did that appear to have any effect did you notice? -
       A. A couple of people were trying to push the
       supporters back.  I would say the majority of them
       succeeded but it was still...

    Q.    They succeeded did you say? - A. Yes, the people
         behind us moved back but it relieved us a bit but not
         much, not to any great extent.

    Q.    Did you hear any calls for gates to be opened or
         anything of that sort? - A. No, I wouldn't say that     I
         did.

    Q. You did not? - A. No, I didn't.



H
A
                                                                 12
                                                      N. K. STEWART


    Q. You are sure about that, are you? - A. Yes, I think
       so.
B
    Q. I just want you to have a look at your statement? -
       A. I can't remember at this moment.

    Q.    I am not trying to catch you out? - A. No, no.

    Q.    It is about there.   Just see whether that refreshes
         your memory.   If it does not then just say, "No, I
         don't think so"? -A. I just can't remember at this
         time.

    Q. It is not that important. - A. I can remember certain
       things b u t ...

    Q.    Eventually I think you did manage to get through   a
         turnstile, that is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

    Q. I do not suppose for a minute that anybody searched
D      you but did you notice whether anybody else was being
       searched? - A. No.

    Q.    You, of course, did not know the ground and soyou
         were going to follow? - A. Follow the others.

    Q. You were going to follow the lads, so to speak.  Am I
       right in thinking that they went off to the toilet? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. You had to wait for them? - A. Yes.

    Q. Do you know what time it was when you got through the
       turnstiles? Have you any idea? - A. I would imagine
       about twenty five to three.

    Q. Whilst you were waiting for them where were you
       standing, can you remember?  If you looked at the
       model would you be able to work it out? - A. Yes.

    Q. Can you walk up to it and just show us where you were
       standing?

         MR. GRIFFITHS:  She is standing behind Gate B, sir,
    just inside the turnstiles, Turnstile 16.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   Have a look at that model and
         tell me which turnstile area you went through? Can
         you see there are two banks there?  Is she pointing
         at A to G?

         MR. GRIFFITHS:  No, sir, she is pointing towards Gate
    B which is obviously at the side of turnstiles A to G.



H
                                                  N. K. STEWART


Q.        THE CORONER:   That is where you were standing.
     What I am trying to find out, Nicola, is where you
     were when you were in the crush of people before you
     got through the turnstile area?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:  Sir, she has indicated she went
through turnstiles A to G.  She cannot remember going
through the gap in the wall but she has indicated there
that she was behind Gate B, the concourse area.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Nicola, it was the first time you
     were there? - A. Yes.

Q. We will get Mr. Horrocks back in a minute and he will
   ma y be able to help us a bit more on that. What you
   were saying is that you remember you went through a
   relatively small bank of turnstiles, is that right? -
   A. Yes, I think so.   I am not quite sure actually.

Q. You do not remember going through a little gap in a
   wall? - A. No.

Q. You do not remember that? - A. No.

       MR. PAYNE:   Perhaps C.258 might help.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Let us put that up.  Does that
     remind you of what it looked like when you came
     because there were people there at that time? - A.
     Not really.




                                /Q. We will give up on that.
                                            N.   K.   STEWART


We will give up, I think, on it.  Let us turn back to
your story.  You were waiting for the boys to come out
of the loo? - A. Yes.

And you were standing somewhere? - A. Yes.

Did you see any big gates open? - A. Yes.

You did? - A. Yes.

Were you standing right next to the gate or was it a
long way away from you? - A. No, from where I was
standing, I was standing opposite the toilets, and I
was just looking round, as you do, and I saw the gate
open and some of the supporters rushed in.  The gate
was then closed again.

What happened then after that, as far as the gate is
concerned? - A. The gate? - Nothing.

Did it open again at all? - A. Not that I can
remember.

You did not see it open twice then? - A. I don't think
so, no, just the once.

Did you go down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

What was that like? - A. We just walked.  There was no
crowd, just people walking towards the terraces.

When you got to the exit of the tunnel you turned
right, is that right? - A. Yes.

What was it like when you turned right? - A. We
started making our way towards the front because at
Anfield it is more flexible at the front, you have got
more room to move, and I remember saying to Keith, my
boyfriend, halfway down that I hoped the crowd didn't
remain like that for all through the game.

Were the players on the pitch already by then, do you
remember? - A. I think they were, yes, at that time.

Playing or just kicking around? - A. I think they had
just come onto the pitch.

There is always a big roar when they come out.        Did
you hear that by chance? - A. Yes.

This was just before kick-off in other words, is that
right? - A. Yes.

Did you yourself see kick-off? - A. No.
                                              N.   K.   STEWART


Did you see them play at all? - A. No.

You did not see any of that? - A. No.

But when you first went down, obviously it sounds as
if it was uncomfortable and you were hoping it would
improve? - A. Yes.

But would it   be fair to say that you were    still
accepting it   at that stage? - A. Yes.

Did it ever get to a point where you said,"This is
unacceptable   as far as I am concerned"? -A. We were
just trying to make our way to the front because we
thought it would be better there.     By the time we got
there that is when I realised that things were not
going to get any better.

We have heard from Mr. Horrocks and he said he thought
you were coming behind him.  Were you, in fact, behind
him, can you remember? - A. Well, I was in between
Keith and David, so I don't know.

You did not see him? - A. No.

Were you with Mr. Horrock's brother, did you see him
at all? - A. Yes.

Was he close? - A. He was to the left-hand side of me.

When did you lose sight of him? - A. We didn't lose
sight of Arthur.  He was actually standing with us.

So you were with him throughout, is that right? - A.
Yes.

You have said that you did not see the match, but in
your statement you mention that Beardsley hit the
cross-bar? - A. Yes, that is what I heard from
hearsay.  It wasn't that I actually saw it myself.

Was it hearsay whilst you were in the crowd, or
hearsay after the event? - A. I heard it from behind,
as I was like sort of at the front of the ---

You were actually in the pen, that is what I am
saying? - A. Yes.

It was not that you heard it when you got home? - A.
No.

So you could hear people say, "Beardsley hit the
cross-bar", something like that? - A. Yes.
                                         N.   K.   STEWART


What happened at that point, can you remember, or just
before Beardsley hit the cross-bar? - A. The crowd
surged forward and that was when I just couldn't
breathe at all.  I could see there were Policemen on
the other side of the fence and I could hear people
shouting to them to open the gate, but nothing
happened for a while, and then they did open the gate
and a few people got out, and then I thought that I
was getting close to the gate and they shut it again.

Do you remember whether, as far as you can remember
the match was still in play at that point? - A. I was
unaware of whether it was or not.

Are you saying that, as far as you recollect, the
gates were shut when Beardsley hit the cross-bar? - A.
The gates were shut at that time, yes.

You are quite sure about that? - A. As far as I am
aware.

The reason why I ask is that there are lots of
photographs and videos, and so on, which tells us
about when the gates were open and I am trying to
piece together the story as you saw it. - A. To me, I
was in the crowd and it seemed to be a long time
before the gates were opened by the Police that were
standing outside on the actual pitch.

How many Policemen were there, do you remember that?
Was it just one, or were there a lot? - A. I can
remember seeing it was just a Policeman dotted here
and there, about two or three Policemen.

So there were several Policemen there? - A. Yes.  They
were just looking into the crowd and wondering what to
do really, you know.

Did you see people on the running track at all at that
time? - A. No, not until they had actually opened the
gates.

Did you see people climb over? - A. Yes, I did.

Did they climb over before the gate was open as far as
you can remember, or after? - A. I would think it
would be after.

After? - A. Yes.

In fact, Arthur was right behind you, was he not? - A.
Yes.
                                            N.   K.   STEWART


And the last thing he said     to you was, "Keep your head
up?" did he not? - A. Yes.

What a shame that he lost his life.  How soon after
that did you yourself get out? - A. I would imagine it
would be about 20 minutes.

I see, quite some time? - A. It seemed a long time       to
me.  I didn't know exactly  how long it was.

     THE CORONER:  Mr. Payne, you are better at these
photographs.  The series of photographs, what is the
exhibit number?

     MR. KING:  277, sir.  I am sorry, I misheard you,
I thought you said the timings.

     THE CORONER: I was not going to show her the
schedule.  I wanted just to show her the photographs,
the ones that you referred to.

     MR. PAYNE:    Which photographs are those, sir?

     THE CORONER: The sequence, 14.59, 15.01.

     MR. KING:    C326 onwards, I think, sir.

     THE CORONER:  What I want you to do is just to
have a look at one or two of these photographs, just
to see if you can help us as to what you saw because
it might just help us a little bit with your timing.
Turn to 326.  It was just chance that somebody
happened to be taking photographs, and it is a picture
of Leppings Lane and you can see there are some people
outside.  Can you remember at any point it looking
like that? - A. Yes.

Tell me, when it looked like that, when was that in
your recollection? Was it before the game had kicked
off or after? - A. After.

The reason why I ask is because, in fact, this picture
was taken at 3 o'clock.  It was taken at 14.59, just
at or before kick-off, but your recollection is that
you can remember seeing scenes like this, but you feel
it was after? - A. After, yes.

Do not worry about the time for a minute, just forget
that.  When you saw the scene like this, were the
gates open or shut? - A. Well, it was open for a
couple of minutes and then it was shut again.  So I
would imagine the scene was much the same as that when
the gates were open.
                                               N.   K.   STEWART


Time is exceedingly difficult.  We try to do it with
kick-off, and so on, but people's memories play tricks
sometimes and, of course, you might be right.  I want
you to just mark a little plan where you were when you
were with Mr. Horrocks, Arthur.  (Witness marks plan)

       MR. BEECHEY:   C423, sir.

       THE CORONER:   So you were quite far forward? - A.
Yes.

             Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

Miss Stewart, when you said that you were going down
towards the front and you made the comment that you
hoped the crowd would not remain like this? - A. Yes.

What was the crowd like at that point? - A. I couldn't
have remained in a crowd like that throughout the
whole game.

What was it about it which was causing you concern? -
A. I was being carried rather than standing on my own
two feet.

This was very soon after coming onto the terrace? - A.
Yes.

I am just trying to pinpoint what time that was.  You
had been waiting for your companions while they were
at the toilet and you were in the concourse, were you
not? - A. Yes.

You told  the learned Coroner that you saw a big gate
open and then close again? - A. Yes.

Did you see a lot of people come through the gate, or
anybody come through that gate? - A. Yes, and they
made their way down the tunnel and by thetime the
boys had   come back from the toilet wewere able to
walk freely down the tunnel.

But the gate had closed again? - A. Yes.

We know there was a time when it opened and shut, so
we can pinpoint it. How long did you wait for the
boys to come back from the toilet after that, do you
think? - A. Just a couple of minutes.

So a couple of minutes later you go onto the terrace
and you have described the way you were being carried
down? - A. Yes.
                                           N.   K.   STEWART




         Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Miss Stewart, are you sure of the time when you
arrived at the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground? -
A. I am not sure, but when we arrived at the ground it
was round about 20-past 2, and it took about 20/25
minutes to actually get inside the turnstile.




                           /Q.   It took you
                                            N.   K.   STEWART


It took you twenty to twenty-five minutes before you got
into the ground? - A. Yes.   We got into the ground about
quarter to three.

Did you find conditions very bad when you first got there
or was this a bit later? - A. When we first joined the
crowd outside the turnstile it wasn't too bad, but I
suppose with people gathering up behind us, that is when
we started to feel the pressure.

I am working it out now that it seems it was the first
opening that you saw at 2.48.   Would that be about the
right time, as far as you are concerned, when you saw
that big gate opening and you said it closed again?
Would that be about right for you? - A. I know once we
were inside the ground it was around quarter to three
because we were anticipating that we might miss the start
of the game.   The boys wanted to go to the toilet and
obviously we wanted to get ourselves sorted out before we
made our way to the terraces.   So it could have been
within minutes, yes.

Yes.   You said you saw some people coming in at that
time.   You didn't see thousands of people coming in,
obviously. - A. About a hundred, I would imagine.

They dispersed.   They went down the tunnel you say, some
went around, did they, to the sides? - A. Yes, they just
dispersed to different places, but the majority of them
made their way straight to the tunnel.

It was very soon after these people went down the tunnel
that you went down the tunnel? - A. We followed.

You didn't see the gate opening again, you said? - A. No.

Did you say the tunnel was quite clear when you went
down? - A. Yes.   There were a few people at the end of
the tunnel, but apart from that it was quite clear.
There were other people, obviously.   You know, one or
two, walking through the tunnel with us at the same time.

When you got to the terrace there were still not a lot of
people coming behind you?   It was just that you saw a
lot of people on the terrace when you got there? - A.
Yes.

Did you say you hadn't been before? - A. No, I had never
been to an away match before.    I often attend Anfield
and it is never like that.    That is why I thought it
would be a lot easier at the front of the crowd.

What about your boyfriend and the other men with you?
Did they think it was more crowded that what they would
                                               N.   K.   STEWART


expect?   Did they make any comments to you? - A. No,
they thought it would be better at the front and the
pressure would ease off as the game commenced.

They weren't very worried, were they, at that time?
They didn't think they had to go back out of the tunnel?
-A. No.

Because it was too bad? - A. No.

It was after you got down to near the front that things
got bad, wasn't it?    Things gradually built up, did
they? - A. As we got to the middle of the crowd the
pressure was building up.    We were making our way to the
front anyway, but we just appeared to be carried rather
than make our own way.

I don't know if I missed the last bit you said, but did
you say how you got out of the pen? - A. No.   I was
pulled from behind by a half-caste gentleman and he said
he was trained in first-aid and he pulled me over bodies
from behind and passed me over the railings to a
Policeman.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   That was very fortunate for you.
Thank you.

            Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

Miss Stewart, can I ask you to clarify one thing?   You
said when you came out of the tunnel you turned right to
make your way down towards the front. - A. Yes.

I thought you told the Coroner that the players came out
at about that time? -A. No. As we were making our way
through the crowd we heard a roar and I assumed that was
when the players came out on to the pitch.

As you were making your way from the tunnel down across
the terrace there was a roar and the players came on to
the pitch? - A. Yes.   I didn't actually see the players
come on to the pitch, but I assumed...

You heard the roar so you   realised that is   what was
happening? - A. Yes.

               Further by THE CORONER:

Just two more things.   The first one is a question which
the jury has asked me to ask.   In fact a very good
question.   When you were standing around waiting for the
lads to come out of the toilet, did you see anybody on
the roof of the turnstiles? - A. I saw a few people
                                               N.   K.   STEWART


climbing over to get out of the crowd.   The ones I saw,
once they were on top of the wall they just sat there.

Did you see anybody jump into the concourse area at all?
- A. No, not that I can recall.

Did you see any Policemen up there? - A. No.

I just want to be quite sure about the openings and
shuttings of the gate.  We are in trouble anyway because
we aren t quite sure which gate you are talking about
because if you were where you say you were then you
couldn't have seen the gate we are thinking of.

        MR. KING: Sir, could make clear whether we are
talking about a gate on the concourse, a perimeter gate
o r ...

     THE CORONER:   I mean the concourse gate.   When you
were standing near the toilets, before you had gone down
the tunnel, you said you saw a gate open and you saw it
shut and a few people come through. - A. Yes.

You have told me as far as you now remember you only saw
it once? - A. Yes.

I think I did show you this sentence? - A. Yes.

I think I have got to put it to you because it is an
important pointer.   I will just show it to you again.
Can you see the ink mark?   That is just a mark to help
you find it. - A. Yes.

I will read it out for you now and then I will just ask
you to tell me...   It doesn't matter what your answers
are so long as you tell me to the best of your ability.
When you gave this statement you said:

     "When we went through the turnstiles we didn't see
     any stewards about.   The boys went to the toilet
     and when they came back we made our way down the
     tunnel.   They had already opened up the gates twice
     by this time to allow the crowds through.  A surge
     of people came through.   I am talking about the
     concertina gates which had been pulled open.
     Hundreds of fans came through and went down the
     tunnel.   Keith went to get a programme and then we
     walked down the tunnel.   By this time the big surge
     of people who had been let in had gone.   Keith saw
     the Policeman closing the gate again afterwards."

What I am interested in is whether you saw them opened
twice.   It isn't clear from that whether you are saying
they opened and shut, opened and shut again, or whether
                                                                  23
A
                                                    N.   K.   STEWART


       you are saying you saw them open twice but you can only
       remember one shutting.   Now can you help me? - A. I
       remember the gate being opened only once and the fans
       came in and it was shut again.
B   Q. You can't at the moment explain why we have got the word
       "twice" in? - A. I think the reason you have got there is
       because maybe of a conversation that Keith and I had.
       He didn't actually go to the toilet.   He was with me.
       He remained with me.   I think that applies to what Keith
       saw himself, but I only saw it open once.

            THE CORONER:    I think that is quite clear now.
       Anything else?    Thank you.   Mr. Horrocks could you
       could just come back for one moment?

                     MALCOLM HORROCKS Recalled

                            By THE CORONER:

    Q. Which turnstiles did you go through? - A. I went through
       the right one.
D     The Officer is going to point to that,     Is it that bank
      you went through? - A. That s right.

      Do you remember where the toilets were you went to? -
      A. Yes, just to the left of the tunnel.

           THE CORONER:     Thank you.

                          (Short adjournment)




F




G




H
                                                 J. THOMAS


             JAMES THOMAS Called (Sworn)
                  By The Coroner:
You are James Thomas, 1 think? - A. That is right.

Is it still                            is it? - A. That is
right.

       in Merseyside? - A. Yes.

And you are an engineer, I think? - A. I am unemployed
at the moment.

But you were? - A. I was an engineer.

You are a football supporter, I assume, as well? - A.
Yes, a Liverpool supporter.

Is it right that on 15th April, 1989, you decided to
come and watch the match at Hillsborough? - A. I did,
yes.

Did you go to the '88 match as well,    the semi-final? -
A. Yes, I did.

But in '89 you came by coach, I think, Amberline, is
that right? - A. That is right.

Do you remember approximately what time you left
Liverpool? - A. Left home.

The coach. - A. I left home at 9 o'clock to catch the
coach at 10.  It was leaving from Bootle which is about
seven miles away from where I live.  I had to get a
train down to there for the coach.

Did it leave at about 10 o'clock or did it leave late?
- A. It left at about 10 o'clock.

Were there a lot of coaches leaving from that location,
as far as you remember? - A. Yes, it's a pick-up point
for coaches.

It is a pick-up point? - A. Yes.

You got on the coach.  I take it you had a ticket? - A.
I did have a ticket, yes.

We have been told by innumerable people, but you aren't
allowed to take alcohol on the coaches, are you? - A.
No, you are not.

Do you remember, was the coach searched at Liverpool at
all? - A. I don't remember the coach being searched
there, no.
                                                  J.   THOMAS


You don't remember? - A. No.

Do you remember whether it was searched on its way into
Sheffield at all, or stopped? - A. No, the coach wasn't
searched.

It wasn't? - A. It wasn't stopped, no.

Pardon? - A. It wasn't stopped or searched.

I think you went with various people.     Was one of them
called Giles Hutt? - A. Yes.

And Philip Bickley? - A. That is right.

Were those your special friends on the coach with you?
- A. Yes.  They were just people who I had decided to
go with on that day.

I am not saying these were your only friends, but they
were your friends on that coach? - A. Yes, I
understand.

You got to Sheffield, I think, at about half-past-1, is
that right? - A. We arrived there about half-past-1.

You wanted to find a pub but you were unlucky, they
were all closed? - A. Yes, they were all closed.    Giles
knew a pub where he had  been in '88 and it was good, so
we went to look for that one but it was shut.

As you were walking around you met several other
friends, in fact, Jason Kenworthy, I think? - A. Yes.

And also Christopher Devonside? - A. That is right.

Did you all link   up and   stay together then as a group
or did you split   again?   - A. No, we stuck together.

After a while --- were you with them when, there is a
supermarket called Gateway? - A. That is right.

You were with them? - A. No, I was with Giles and
Philip when we went in the supermarket, and we met       then
soon after, when we came out.

But you met them in that location? - A. There was a
green bank where we sat and drank and they walked up
Leppings Lane, from the ground.   I think they had
parked somewhere and we met them.

Anyway, after a while you made your way down to the
ground and you got there at about what time? - A. We
arrived at the ground I would say between 20-past and
                                              J.   THOMAS


half-past-2.  I could not really be sure because I did
not have a watch.  It is only rough.

There was a large crowd there by then was there, or
not? - A. There was a large crowd but you could move
freely about.

You had been before so you knew that you had to get
through some perimeter gates, like park gates? - A.
That is right.

Were you able to get through those gates without too
much difficulty? - A. There was a large crowd there.
There was queues but they weren't really organised by
anyone special, but there was queues.

Are you saying that the queues when you went through
were there right up to the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Such as they were? - A. Yes.

Who were you with at that point? - A. I was with Philip
Bickley, Giles Hutt, Christopher Devonside, some more
lads who had arrived by minibus, we just saw them on
the off chance driving along Leppings Lane, and they
waved to us and said "Wait there".  There was a gang of
about 13 or 14 of us.

Quite a big crowd, in fact? - A.   Yes.

Group, I think we had better say, not crowd.  It is so
difficult with these words, isn't it? Do I gather from
that that you had no particular difficulty getting
through the turnstiles? - A. It was more time not
difficulty, because of the amount of people actually
outside the ground trying to get in.  It wasn't really
difficult.

Did you see anybody who was distressed or upset or
anything like that? - A. No, people were happy, they
were looking forward to getting into the match and
there was no trouble or anything.  The mood was happy,
looking forward to the game.

Did you see any Police horses at all? - A. I saw one
Police horse but of actual Police there were very few.

When you got to the turnstiles were you searched at all
on the outside? - A. No.

When you got through were you searched? - A. I think I
was searched by an Officer when I came through, yes.
                                               J.   THOMAS


You were.  Having got through the turnstile, did you
see any big^concertina type gates opening at any point?
- A. I didn't see any gates opening, no.

At this point you were still with this group, including
Christopher, Simon Bell, yes? - A. The situation was
people went in different queues but we all met up
inside the concourse.  People decided to go in
different queues.

Yes, I understand, but once you had all managed to get
through you regrouped, so to speak, within the
concourse area? - A. We all met up inside, yes.

I am just running through some of the names - I don't
need to know all 13 - were you with Christopher and
Simon Bell, and Gary Church? - A. Yes, I was.

Within the concourse area, and also your other friends,
Philip Bickley and Giles Hutt? - A. Yes.

So the six of you, plus a few others? - A. Plus the
others, yes.

Jason, I think, probably was among that number? - A. We
were all there.

You didn't have a watch so obviously it is very
difficult for you to say, but can you give an estimate
of h o w l o n g it took you, not to get through the
turnstiles but to regroup on the inside, from the time
that you arrived in Leppings Lane to the time that you
were ready to make your next move into the tunnel, so
to speak? - A. When we got through the turnstiles, only
a matter of minutes.       We were in various queues but
about the same stage in each queue. I was one of the
first to get through and we all waited for everyone
else.     I would say it was about five minutes.

Tell me, having got through you then went down the
tunnel, is that right? - A. Yes, I did.

Is that because you knew that was the way, or what was
the reason why you chose the tunnel? - A. The reason
that we went down the tunnel was because in '88 we had
been told to go on the side, but we knew the tunnel,
when you went through the tunnel it would be behind the
goal so we could have a better view.

You liked being behind the goal? - A. Yes.

The tunnel, was it clear or packed, or what was it? -
A. The tunnel was fairly clear at this time.
                                                 J.   THOMAS


There were obviously people going down? - A. There were
people going down but you could move freely in the
tunnel.

When you got out of the tunnel at the other end, just
coming out, okay, no further? - A. Yes.

Did you chance to look at the pitch at that point?      - A.
Stop to look at the pitch?

Yes, at that point did you look to   see what was going
on? - A. Yes, I did.

And what was going on? - A. There was nothing on the
pitch at that moment.

Nothing at all, it was empty?  I mean there were no
players on it? - A. I think there might have been --
there was like a soccer skills competition with
schoolboys, I think.

Something, but .... - A. No players on the pitch.

Which side did you go into, the right or the left-hand
side? - A. I went in the right-hand side.

The right-hand side, and where were you actually
intending to go? You presumably had some idea where
you wanted to end up? - A. Yes.

Where did you want to end up? - A. We wanted to go, not
exactly right down at the goal but just to the right of
the goal.

Were you able to make your way to that position or not?
- A. At that time we made our way to a position about
half-way down the terrace.

At that time what was the terrace like? - A. I remember
saying to a few of my friends, "It is packed in here,
isn't it?".

It's what? - A. "It's fairly packed in here, there's a
lot of people", because there was movement of going
back and forth up and down the terrace, and there was a
lot of people in there.  It was unusual because you
expect to stand still at a match really.

Are you saying that it is unusual to have sways then? -
A. Not to have sways, but it was unusual even more so
than any other ground I had been to.

What you are saying is the swaying or the surging was
stronger? - A. Stronger, yes.
                                              J.   THOMAS


I just want to try and pin the time when this happened.
Do you remember a beach ball being knocked about at
all? - A. I don't, no.

You don't remember.  Can you recollect the players
being announced?  Do you know what I mean by that, over
the tannoy? - A. Yes, I do.  I do remember that.

Do you remember the players coming onto the pitch at
all, pre-match? - A. I remember the players coming onto
the pitch, yes.

Let's just deal with the announcement, okay? Where
were you?  Was this the position half-way down the
terrace where you were at that point? - A. Yes.

At that point you were experiencing these surges, is
that right? - A. Yes, that's right.

You found it a bit tighter than you would have liked? -
A. It was very uncomfortable.

Did you move from that position at all? - A. You could
not move from that position.  There was that many
people around you that if you tried to get out it would
just be useless because you kept getting forced further
down.

Was the pressure coming from behind? - A. From behind,
yes.




             /Q What happened
                                                        J. THOMAS

 Q. What happened after that? Just take me through what
    happened after that? - A. The surges gradually got
    worse. You were moved further and further down the
    terrace and when you went to get back up again you
    found it steadily harder to get back up to your
    original position until it came to a stop. The
    surges stopped and you could not move forward or back
    any more.

Q. Initially you were able to recover your position,
   though with some difficulty, and a point came when
   you could not recover your position at all. You had
   got forward and that was it, is that right? - A. Yes,
   that is right.

Q. Do you know when that was? I do not mean the time,
   because you did not have a watch, unless you happened
   to look? - A. When the crowd actually stopped moving?

Q. Yes? - A. Only roughly.     I could not really say a
   time.

Q. Did you know what was going on, on the pitch? Can
   you remember by any chance? - A. When the crowd
   stopped I was not really concerned about what was
   going on.  I just wanted to stay on my feet.

Q. Were you at that time near a crush barrier? - A. I
   was.

Q. You were. Who was still with you at this point out
   of all these friends? - A. I was on my own then.

Q. What about Gary Church? Was he anywhere near you? -
   A. He was to the right of me but I didn't see him.
   The only time I did see him was when he shouted to me
   for help. That is when I did see him.

Q. When was that? - A. That was just after the crowd had
   stopped moving and he was getting crushed.

Q. Just after the crowd stopped moving? - A. That is
   right.

Q. Were you at that point already against the crush
   barrier? - A. I was.

Q.    Was it in front of you    or had you managed to get it
     so that it was behind you? - A.  It was in front of
     me.

Q.   It was just after that that the   crowd had solidified,
     so to speak? - A. Yes.
                                                  J. THOMAS

Gary shouted "Help"? - A. That is right.

You could not because you yourself...? - A. I was in
no position to help him because I was in exactly the
same state as he was in.

Do you know whether he then got swept away, so to
speak, or not? Did you see that or do you not
know? - A. He shouted for help for a while and I lost
sight of him.  I saw him again and he just got swept
under the crowd.

You saw him again? - A. I saw him again.

What was happening to him then? - A. He wasn't moving
and he just got swept under.

The barrier which you were against, did that stay
intact or did it break at any point? - A. At the time
I thought it had broke but the only explanation I can
give as to why maybe it didn't was that I might have
gone over it because I was in a bad state at this
time.  I didn't know what was really happening to me.
I might have gone over it but it seemed that it had
given way because a lot of people sort of went
forward in a further rush which would indicate that a
lot of people went forward at the same time.   That is
what I thought it w a s .

We will sort out in a minute whether you are right or
not as to whether it went but describe to me what
happened to you and the others around you which made
you think that the barrier had given way? - A. We
were getting crushed and all of a sudden a rush of
people went forward even more, which seemed
impossible at the time.  I would say about 50 people
went forward in an instant.

Were these people who went forward ahead of you, do
you think, or were they behind you? - A. They were
probably on the same level.

They just suddenly seemed to move forward? - A. Yes,
that is right.

You have already told me   you were more interested in
what was going on around   you than what was going on
on the pitch and I quite   understand that? - A. I
didn't care what went on   on the pitch.

Are you able in   any way to relate it to what was
going on at the   pitch when that happened? Were the
players playing   or not? Have you any idea? - A. I
couldn't really   relate it.
                                                  J. THOMAS


You thought at the time that the barrier had gone? -
A. Yes.

Now you are a little bit more doubtful about it in
that you think you may have gone over the top of
it? - A. Yes.

What has happened to make you have that   doubt? - A.
After seeing the video evidence of when   the barrier
actually broke.  I had already left the   terrace,
which I couldn't possibly be there when   the barrier
broke.

Let us just establish when you left the terrace.
When was that? - A. It was four minutes past three.
I have seen it on the video.

You are sure about that? - A. Yes, I am. There was a
clock on the video and I have seen myself being
carried out at that time.

You are absolutely certain you recognise yourself on
the video being carried out? - A. Yes.

Across the fence or which way did you get out? - A.
Through the gate.

Through a gate? - A. Through Gate 3.

Does that mean you were conscious or unconscious at
that time? - A. I was conscious but only just about.

A bit dazed? - A. Yes.  In other words, there was no
way I could get myself out on my own.  I needed help
there.

You say you have seen the video and you noticed the
time at 15.04, four minutes past three? - A. Yes,
that is right.

After you got out obviously it was a great relief for
you? - A. Yes.

Did you see anything of the match after that? - A.
No.

What makes you say that the video evidence indicates
that the barrier broke after that? - A. I think they
explained to me that the barrier had broke after I
got out of the ground.

Somebody told you that? - A. Someone told me.
                                                    J. THOMAS

It was what   somebody else had told  you? -A.       You
could not see it on the video but the Police         told me
it broke after I got out.

That is why the doubt has come into your mind? - A.
Yes.

Forget about what the Police told you or what the
video might or might not show with regard to the
breaking of    the barrier? - A. Yes.

The video is very good if you can see yourself on it,
fair enough, but I want you to describe to me again
what you felt and why at the time you felt that the
barrier had broken? Forget all about whether you are
right or wrong? - A. Because I went forward very
suddenly.  That was the main thing.

You were obviously against it, were you not? - A.
Yes.

Did you feel it move at all so far as you now
remember? - A. I did feel it under strain, the
barrier under strain.

It is really the forward movement which made you
think it had given way? - A. A sharp forward
movement.

If you are right that the barrier went and you were
definitely out at four minutes past then it must have
happened before four minutes past? That is what you
are saying? - A. If I was right.

Show us on the little plan where you were?   -   A.Yes.

  MR. BEECHEYs   This is C.424.

     THE CORONER:   I just want toshow you what   you
said in your statement about the barrier.   It is more
or less what you told me.  It is the bottom of the
first page and the first line on the next page.   I
want to just explain to you - hang on, that is the
wrong statement.  Just give it back. This is the
right one.  It is James Thomas? - A. Yes, that is
right.

Can you see in the middle? - A. Yes.

That is basically what you are saying to me now? - A.
Yes.

What you are saying is that around three o'clock you
felt the pressure of the barrier give way at that
                                                  J. THOMAS

time? - A. That is what I felt had happened at the
time.

I just want to go back to 1988 for one moment,
okay? - A. Yes.

Which pen were you in then in 1988? - A. I was in Pen
4 in 1988.

How did you get to that pen? - A. I came through the
turnstiles, on to the concourse, and we were going to
go up the tunnel but there was a steward actually at
the front of the tunnel saying, "No, it is full up
here, lads, go that way" and pointed us right and we
were into Pen 4.  This would be around two o'clock.

At two o'clock you say? - A. Yes, we got there early
that year.

Can you just put up the plan of the ground? Who were
you with that year? - A. I was with the lads who came
in the minibus, Anthony Owen, Ian.

Were you with Christopher? - A. I wasn't, no.

You were much earlier that year? - A. We were a lot
earlier.

Just walk up to the plan and just direct us as to
where you were going? Pick out the turnstile for
him. - A. This is the turnstile we came through. We
came to there and the steward was here and he
directed us down this way.  So we came in at this
pen.

Is that the pen you were in where you arenow
pointing? - A. This is the pen we were in. We     were
around this area by Gate 2.

That was in 1988? - A. That is right.

You said it was Pen 4 . Can you just show him where
Pen 4, in fact, is so that we make sure? - A. It is
this one.

It is that one? - A. I thought the numbers were going
the other way.

It is the one you pointed to? - A. Yes.

Just point again where you were? - A. This one.

That is actually Pen 2? - A. Yes.
                                                      J. THOMAS

     MR. KING:  Sir,I think he said he thought the
numbers went the other way and so Pen 3, Pen 4, would make
sense.

Q.         THE CORONER:   Yes, it is quite all right.  I
     just was not quite sure how it got to Pen 4 and I
     wanted to be clear in my mind.   You are saying you
     arrived about two o'clock? - A. Yes.

Q. A steward was directing people round to the side
   including yourself at that time? - A. Yes.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Q. I just want to try and clarify, if we can, what you
   expected as normal and how, if at all, this differed
   from that. You said that as you got in you were able
   to make your way to a position about halfway down? -
   A. That is right.

Q. Did you have more than normal difficulty in making
   your way to that position halfway down? - A. Yes, it
   was difficult.




                           /Q. Because there were a lot of.
                                             J.   THOMAS


Because there were a lot of people there? - A. That is
right.

But that was not something that surprised you, bearing
in mind that this was a semi-final? - A. It surprised°
me because I expected a lot of people but not that
many.

Of course, you were making your way to what is the
most popular spot on the terrace, in other words just
to the side of the goal? - A. That is right.

It is fair to say of that spot, because it is the
choice spot, that people try to get that sort of
position if they can? - A. Yes, they do.

What you said about it then to your friend was, "It's
fairly packed in here"? - A. That is what I said.

When you reached your position halfway down the
terrace, how many of your original group of 13 or so
were able to be roughly together halfway down the
terrace? — A. We sort of had to break off in groups
them, maybe one or two, or even on your own, because
the surges were that strong we got split up straight
away.

So how many were sort of in your immediate vicinity? —
A. After a few minutes I was on my own.

But when you first got to the position halfway down? -
A. We were fairly all together.

We are all trying to picture that, you see, in our
mind's eye, that you come onto the terrace, that it is
fairly packed with people, but you are able with your
friends to gain a position about halfway down to the
right of the goal, pretty good spot and you are all
together in a group? - A. Yes, that is right.

If nothing else had happened would you have been happy
to have stood in that position and watched the match
from there? — A. The amount of people that were in
there, I wasn't really happy at all as soon as I got
in the ground.

Did you think, therefore, of coming off that terrace
and seeing if you could find another spot? - A. It
wasn't really a case of coming off.  You didn't have
no choice because there were that many people there at
that time.
                                                J.   THOMAS


That cannot be right, can it? You had just made your
way halfway down a terrace that was fairly packed? -
A. I know what happened.

It would have been perfectly reasonable at that time
to have turned to your friends and said, "This is too
packed for me, I'm going to go and find another spot"?
- A. I did, but, as I said, there was n othing you
could do.  There were that many people there.

You say you either did that, or you said it to one of
your friends? - A. I said that.

At what stage relative to gaining that position
halfway down did you say that to them? - A. This was
not long after we had arrived at that position halfway
down the terrace.

So not long after? - A. No.

What did your friends say to you in answer to the
suggestion from you that you thought you should move?
- A. I didn't say we should move.  I said, "It's
packed".

You just said,   It's packed".  So did you at any time
then think of actually moving somewhere else? — A.
Well, we thought of it, but we knew there was nothing
we could do.   The situation was on the terrace, as you
know, it goes downhill and going uphill is much harder
with the crowd sway, and it is harder to move up than
down.

I appreciate we are looking back and we are asking you
now about moments only, but we have got to try, as far
as we can, to look at it and press it and see just
what the result is.  You got with some difficulty
halfway down and assembled a group without the
movement at this stage of 13 of you in an area, or
that sort of number, a group? - A. It was about that,
yes.

That very soon after that you felt uncomfortable7 - A
I did.

That you said to your friend,   "It's fairly packed"’ -
A. Yes.

But you did not say to anybody, "Do you think we
should look for another spot?" - A. I didn't say that
because I knew it was useless to look for another
spot.  You could not move.
                                             J.   THOMAS


How long after you had got there are you saying that
you could not move? - A. It wasn't long after, not
long at all.  You couldn't move away from that spot
really.  You were moving involuntarily with the crowd
force.

Then there were some surges? - A. That is it, yes.

At first those surges were the surges that you perhaps
well recognise, in other words the ones that go down
and then come back up again? - A. I didn't recognise
these.  These were a lot stronger than normal because
of the amount of people in that area.

Did they go down and come back up again? - A. Yes.

Then there was a surge which took you down but did not
come back up again? - A. Yes, that is right.

Did you look to see whether there might be some more
room at the front? - A. It was even worse at the
front.

You could see that, could you? - A. I could see that.

When these surges take place which you say on this
particular occasion was worse than you normally
expect, is that something which is all part of the
crowd and certainly before kick-off when you are
standing on the terrace behind the goal? - A. To be
part of that, which was too many people, was not part
of it, no.

I think, Mr. Thomas, if you can try and concentrate on
what I am asking you in ordinary terms, I am just
saying to you that those surges up and down the steps
are ordinarily part of the scene? - A. We are not
talking in ordinary terms in this situation.  We are
talking about a terrace which was too packed.

     THE CORONER:  Mr. Thomas, that may well be so.
What Mr. Manning is trying to find out is this.  We
know that a lot of people died on that terrace, so you
do not have to persuade us about that.  What we are
trying to find out is the position at various points
in time on that terrace.  If you had gone in at half­
past 1, for instance, or say half-past 12, you might
well have said it was empty then, I do not know? - A.
I definitely would have done.

What Mr. Manning is trying to find out is at points in
time.  Nobody is saying anything about what it
developed into, but he is trying to find out from you
how it was and how various things compare at different
                                               J.   THOMAS


points in time with your experience. - A. Yes.  To be
honest, I can't understand what he means by time.  Do
you mean the time that I got in the ground until I got
out?  Is that what you are trying to say?

     MR. MANNING:  I am going to try and ask it in an
entirely different way.    Forget this particular day
and this particular match.    If you were standing in a
crowded terrace just to the right of the goal, it is
right, is it not, that p r e—match the crowd sways up
and down, surges up and down and regains its place? -
A. It does, yes, but not like this was doing.

I did ask you, Mr. Thomas, to try and forget this
particular game on this particular day. - A. Yes, it
does surge at a normal match.

Yes, that is right, and then it settles down, usually
just after kick-off and finds its level? - A. Yes,
that is right.

Then it may very well have another surge or sway if
there is an exciting incident? - A. Maybe a goal, or
something like that.

A goal or somebody hitting the cross-bar? - A. Yes.

Or a near escape? - A. That is right.

What you are saying about the crowd on the day we are
talking about now at Hillsborough is that those things
happened but there were more people when they were
happening than you normally experience? - A. Yes, and
this caused the surges to be stronger because there
were more people.

When you said that you would normally expect to stand
still in that crowd, that cannot be right, can it, Mr.
Thomas? - A. I think it can.

I have just taken you through it, and I will do it
again.  Forget Hillsborough, forget that day.  A
normal match, standing in a choice spot, just to the
right of the goal, the surging up and down pre-match,
you cannot stand still, can you, when that is
happening around you? - A. Yes, but it does, as you
said, settle down, and it didn't settle down.

So what you mean is that you expect the crowd after
the swaying and the surging to settle down and on this
particular day it did not settle down so that you
could settle down and watch the match? - A. Yes.
                                               J.   THOMAS



            Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

Mr. Thomas, I may have misunderstood your evidence.  I
thought you were telling us that the surges were never
normal surges? - A. No, they weren't normal surges,
no.

That is what I thought you said.  I   am a bit puzzled
by your answer.  What was abnormal about the surges at
the game in 1989, any of the surges? - A. They were
very strong, they were pushing people over.    You could
not stay with people.  I went with people to the match
and you could not stay together.  At an ordinary match
you can.

So at no time, is this your evidence, did you regard
what was happening to you on the terrace as part of
the normal experience which you expected? - A. It was
very abnormal.

Can I just go back to 1988.   I am interested in the
steward who directed you.   Did you tell us that he
actually told you why he was directing you? - A. The
steward directed me to the other pen because this one
was full at 2 o'clock.

Did he tell you that? - A. He said,   "Not this way,
lads, it's full" and pointed us in another direction.

That is what I thought you said.  I wanted to check I
got it right.  Just to clarify matters, you were not
in 1988 with Mr. Devonside and his son, were you? - A.
No, I wasn't.

         Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

Mr. Thomas, I assume you would agree with me that when
you go to football matches just generally you do not
remember everything that happens on the field, you do
not remember every incident, do you? - A. No, it would
be impossible to do so.

Just as in everyday life as you go through things you
do not remember every incident.  You see certain bits
of incidents, you remember certain angles, is that
right? - A. Yes.

Just the same as when you go into a football ground,
unless there is something exceptionally noticeable you
do not take much notice of what the turnstiles are,
which turnstile you have gone through, because you are
just going in because you want togo and see the
match, is that fair? - A. Yes.
                                              J.   THOMAS


In 1988 did you go to the match with Anthony Owen? -
A. I did, yes.

Did he go round to this other pen as well with you?
Were you together the whole time? - A. Yes, we were
together.

You see, Anthony Owen gave evidence yesterday.  He was
asked a number of questions about the 1988 match and
he was asked specifically whether he went into the
same pen in 1989 as he had done in 1988, and he said
"Yes", and the pen that he went into in 1989 was Pen
3, that is the pen you went into this year, you see.
Do you follow that? - A. I follow that.

I am not criticising you because we have just agreed
there can be mistaken recollections and as a lawyer
you often see people who very honestly think about
things and forget to say about it, but it is obvious
from that, you would agree, that one or other of you
is mistaken about it? - A. That is right.

If I also told you, just to be fully fair, that there
is a considerable body of evidence from all the
stewards at the club - and there may be further
evidence - that stewards never directed people on that
concourse, whether semi-finals or any other match,
would it be fair to say that you could possibly be
mistaken? - A. No, the steward definitely told me to
go right.

Will you just bear me out.   As far as you are
concerned, your honest recollection is that you, in
1988, went round to Pens 1 and 2? - A. That is right.

That differs from Anthony Owen's recollection.  He has
told us he went into Pen 3 in 1988.  Your other
recollection is that this was at 2 o'clock, so it was
a full hour before kick-off that you were directed
round? - A. Yes.

Importantly, you think that someone, a person,
directed you round, and that is your recollection? -
A. Yes.

All I am asking you is whether it is possible that you
could be mistaken about the identity of that person,
i.e. you think now, two years on, that he was a
steward and, in fact, he may not have been, he may
have been a Police Officer, he may have been someone
else? — A. No.  He had a yellow top on which said
"Steward".
                                             J.   THOMAS


You are positive it said "Steward"? - A. I am positive
it did.

Perhaps I could also tell you as a fact from the
stewards that the stewards' jackets at Sheffield
Wednesday do not have "Steward" written on them.  They
have an advertising, Umbro.  Take it from me that that
is a fact.  Is it still possible that you are
mistaken? - A. Why would he direct us?

I am not challenging for a moment that you were
directed.  All I am saying is is it possible you are
mistaken?  Having heard all those factors, is it
possible that you are mistaken? - A. I am not mistaken
in the fact that he told us where to go.  I thought he
was official.




                      /Q.   You thought he
                                                J.    THOMAS


You thought he was an official, but you could be
mistaken?   You accept you could be mistaken?    You
accept he was not an official steward? - A. I could be
but it looked like it to me, that he was official.

           Cross-Examined by MISS SINCLAIR:

You said earlier when you had reached your first position
on the terrace, your half way position, at that point you
remember the teams being announced and you saw both teams
coming on to the pitch? - A. I don't remember the
Nottingham team coming on the pitch.

It was after you reached that point the surges began? -
A. No, that was before that point.

Before that point the surges began, but it was after then
the major surge happened? - A. That's right.

That is the one you referred to as the surge which went
down but didn't go back up? - A. That's the one, yes.

After that the crowd had stopped moving? - A. The crowd
had stopped moving, yes.

Then after that you, and you said about fifty other
people on the same level as you, suddenly moved forward?
-A. Yes.

That is when you thought, correctly as it turned out,
that the barrier against which you were standing had
broken? - A. I thought that is what had happened, yes.

You said, quite understandably, that you were concerned
about your personal safety at that time? - A. I was very
concerned, yes.

Of course you were and obviously you weren't looking at
what was going on on the pitch? - A. Yes.

Again you said you were dazed.   Do you remember after
you fell forward with these other people on your level,
where you ended up?   Perhaps I can help.   How far were
you from the perimeter fence at that point? - A. I wasn't
very far at ail - a metre maybe.

A metre from the perimeter fence? - A. I was in line with
gate 3, I remember that.

You said you were carried out? - A. Yes.

Were you carried out through that gate? - A. I was.
                                                J.   THOMAS



I know it is difficult, but can you give us some indicate
of how long it was after you fell forward that you were
carried out through the gate?   Did you feel, for
example, you had to wait a long time? - A. It seemed a
long time, yes.

It seemed a long time to you.   Did you see other people
being carried out before you through the gate? - A. Yes.
There were people in front of me who were in line with
the gate, but they were in front of me so they got out
before me.

Yes, I see.   Any idea how many people there were?   Were
there, for example, five or ten, or less? - A. Maybe
five.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Mr. Thomas, are you a regular football supporter? - A. I
am.

Where do you normally like to stand when you go to
matches? -A. I like to stand behind the goal because it
is the best view.

You told us that you arrived early in 1988 at two
o'clock? - A. Yes.

Would you have expected to find the position you would
wish to stand in?   Would you expect to go into the
centre area that year? - A. It was difficult to judge
because I had never been to that ground before 1988 so I
didn't know what to expect.

Were you surprised when you were told the centre was full
at two o'clock? - A. Yes, we were disappointed.

You have told us that a steward directed you around.
Did you notice dividing fences on the terrace?   When you
went round to pen 2 did you see radial fences? - A. I
did.

What was pen 2 like when you got into it at two o'clock
in 1988?   Was it quite quiet there? - A. It was quite
quiet.

You could clearly see the radial fence.   Could you see a
gate at the back? - A. I don't remember a gate, no.

You didn't see a gate? - A. Well, I don't remember it.
There might have been one there but I don't remember
seeing it.
                                                                  45

                                                          J.   THOMAS


    Q. Did you leave that pen at all to go, for instance, to the
       toilet and pass the tunnel or did you remain in the
       terraces the whole of the game.

    Q. You were quite happy to stay in that position? - A. I
B      was.

    Q. Did you look at the centre pens to see if they were full
       at two o'clock? - A. I didn t really   look because the
       position we were in was OK to see the game.     We were
       bothered at first when we saw it had been closed but
       afterwards it was OK in the other pen.

    Q. Yes, you just accepted where you had been directed? - A.
       We knew there was nothing we could do so we just accepted
       it.

    Q. When you came in through the turnstiles that year, did
       you notice the tunnel ahead of you? - A. I did, yes.

    Q. Where exactly was it that the steward spoke to you? - A.
       He was in front of the tunnel.
D   Q. Right in front of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

    Q. Was the tunnel open so you could see    down the tunnel? -
       A. Yes, the tunnel was open.

    Q. So you could see the pitch? - A. Yes.

    Q. So he just prevented you from going down? - A. Yes.

    Q. I was just wondering when you had made your statement.
       A number of people have been referred to their statements
       and I am just wondering when you made yours? - A. Which
       statement is this?

    Q. It is an interesting point this one.   I am just
       wondering how soon after the incident...

             THE CORONER:  It is a fair question he has asked
       because he has made more than one statement.    One of
       them was made on the 6th of July, 1989.    I will tell you
       because he won't remember the dates.    Another one was
       made on the 4th of May, 1989 and another one was made on
       the 8th of August, 1989.   That one isn't terribly
       relevant, the one of the 8th of August.    The first one
       was the 4th of May and the second one is the 6th of July,
       1989.

            MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you:

    Q. With the statements, you didn't write them out yourself?
       - A. No.




H
                                                                46

                                                        J.   THOMAS



    }. The Police Officer writes what you are telling him? - A.
       Yes.
                    Cross-Examined by MR. P A Y N E :

®   Q. At the beginning of your evidence you mentioned the
       Safeway supermarket? - A. The Gateway supermarket.

    Q. What has that got to do with it?   What did you do there?
       - A. We bought a couple of cans of beer and we drank
       them.

    Q. Who is we? - A. Myself and a few friends.

    Q. Is that the thirteen friends or so who went to the ground
       with you? - A. No, that was three of us at first who came
       by Amberline Coach.

    Q. Where were you when you drank the cans of beer? - A. We
       were sitting on a grassy bank, not far from the
       supermarket.

D                     Further by THE CORONER:

    Q. I have got two or three questions from the jury and I am
       now hopelessly confused with regard to the times, so I am
       going to try and take you over it once more in my mind.
       The other thing is, Sergeant Killoch, do you think we
       could see whether we can find the video on which he
       identifies himself at four minutes past?   We will show
       you a few videos and see whether you can find yourself.

           SERGEANT KILLOCH:  Perhaps I could speak to the
      witness afterwards and try and identify it.

            THE CORONER:   We will see if we can find it because
       I would like to know whether that timing is a correct
       recollection:

    Q. What I want to ask you is this:  in one of these things,
       the one I showed you was the May one, but in the 2nd of
       July statement you describe Beardsley hitting the
       crossbar? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you see that? - A. I didn't see it, but there was a
       big roar in the crowd and I learned that was when he hit
       the crossbar afterwards, which is before I made the
       s tatement.

    Q. So you never saw that incident? - A. I didn't, no.

    Q. When you say that something happened at the time when
       Beardsley hit the crossbar it is a reconstruction?    You
       are trying to put the various bits together in the light




H
                                                 J.   THOMAS


of what happened to you plus what you were told? - A.
Yes.

I am not trying to catch you.   I am just trying to make
sure we have got this right because... - A. There was a
big roar as if something happened, but I didn't really
care what happened.

Where were you when that happened?   Were you still on
the terrace? - A. I was on the terrace.

You were definitely on the terrace.   Was that the point
in time when the barrier appeared to give way?   Forget
about what you have seen on videos or was it earlier that
you saw these fifty people tumble forward? - A. I would
say it was earlier.

I will show you this statement as well.   Just have a
look and then we will let you have a quick look at the
video if we can.   If you start reading from here and if
you read about the first five lines on the next page. -
A. Yes, that's right.

Is that right? -A. Yes,   that is before.   That is what I
said.

Does what you have just read fit in with your
recollection of what happened? - A. Yes.

I will read it. What it says in this statement - it is
quite important because we are trying to pinpoint this
barrier to a certain extent:

     "Soon after, after three to four minutes into the
     game Beardsley hit the ball over the bar and there
     was a further surge forward which was a lot worst
     than the first.    As a result I was forced away
     towards the field to a point where my chest was
     pinned against the crush barrier nearest to the
     pitch.    I was having difficulty breathing.    I was
     positioned as you look at the pitch on the left-hand
     third of the barrier and it was at this time I saw
     Gary Church standing up against the centre section
     of the same barrier about five or six feet away from
     me.    Gary was shouting for help saying he couldn't
     breathe, but I could not help.    At about four
     minutes past three I felt the crush barrier bending.
     I could not move and ray feet were not on the ground.
     Within seconds I felt the barrier give way and I was
     immediately carried forward to a point approximately
     three feet away from the perimeter fence gate.     I
     looked around and I could not see the barrier."
                                                J.   THOMAS


- A. This time I gave as three or four minutes past is
clearly a guess.   I wasn't really concerned about the
time.   On this statement that was a guess of the time.




         Q. That was a guess.   If we exclude
                                                              49

                                                      J.   THOMAS


0. That was a guess.  If we exclude the timings for
   minute, would the account of what happened be right in
   the sense that that is what happened, that there was a
   big surge which carried you against the crush barrier,
   which was associated with a roar, whatever that roar
   might nave been? - A. Yes.

Q.   And it was at that point you were against one bit of
     the barrier, Gary was to one side of you. - A. lie was
     further along, yes.

Q.   He spoke to you and said, "Help", you couldn't, then
     you felt the barrier give way and you finished up three
     feet from the perimeter fence, with everybody tumbling
     forward.   Forget the timing now, whatever time it might
     have been.   Is that the sequence? - A. That is right.

Q. Subsequently you associated that big roar with
   Beardsley hitting the crossbar, but that is a bit of
   reconstruction? - A. Yes.

0. I am not criticising you for that because you were
   doing your best? - A. Yes.

0. But at the time you did not see the shot.  Did you hear
   anybody in the pen say, "Beardsley has just hit the
   crossbar", or anything like that because that might
   help? - A. I don't really remember anyone saying that.
   The main thing, what made me say that in the statement,
   was afterwards, watching things on television and it
   was a big roar, it was the loudest cheer of the day
   really.

0.   I see.   Anything else you want   to ask out of that?

          HR. ISAACS:   Sir, I just wondered whether in
     those circumstances it would be right for you to ask
     this witness how much more of his evidence is
     reconstruction based on what he has been told, or what
     he has seen after the event?  It is important because
     it seems that a good deal of what he said may well not
     be his impressions of the day but, as is so easy, as we
     all know, for something to happen, to be recollections
     after the event of something that he has seen since the
     event.

0-        THE CORONER:   You heard that but I will ask you
     directly.  You have told us quite a lot about getting
     in and how you felt, and how packed it was at various
     positions.  What we are trying to find out is that what
     you felt, thought and said at the time, or was it
     something which you later on thought about? - A. No,
     that was definitely at the time.  There was no way I
                                                          J.   THOMAS


could reconstruct that in my mind.  That will stick
with me forever.  I saw that, I was there.

     THE CORONER:   I don't think, Mr. Isaacs,             we can
really take it very much further than that.

     MR. ISAACS:   Of course not, sir.  One can believe
you are saying what you believe is right and of course
not be accurate, just like the steward's shirt.

     THE CORONER:   That is right.  well, he has told
us what his recollection is.  Whether he is right or
not ....

     MR. KING:   Sir, we have not lost track, have we,
that we were going to have a look at nis video?

     THE CORONER:   No, I haven't         lost track,     because
that might be the answer.

     MR. KING:   Absolutely, because he did say the
video showed him out of the pen at 4 - m i n u t e s - p a s t .

     THE CORONER:   Yes, exactly.           If that is correct
then we know that roar ....

     MR. KING:   We know when Beardsley hit the
crossbar, absolutely, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I was just trying to reconstruct it
as far as one could on his evidence.  It is difficult.
I find it difficult anyway.

Mr. Thomas, you have done very well and what I would
like you to do now is one of my Officers will try and
find the video where you can see yourself, and then we
might just have quick glance at it ourselves.  There
are a few questions from the Jury, Mr. Thomas, which I
forgot.  1988 first of all. - A. Yes.

When you were directed by whoever it was, steward or
whatever, to go round the sides at the tunnel, can you
remember whether the gates of the tunnel were shut or
were they open? - A. They were definitely open.

Definitely open, and can you remember in 1988, when you
were walking towards the ground, whether you were
stopped at a distance from the ground and had tickets
and things like that checked? - A. We were stopped by a
bridge.  We came from the opposite way than we did in
'89.  we came from that way, if you see what I mean,
towards the ground, and we were stopped on a bridge by
the Police, asked had we got tickets, and we had to
show them and then we were directed to the turnstiles.
                                                                                    51

                                                                          J.    THOMAS


    Q« You, of       course,   had    a ticket?   - A. I    did.

    0.
B         Did you see anybody
          - A. I didn't.
                                      who did not have a ticket in 1989?


          And back to the tunnel again, in '88, did anybody
          object to being told they could not go down there, as
          far as you remember? - A. No, no one objected because
          there was nothing we could do about it.

               MR. KING:   I thought I had already asked this
          question, but Mr. Devonside is anxious that I ask it
          again:

          Mr. Devonside was not with you at 2 o'clock in 1988,
          was he? - A. He wasn't with me.

               THE CORONER:           He has   told us that.

               MR.    KING:    Yes,    indeed,    sir.
D              THE CORONER:          That is it now,       apart from looking
    Q.
          at this video.

                     TERENCE MATTHEW MOORE Called           (Sworn)

                                 By THE CORONER

    Q< You are Terence Matthew Moore,              is that right?         - A. Yes.

    Q.                                         in Liverpool?       - A.    I have
          changed my address.

    o ,   Tell us w h at the address      is? -     A.
                      Liverpool.

          You went    to the 1989     football match,       I believe,         is that
          right? -    A. Yes.

    Q. In fact, you went with about six friends which included
       Paul Hewitson, didn't it, and unfortunately Paul lost
       his life, that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

    Q. Have you       brought any members of Paul's family with you
       today? -       A. His father and his sister, his uncle,
       cousin.

    Q. Did you go to the match in 1988? - A. No.

    Q. I think you travelled to the match in a van, a mini van
       I suppose? - A. Yes.




H
                                                                         52

                                                             T.   M.   MOORE


    Q. It was not an organised party it was an arrangement
       amongst friends? - A. Yes, it was just arranged at
B      home.

    Q. What time did you leave Liverpool?        - A.    I think about 9
       or 10 - I think about 10 o'clock.

    Q. What time did you get     to Sheffield?    - A. Around 2.

    0. As late as that do you think?   In your statement you
       said rather earlier? - A. I am honestly not sure.   I
       haven't really talked about it.   I haven't been in
       touch with anybody.  I wanted to just forget about it.

    0. I am sorry, we are reminding you.       - A.     I know,   yes,   I
       unders t a n d .

    Q. You all had tickets, I think, is that right?- A. Not
       when we left home but by the time we got to the ground
       we had tickets.
D   0. I see.  Did you get the tickets near the ground or at a
       distance? - A. Most of them on the motorway because
       there were traffic jams for a couple of hours.

    0. You were able to walk from car to car? - A. Yes,
       everybody was just chatting and getting out of the cars
       and things.

    Q. How many of you had set off from Liverpool?  There were
       six of you, I think.  How many of you had set off
       without tickets on that occasion? - A. At least three.
       It might have been more.  At least three people.

    0. Whatever time you got to Sheffield, what time did you
       get to the entrance at Leppings Lane? - A. Around half-
       2, q u a r t e r - t o - 3 .

    Q. Did you go into a pub before you got into Sheffield, or
       I think you had brought food and drink with you, hadn't
       you? - A. We had some sandwiches and we bought soft
       drinks and some beer as well.

    Q. In Sheffield?    - A. No, no.     When we left Liverpool.

    Q. So what time did you get to the ground? - A. I think
       around two-ish.  It was quite late.  There was a lot of
       people.

    Q. Two o'clock,    did you say? - A. Yes,     it was quite late.

    Q. How crowded was it then?     - A. Outside,       very crowded.

    Q. Pardon?   - A. Outside,   very,   very crowded.


H
                                                              53

                                                    T. M. MOORE


    Q. I ought to tell you that in your statement you said:
       "We got to tne entrance of the ground at about 2.30",
m      and would that ring a bell with you? - A. Yes, it was
       probably around that time, yes.

    Q. You don't really know what time it was, do you? - A.
       No.  I don't really take much notice of it, only
       knowing it wasn't nearly 3 o'clock.

    Q. I understand, and I think you didn't actually go
       straight in, you sat on the bridge or something, is
       that right? - A. Yes, we sat on the bridge outside the
       Leppings Lane end.

    Q. When you got there were the perimeter gates open or
       shut?  Do you know what I mean by the perimeter gates?
       - A. Yes, the outer gates.  All the gates and all the
       turnstiles were closed.

    Q. Let's talk about the gates first of all.   You say the
Q      gates were closed, right? - A. Yes.

    Q. What makes you say the turnstiles were closed, because
       after all this was a match day, wasn't it? - A. Yes,
       well it was very unusual to be sitting outside a ground
       from like half-2 to 3 o'clock and the crowds not moving
       at all.  We were on the bridge, we were actually on the
       wall which is six foot higher than everyone else, and
       we were watching what was happening.

    Q. Before you say that the turnstiles were closed, let's
       just establish whether you could see them.  Could you
       actually see the turnstiles? - A. Some of them, yes.

    Q. And describe to me what you saw so that you could tell
       that they were closed? - A. To my knowledge, as I can
       remember, there was turnstiles, it looked like outside
       the perimeter gates.  There is two sets of gates or
       three sets, whatever, blue railings, that is all I can
       remember seeing, and there was people, even outside
       people were getting crushed against the wall.  Some
       people were getting dragged up onto the top of the
       fence and there was horses in the crowd, and the horses
       were going mad and people were ....

    Q. Yes, but you have not answered my question, which is
       what could you see of the turnstiles which made you say
       the turnstiles were closed.  There is a difference
       between people going through slowly and the turnstile
       being closed.  What made you say that the turnstiles
       were closed? - A. Because as far as I could see there
       was no movement at any of the entrances.  There was
       just no movement whatsoever.



H
                                            T. M. MOORE


You are not saying that the gates -- the turnstiles
have all got doors which shut.  Did you see those shut?
- A. I am not really sure whether I could actually see
an actual door or a gate.  My memory just says I was
looking at where people, you would normally make an
entrance, and there was just no movement whatsoever.

The perimeter gates were shut as well as far as you
remember? - A. Yes, definitely./




                 /Q. There were horses
                                                T. M. MOORE

There were horses   on the outside of the perimeter
gates. Were they    in a line or were they moving about
or what were they   doing? - A. They were just right in
the middle of the   crowd which had gathered outside.

Did you see them form a line at any point in time? -
A. No.

You did not? - A. No, it wouldn't have been possible.
There were too many people in the street.

So you did not see a line being formed? - A. No.

Did you see a Land Rover arrive at any point?   You
were on the bridge, were you not? - A. Yes.

What time did you leave the bridge because I ought to
check that with you? - A. It would have been, I would
think, five to three.

Did you see a Land Rover arrive? - A. No.

Did you hear any public address announcements of any
sort whatsoever? - A. Only a Policeman.  I was
sitting on top of the bridge and so I was, like, five
or six feet higher than everybody else and a
Policeman came with a flat had with a band round and
he looked very important with the coat and everything
on. He had the radio and his head was there, right
in front of me and me and my friend were sitting on
the bridge and we said, "Can't you delay the game?"
or whatever and he just ignored us because he was on
his radio.  He said something like, "Could you open
the west gates or the Leppings Lane west end gates?",
something.

Something like that? - A. Something like that because
he repeated it again.

So you did not hear any public address announcements?
- A . No tannoys, no, nothing.

The only thing you heard was this one Policeman on
his radio, speaking into the radio, and you only
heard him because you were next to him? - A. Yes.

Nothing coming across the crowds towards you? - A.
No.

How did you in the end get into the ground? - A. When
the Policeman said over the radio to open the gates
we seen some kind of movement towards the outer
gates, the park gates as you call them, to open them
and this was like within a minute or so of him saying
                                                T. M. MOORE

this. We were on top of the bridge with the road in
front of us here, the canal or the river behind us,
and we climbed down sort of the back which got us
nearer to the gate.  If we had got off in the road we
would have been, like, twenty yards further away and
so we dropped down the back by the railings. We made
our way along the railings, sort of, until we were
through the first area.

What happened then? - A. Then the gates had opened
fully by then and, sort of, looking round to make
sure my friend was with me and we just met up with
another friend. We went, "Yes, come with us. Let us
get in quick" because I knew there was at least 3,000
to 5,000 people outside.  There was a hell of a lot
of people outside and it was getting on for three
o'clock and I could see like a big surge of people.
I could see them running through the gates looking
for which way to go in. That is when I seen the
tunnel gate. That is where everybody headed for.

So you think it was quite a big crowd, a substantial
crowd... - A . A huge crowd.

Went through that gate and are you saying that they
went through it at quite a fast pace? - A. Yes.

I am not saying that they ran pell mell? - A. No.

But they were going through? - A. A lot were getting
pushed through anyway because, as I say, the Police
horses were still there and people were screaming to
get them out. They were causing the people to panic
and there was a lot of kids. They were there
probably because they were there first and all that.
There was a lot of children, sort of thing, because I
could see one or two getting pulled up. People were
climbing on the railing and pulling kids up to try
and get them up.  I know it was dangerous getting
them up but there was no way out because everybody
had headed for this little corner of the ground and
it just seemed to be Liverpool fans.

You then got into the ground? - A. Yes.

Through this gate? - A. Yes.

Then did you head towards the tunnel, is that
right? - A. Yes.

Were you able to make your own way or were you being
carried or pushed? - A. We can make our own way.
                                                T. M. MOORE

You were still with Paul and your other friends? - A.
Yes. No, one other one.

Pardon? - A. Just one other friend and Paul.

Paul, you and   another friend? - A.Yes.

When you got into the tunnel, when you looked, did
you look through the tunnel before you entered it? -
A. Yes, you could see just like the top.

Could you see   what was going on onthe pitch? - A.
You could see   the other supporters and part of the
fence.

You could not see the players or anything? - A. No.

So you went through the tunnel. Were you able to
make your own way through the tunnel? - A. Yes, I got
halfway through the tunnel and one of my friends I
had just met outside, not the one who travelled,
said, "I'll have to go back and find, see if so-and-
so is here" and I said, "Here you are, here is my
ticket.  You might as well take the ticket" because I
was in.  I turned back to give him my ticket and I
went back into the tunnel.

Are you saying that your friend turned round and
walked out of the tunnel? - A. Another friend, yes.
He just went back out of the ground.

You gave him your ticket so that he could give it to
somebody else outside so that he could get in if they
did not have one? - A. Yes.

He was able to get out of the tunnel without any
difficulty at that point? - A. Yes.

You were about halfway down the tunnel at this stage?
- A. Yes.

You carried on. You had no reason to go back? - A.
Yes, I carried on.

When you got to the exit of the tunnel, just before
you got out on to the terracing, which side did you
go right or left? - A. To the right.

Was the game in play by then? - A. No.

Were the players on the pitch? - A. I don't think so,
                                               T. M. MOORE

You do not think so. What happened? - A. As we got
to the end of the tunnel you had a choice to go right
or left and we chose to go right which we normally do
anyway. We got like five or ten foot on to the
terrace and it felt very packed and so we said that
we will head right to the side. We didn't know there
was another railing here and then we got halfway down
the terrace and it was getting very cramped.  I said,
"I think we had better go back" because we had seen
there was no way out.  By that time the crowd were
coming in and we were going further down the terrace
and we couldn't even turn back. At that stage I had
been spun round until my back was to the goal and I
couldn't get myself back round to face the goal and I
asked Paul to help me turn round.  Him and another
guy who I didn't know they spun me round because I
was getting a bit anxious then because we couldn't -
we had no choice.

At that point when you were then spun round and you
were looking at the goal again what was happening on
the pitch? - A. I really don't know.

You do not know.  Did you see the players come out at
all? - A. After I had been turned round, and I don't
normally panic in any situation.   I just knew there
was something wrong and I was saying to Paul and this
guy, "Just get me up so that I can see where we can
go or where is the best way to get out because we
knew it was on top and we knew it was, like,
something wrong because it was getting too tight.
They couldn't pick me u p . They were trying to get me
up and I didn't even get my feet off the floor and
then it locked.  The crowd, just all of a sudden,
locked at that moment when they were trying to pick
me up.

Did Paul ask you to get him out at any point? - A.
Later on, yes.

Were you at this point already against the barrier or
had you not reached it? - A. I would assume that we
were maybe four foot from the barrier, four or five
feet.

Was the match in play at that point? - A. I don't
know.  I wasn't aware of anything. All I was aware
of was that I was getting crushed and I wanted to get
out.

Did you notice anything about the barrier? - A. It
seemed like it was a lot longer when the barrier
snapped.
                                              T. M. MOORE

You mean there was a passage of time from then
onwards? - A. It seemed like it, yes. You see, I
have watched videos and it is hard like to know what
actually happened and what I have seen on video.   So
by this time it was really tight.  It was getting
tighter and it wouldn't release and it was a case of
I had somebody's elbow in me.  I was in a lot of
pain.  I couldn't even move.  I remember moving the
guy's elbow and it was just sort of round that moment
it felt like the terrace concrete had snapped
underneath because of the sound.  It was like a
really loud underwater type of crack and it went like
two or three loud bangs.  I tilted like that and I
ended up lying forward on my stomach almost.

You fell forward? - A. Yes, but on top of people.

You made a statement on the 28th April, less than a
fortnight after the incident.  I do not know if you
can remember making that statement.  That was made
before you saw any videos, would that be right? - A.
Probably. Where did I make that statement?

That I cannot tell you but have you got the original?
I will show you what you said about the barrier.   I
just want you to read it because it may help you sort
out the video evidence from what you remember. What I
want you to do is tell me whether that is right or
not.  It is halfway down the page? - A. Yes, this
statement is partly correct but other parts I am not
very happy with.   It is only minor things.  It says
"the second barrier".   I didn't even know whether a
barrier had broke.   I thought the floor had gone
through and the noises I heard were all within like
three seconds.   If it was two or three cracks it was
all one after the other.

Can you just look at this and check whether it has
got your signature on? - A. Do you want me to read
this?

No, no.  I just want you to check your signature and
see whether we have got the right chap, Terence
Matthew Moore? - A. Yes.

I will read you the bit and you tell me where it is
wrong.  I will start from here:

      "We did go to the right but we were more
      or less carried down the way with the
      crowd. We carried on down to the point I
      have shown on the grid."
                                                 T. M. MOORE

You have marked where you stopped.  You will show us
on the plan in a minute where that i s :

      "It felt tight and we decided to try and
      move out but it was impossible to move.
      We were jammed and locked solid."

That is more or less what you have told me, is it
not? - A. Yes.

It goes on:

      "The match had just started at this
      point.  It was a few minutes later when I
      heard the barrier.   It sounded as if the
      floor was going through.   The second the
      barrier broke everybody just seemed to
      tilt forward as if we were on a hinge.
      All I could see of Paul was his head.   He
      was looking towards me and he was saying,
      'Get me out, Terry, get me out' but
      obviously I couldn't.   He was just to my
      left.  I was jammed leaning forward for
      about 15 to 30 minutes."

I have read this to you.  It does not actually say
the second barrier but says, "the second the barrier
broke"? - A . Sorry.

Do you understand? - A. Yes.

This statement was taken about two weeks after the
event.  Is that a correct description of what
happened at the time so far as you know? - A. Yes.




                               /Q. This movement of the.
                                           T. M. MOORE


This movement of the concrete which you have
described, I think you say it sounded as if the floor
was going through, that is exactly what you told me
now, and this you feel happened a few minutes after
you had got into this sort of locked position? - A.
Yes.

How confident are you that the match had already
started at that point? - A. You see I am going again
judging by everything I have heard and piecing it
together.

No, I want you to tell me what you remember. - A. I
wasn't conscious of the match.  I wasn't conscious of
anything.

Show us on a plan where it was that you were.
(Witness marks p l a n )

     MR. BEECHEY:   That is C425, sir.

     THE CORONER:  Can I just ask you one other thing.
There is no doubt whatever that you entered the ground
through a big open gate, that is right, is it not? -
A. A concertina gate, yes.

There is no question about that, and it was wide open,
was it, when you went through? - A. Yes.

In fact, you saw it open when you were still on the
bridge, is that right? - A. No.

Where were you when you saw it open? - A. I had got
past the park gates.  I was actually inside the
grounds but not in the ground.  It was only when I got
within 30 metres that we saw that is where the flow of
people were going in.

I am trying to find out when you first saw it, because
I thought you told me that you moved from your
position on the bridge because you could see the gates
opening? - A. No, that was the park gates, the
perimeter gates.

I see, you saw the perimeter gates open and that is
when you moved from your position? - A. Yes.

You climbed down, you have explained that to me.   You
got through them and then you saw that the concertina
gate was wide open? - A. Yes.  It looked like the only
way into the ground from where we were, because we
were looking where to go onto the terrace.

That is fine.   - A. I understand.
                                            T. M. MOORE


           Cross-Examined by MR. PAY NE :

In front of you there is a black folder.  Can you open
it up, please, at 255.  I see there is a sticker on
that copy which actually covers probably the part that
we want to look at. - A. Yes.

There is another one on the screen.   I wonder would
you mind going up to the screen, Mr. Moore, and with
the pointer show where you went from the bank on the
bridge to get into the ground.  Do not go too fast
because we want to follow your route.   Take your time.
- A. This is the bridge.  Do you want me to show you
my route?

That is it.  - A.  We were here,  We climbed down the
side of this fence here, along here, and along this
perimeter fence here, to about here, and we just cut
across that way.

Did you climb back over? - A. I am looking at these
gates now.  Is this the park gates here?

     THE CORONER: No, no, those are the turnstile
gates.

     THE WITNESS:  Yes, the park gates are here.  We
headed here.  There was no one taking tickets anyway,
to my knowledge, at this point because I think this is
the gate, or this.  I think that is the gate there and
it was a case of seeing through there and seeing the
pitch.

     MR. PAYNE:  Just show us again.   You found the
park gates, which are the ones at the outside there,
you are pointing to them now.   Just show us again how
you got into the ground? - A. Along here, this is a
wall and a fence, and we went along here and along by
this fence here.  We had to climb over a small fence.
I don't know where that fence was.

I might be able to help you about that.  Can you come
back and I will show you another photograph - 254.
Now those are the park gates and there is a fence on
the right-hand side and down the drop, we cannot see
it on the photograph, down to the right there is the
river and the bank. - A. Yes.

Does that help you to show us where you went, please?
- A. Yes.

I know that sticker is over it again, but there it is
on the screen if that helps you.  Can you show us on
the screen? - A.  We came down and we ended up on this
                                                T. M. MOORE


side of the fence for some reason.  I don't know
whether it was for people, or whatever, and we came in
here, and that is why I haven't seen these gates.  We
came over a small fence here, and then cut across this
way.  I did not have to hand my ticket in there
anyhow.

So for about half-an-hour you had been sitting on the
bank, on the bridge, with how many other friends? - A.
Just one, who I originally went down with in the van.

Then at about 5-to 3 you got into the ground by going
along the bank by the river? - A. Yes.

Climbing over the fence after you had   gone past the
perimeter gates, the park gates? - A. Yes.

And then went in through the big open       gate atthe
side? - A. Yes.

Then in the tunnel you handed your ticket to somebody
else? - A. Yes.

And they took it back out again? - A. Yes.

If you had a ticket, why had you been sitting on the
bank for half-an-hour? - A. Because you couldn't go
in, because there was no way to go in the ground.

If you had a ticket, why did you by-pass the perimeter
gates? - A. It wasn't a case of having a ticket or not
having a ticket.  It was a case of getting in the
ground.  There were too many people on the streets.
The road and the bridge area was packed solid with
people waiting to go in the ground shouting, "Why
aren't you opening the gates?" and things like that.
I had a bird's eye view of it all.

So by the time you   got into the ground, within a
minute you had not   got your ticket with you any m o r e ’
- A. No.

It is true, is it, that you did buy a ticket? - A.
Yes, it is true.  I paid £14 for it as well, yes.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Payne, there is no reason why we
should doubt his word on that.

     THE WITNESS:    I do not mind.

     MR. ISAACS:  I think, sir, if I may just
interrupt my learned friend, the question, with
respect, is a perfectly proper one having regard to
the issues that have gone before this Jury, but I do
                                                                     64

                                                        T. M. MOORE


          feel that you, sir, should really warn this witness
          that he may not be obliged to answer these questions.
B
               MR. PAYNE:  I do not take it any further.       The
          Jury have heard the evidence.

               MR. KING:  I think, to be fair to the witness, he
          wanted to answer that at that point and say what he
          wanted to say.

               THE WITN ES S : I do not mind answering these
          questions.  I have got nothing to hide.

              THE CORONER:  The thing is I do not think it gets
         us any further forward.
    Q.   You have told me that you had a ticket - that is
         right? - A. Yes.

    Q.   You have also told me that some of your friends in the
         van, at least three, did not initially? - A.  Yes
D        initially.                                        *

    Q.   And that they acquired them on the way basically? - A.
         Yes.

    Q. And that you having   got in    gave your ticket to your
        friend in order to   pass it   on to somebody else who
        presumably did not   have a    ticket? - A. Yes. It was
        wrong, but that is   what I    did, yes, and that is what I
        would normally do.

              THE CORONER:   I do not think we need to explore
         it any further.   I am quite satisfied with that.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

    Q.   I am not, Mr. Moore, going to explore that aspect of
          the tickets, but I do want to explore the question of
          tickets, if I may, because it is of some interest and
          I know that there has been some evidence before the
          Jury before this.  Three of your pals did not have
          tickets when you set off from Liverpool? - A.
          Something like that.

    Q.   But you got them by the time you got to the ground7 -
         A. Yes.

    Q.   Could you explain to us how it came about that they
         did get them? — A. Yes.  When we were travelling to
         the ground in the Manchester area there were large
         traffic jams.  A lot of people were just getting out
         of their cars, sitting on the grass, and we chose that
         time to go and look for tickets to the cars and any



H
                                            T. M. MOORE


spares.  That is what you do because we knew there
would be a few people with the odd spare ticket.

Apart from your group, the three of you of the six,
were there other people who were doing the same thing
as you? - A. Yes.

So there were plenty of people who were trying to get
spares even on the way to the ground? - A. It was more
a case of swaps and spares.   Like I had a ticket, but
I swapped the original ticket I bought outside the
ground for two ground tickets, because I had a stand
ticket.   It is just a case of like, you know how it
goes.   People either want to buy them, sell them or
swap them.   There's a lot of that going on.

When you swapped your stand ticket for two terrace
tickets, was that in order to get one of your pals who
did not have a ticket a ticket, or had all the people
who had gone with you already got one? - A. No.   What
had happened was it was just that somebody had said in
the pub a few days earlier, "If anybody wants to go to
the semi-final I've got a ticket", so Paul and myself
paid half each towards a ticket.   We said, "Right,
there's one ticket, we go to the match".   I don't go
in without him, he doesn't go in without me.   It is
just one of those things.   I don't normally go to the
match with Paul.   I have seen him there before.  It
was just a one-off.

You eventually got in in the way you have described,
and you had been waiting for quite a long time to get
in? - A. Yes, at least half-an-hour.

You must have been thinking by this time   itwas very
close to kick-off? - A. Yes.

When you went down the tunnel, who were you with? - A.
Paul Hewitson.

And anybody else? - A.   Another friend we had met
outside.

Was it the other friend who stopped in the tunnel and
went back again? - A. Yes, he turned round and
realised he had lost one of his friends, so he said,
"I'm going to go back and see if I can see one of my
friends", and I went, "Well, here's my ticket".  That
was when I gave him my ticket.

I am not interested in that just for   the moment, but
did that seem strange to you at the time, that this
pal of yours, having got into the ground through the
tunnel just before kick-off, he is going back? - A.
                                            T. M. MOORE


Yes, but we were going to take our position on the
terrace.   He was sort of going to wait probably at the
other end of the tunnel to see if he could see him
coming in.   I don't know, I wasn't really interested.
We had just met up with him on the bridge and we
weren't really interested, you know.

I just wondered why, in that case, you should think
about giving him your ticket, because he wouldn't be
leaving the ground? - A. It was just one of them, you
know.  I wasn't even thinking.  It was just a case of,
"Well, there's a ticket", you know what I mean.

We will leave that.  When that happened, though, that
was in the middle of the tunnel? - A. Or on the way
into the tunnel, middle, slightly into the tunnel,
yes.

I think you told us you were halfway through the
tunnel? - A. Yes.

Those were your actual words - "Halfway through the
tunnel one of my friends said 'I'll have to go back'".
Could you explain to us then what happened halfway
through the tunnel?  Did he just pull up short and you
had a conversation with him and get your ticket out? -
A. He had half gone and I turned round like quite
surprised that he was turning back to go and find
someone else when it must have gone 5-to 3, I would
say like.  I shouted him to say, "Here you are, here's
a ticket just in case", you know.  It was one of them.

Just so that I can understand it, you were part of the
crowd that came in through that gate? - A. Yes.

Part of the crowd that then went through the tunnel,
or towards the tunnel and into the tunnel, is that
right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

You are halfway through the tunnel, part of this
crowd, and your mate, who was also part of the crowd,
stops and goes back the other way? - A. Yes.  It
wasn't that crowded.  At that time there wasn't like a
mad surge of people.  It was just like a busyish
tunnel with people walking through.

People were going back and forth? - A. You know, like
just gabbing and talking because the game hadn't
started.

Even though you had got in through that gate, you were
not part of a great rush? - A. No, there was no danger
then, no.  That is when we saw people coming.  They
weren't rushing or running, it was just a case they
                                            T. M. MOORE


were just eager to get into the ground.   So it was a
case of take position, and we were some of the first
people there because we heard them announce it, we
heard the Police Officer announce it, so we went,
"Okay, we are getting in", and we knew it was 5-to 3,
so we were some of the very first people from when the
gates were opened to get into that ground.   We were
the first people through, we were within the first 50
people that headed for that tunnel.




                         /Q.   But your mate was.
                                                           68
                                                  T. M. MOORE


    But your mate was still able to go back the other way? -
    A. Yes, this was like only a minute and thirty seconds
    into getting into the ground.

    Can I ask you about something else now?   When you were
B   sitting outside on the corner that you have told us about
    near the bridge, you said there looked like there were
    some turnstiles outside the perimeter gates? - A. Well,
    you know, these things you don't...   All I could see
    were gates, a wall and then other gates with no people
    going through.

    That is a clear recollection you have?   You thought
    there were turnstiles outside the perimeter gates? - A.
    No, I said it was possible.   I didn t think there was.
    I said it was possible they could have been outside.  I
    don't see the relevance.

    Well, the relevance of it, Mr. Moore, is how far the jury
    can rely upon your evidence as to how accurate it is so
    it is perhaps worth exploring that you said these things,
    how sure you are about them, how far your recollection is
    accurate or not, it perhaps may touch on the accuracy of
D   some of your other evidence. - A. If I had been asked
    these questions soon after maybe I would have answered
    clearly but to me now it is just something I want to
    forget.   I don't even think about it.   It goes through
    my head most days but...

    This isn't meant as a criticism because clearly you were
    on your way to a football match, you were going to have a
    good time, but did you have a lot to drink? - A. I don't
    drink a lot anyway.

    Had you had a lot?   It's all relative, I expect. - A. Me
    personally, no.

                Cross-Examined by MR. MANN ING;

    I appreciate that having been in an awful situation you
    wanted to put this out of your mind and haven't tried to
    think about it for quite some time.   Is that right? - A.
    That's right.

    So you are now having to look back and re-live an
    incident that we know happened in this city some time
    ago.   It is difficult for you to first of all bring it
    accurately back to mind because of the reason you have
    stated? - A. Yes.

    Secondly because it is difficult to distinguish that
    which you actually remember and that which you have tried
    to piece together afterwards, by both talking to your




H
                                                                  69

                                                      T. M. MOORE


       friends and looking at the videos and that sort of thing?
       - A. Yes.

    Q. Of course it all happened very quickly and somehow it
       doesn't quite seem to fit together? - A. Oh, it fits
B      together, yes.

    Q. You think it does fit together? - A. Yes.

    Q. I was trying to suggest to you a reason why perhaps in
       the questions and answers there have been there appeared
       to be inconsistencies, if you understand that. - A. Which
       questions are those?

    Q. That will be a matter for the court.   I have
       established, and you accept, the difficulty, for the
       reasons I have stated and I don't need to state again, of
       this re-construction today?

                    Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

    Q. I am just interested in one matter.   When you were near
       the Policeman with the flat cap, the important looking
D      Policeman, and you heard him say something into his
       radio.   You told us something about mention being made
       about delaying the game.    Who said what to whom? - A.
       Myself and one or two other people who were around.

    Q. What were you saying and to whom were you saying it? - A.
       Just to the Police Officer, saying, "Can't you delay the
       game? There is no chance we are going to get in."    The
       amount of people outside was unusual for a football
       match.

    Q. Did he react in any way to that? -    A. No. I think he
       was more involved with his radio.    I think he had more
       important things than to listen to us.

             MRS. MCBRIEN:  I haven't written any questions down
       this time but I am going to try and pick my way through
       this.

                  Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

    Q. Mr. Moore, what time did you say you arrived on the
       bridge? - A. It was around half two.   I am going by my
       statement now.   I have been told that is what I put in
       my statement so I can honestly only answer what I
       believe, so around half two.   I was waiting outside for
       at least twenty minutes to half a hour anyway.

    Q. Did you say that to the Police when the statement was
       taken, that you got there about half past two, or did
       they suggest a time to you?   Were you aware of the time




H
                                                                 70
                                                        T. M. MOORE


         at all? - A. Yes.    I know we were late because of the
         traffic jams.  We were all thinking we weren't even going
         to get there for four o'clock.    I remember the relief
         when we realised we were there.    It couldn't have been
         more than an hour we had.    We walked round the ground
B        trying to swop my ticket first for a while.    When we had
         toted the ticket we ran back to the bridge to see if we
         could see any more friends because obviously we all had
         different tickets because they had to go in different
         parts of the ground.

    Q. Did you have a watch on to know the time? - A. No, I
       don't wear a watch.

    Q. You think it was about half past two? - A. Yes.

    Q. Was it very, very crowded at half past two by the
       turnstiles? - A. The streets...   Yes, outside.   The
       queue from the turnstile went into the main road outside.

    Q. At that end did you all have tickets to go into the
       match? - A. Yes.    Some of my friends had already left
       and gone to the main stands or wherever it was they were
D      sitting on the day.    That is why just the two of us were
       left on the bridge because we had tickets for that end.

    Q. I haven't come here to criticise you at all, although we
       lost our son at Hillsborough.   If you travelled to the
       ground without a ticket it would help me a great deal if
       you just spoke the truth.

               THE CORONER:   I didn't let Mr. Payne do it.    This
         man says he had a ticket.    He says there were friends in
         the car who didn't have tickets.    What more can he say?
         Why should we say he didn't have one?    He has told us
         there were people in his car who did not have tickets,
         then that they bought them on the way, so he was
         travelling with ticketless fans.    We don't need any
         more.    We don't need to make him say he was a ticketless
         fan because he says he wasn't.

    Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:    I am just wondering why you stayed
         outside at half past two if you had a ticket?    You
         waited there until five to three? - A. there was no
         entrance.    There was no way to move.   It was pretty
         clear with what was going on outside the ground, people
         getting pushed with the horses.    It was pretty clear
         that people were not moving into that ground, that people
         were just there.    That is what a lot of people were
         saying.   "Why aren't we moving?"   People were screaming,
         "Get the horses out."    Men with children.   You could
         see them trying to escape the horse because the horse was
         going crazy with all the crowd.    There were so many
         people outside at that time for a football match.     As I




H
                                                 T. M. MOORE


believe, most of them had tickets anyway, because there
were people queuing for turnstiles, but there was no
movement at all.   It wasn't even worth trying to force
your way through the crowds because that is what I would
normally do, just think, "Get in", and look for the
easiest way or the quickest way in, but there was no way
in.   That is why we just sat and watch.   There was a
guy with a camera next to us on the bridge filming it.
I don't know where he was from.   He was actually
standing on the bridge, filming, at five to three when it
was happening because everybody was telling him where to
point the camera - "Get that, get that and get that."

I don't know.   It just looked like the ground wasn't
open to me.

There is plenty photographic evidence of the scene at
2.30 and people seemed to be just walking steadily down
the road at that time, but it was after, at 2.35 that the
area became very crowded. - A. Yes, on the road.     On the
bridge and the road people were walking around and
moving, but the actual queue was not a queue.     It was
just a crowd in this space by the gates towards the
turnstiles.    It was a crowd.   It wasn't a queue.    It
was a crowd.    It was just gathering and getting bigger
and by five to three it just seemed like there were three
to five thousand people outside.    That is as it
appeared.    Maybe there was a lot less or a lot more.    I
don't know.    That is all I can recollect.

It is all very puzzling.      Who did you get your ticket
from?

     THE CORONER:   Pardon?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Is it all right if I ask who
Mr. Moore did get his ticket from?

     THE CORONER:   Not relevant.

      MRS. McBRIEN:    Where did you buy it? - A. I bought
it in a pub in my area a few days previously off a guy in
the pub who said, "If anyone wants a ticket, I have got
one here."    It was a £14 stands ticket for £14.    That
is what I paid.     I swopped it for two ground tickets
when I got to the ground.     I don't know who the guy was
or...    It was just a boy in the local pub.

Why would you swop a £14 ticket for a cheaper one? - A. I
swopped it for two tickets.   You can only get one person
in on one ticket.

What time was that that you swopped it? - A. It was late.
Half two.   I got to the ground late.   It was right
                                                                     72

                                                          T. M. MOORE


         outside the ground, within 50 yards of the bridge.      I
         swopped it on one of the corners.

    Q. That is about half past two? - A. Around that.
B Q.     All these other people seemed to have managed to go in
         through the gate and everything.   Didn't you think you
         were capable of making your way forward?   Why did you
         just hold back?

              THE CORONER:   Well, he has told us, Mrs. McBrien.

              THE WITNESS:   Well, to us it appeared - we had a
         bird's eye view.  We were standing on the bridge.   We
         were at least five to six feet, and standing on the
         bridge...

              MR. KING:   In fairness, it ought to be made clear
         to this witness that Mrs. McBrien is putting to him
         evidence as if it were evidence one way.   I simply make
         this observation, sir, a number of people have been
         criticised by various people asking questions, for
         joining the crowd when it was sensible thing to do would
D        have been not to do so.

              THE CORONER:   I think Mrs. McBrien is trying to
         establish a different point.   He has given us at least
         three times the reason why he sat on this bridge.
         Whether the jury believes him or not will be a matter for
         the jury, but he has told us why he was on the bridge and
         why he didn't join the crowd:

    Q. What you said   was you didn't join the crowd.   You were
       on the bridge   because you could see there was a big crowd
       there and you   thought it wasn't moving and you couldn't
       see any point   in joining it? - A. That's correct.

              THE CORONER:   That is what he is saying.   Now
         whether you believe him or not is neither here nor there.

    Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   I think I will have to believe what
         you tell us. - A. You don't have to believe me, do you?

              THE CORONER:   Well, any other questions,
         Mrs. McBrien?

              MRS. MCBRIEN:   I am completely   puzzled with this.
         This why I just gave up making notes   because it is not
         making much sense to me.

              THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, the witness gives his
         evidence in his way.    The jury will make a judgment in
         the end as to what to think of it and I will direct them
         if I think it appropriate.




H
                                                           73

                                                   T. M. MOORE


         THE WITNESS:    I am sorry for not being as
    intellectual as you.

         THE CORONER:   No, nobody is criticising you,
    Mr. Moore.
B




D




                 MRS. MCBRIEN:   I am not a lawyer.




G




H
                                                               74
                                          T.M. MOORE


0         HRS. McBRIEN:    I am not a lawyer, I am just a
     parent acting on behalf of my family, so I am certa inly
     not an intellectual. - A. Yes, I know, but it seems to
     be that everybody seems a little bit confused, not
     because of my answers, because of the way I am
     answering tnem.    Not because of the answers, you
     understand?   It's the way I am answering.    It is a
     little bit like, neither here or tnere.

          THE CORONER:   Now then, next question, Mrs.
     McBrien - question, I say.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:    I am puzzled, you see, when you
     said you gave somebody a ticket when you were in the
     tunnel even.    That doesn't make sense to me, when it
     was so close to kick-off time, to go back out? - A.
     Speaking for myself, that's just tne way I am.    You
     know, it's wrong to do that, it's breaking the law to
     do that, but if I ....

Q.        THE CORONER:    I don't think it is actually -
     well, perhaps it is. - A. If I was to get into a
     concert or a football match or anything, if I was
     pushed in there or I was       inthere for nothing andI had
     a ticket,   to me it might     aswell be used.  If everybody
     done that we'd have more       accidents like that,     butthat
     is all that happened.   It was just an instinct to say,
     "Here you are, take that".

0.        MRS. McBRIEN:      Could you repeat what you just
     said then?  If more    people did that it would lead to
     more accidents, did you say? - A. Yes, it would.

Q. Yes, I agree. - A. Because the allocation to the ground
   is only so many tickets and that is what the law
   permits.

0. Yes, that is right. - A. I am not trying to hide from
   the fact about my ticket.  I am not trying to hide from
   nothing, I nave nothing to hide.

0.        THE CORONER:   You have done very well on that and
     I don't want any more from you on that.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:    I don't think I could ask any
     more.   There is a lot.  I could think of no end of
     things if I had a lot of time to speak to you but I
     will leave it at that now.   Thank you.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

0. Mr. Moore, when you were on the bridge you described a
   moment or two ago to Mrs. McBrien a cameraman being
   there? - A. Yes.
                                                                     75

                                                T.M. MOORE


    Q.   At 5-to-3. - A. Around     that time, yes.

    Q.    And people were saying,    "Get that one, get that one".    -
B        A. Yes.

    Q. Advising him of what shots he or she might take? - A.
       Yes.

    0. So at that time you were still on the bridge with the
       cameraman? - A. Yes, I was on the same bridge as the
       cameraman, yes, within three foot,  two or three foot of
       the cameraman.

    Q. You had a ticket for the stands.        Can you remember
       wtiich stand it was for? - A. No.

    0. The West Stand or the North Stand? - A. I don't know.
       I haven't got a clue.

              MRS. McBRIEN:    Can I just ask one more question,
         please?
D
              THE CORONER:    Yes.

    Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   What did    your ticket   look like,
         please? - A. I go to a lot of    football matches, a lot
         of concerts.  I don't drink,    I don't go to pubs, so it
         is the type of thing I did -    I do drink, sorry, but I
         am not a heavy drinker.

    0. No. - A. I have old tickets at home and things.  I get
       tickets all the time.  I honestly couldn't say because
       you get different tickets at different football
       matches.

    0. You didn't look at that one? - A. No.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   I wonder if I could just help you
         with this cameraman, because we know what  time that
         cameraman was there, or we think we know.   Had he
         already left, the cameraman, when you decided to move
         towards the ground, or did you leave before him? - A. ]
         am not sure.

    0. Can you remember that? - A. No, I just remember him
       standing next to us and he was filming and people were
       shouting up, "Get over there and get on that", and
       things like that.

    0. What I am trying to find out is whether you left after
       the cameraman or whether you just left the cameraman
       with the filming? - A. I am not sure.




H
                                     T.M. MOORE


You don't know, because we think he left the area at
10-to-3 actually. - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   That is in Mr. Layton's statement,
for those of you who want to look it up.  I think we
have exhausted this witness, yes?

     MR. ISAACS:     Physically and intellectually,   I
think, sir.

     THE CORONER:   In every sense.   Mr. Moore, please
do not leave this court room thinking that we have
criticised you, either as a person or as to your
presentation.  It is true that we have found it
difficult to follow in places, and it is true that we
will have to try and sort it out.   This is part of the
problem, we are trying to relate your evidence to what
other people have also told us, and in a sense trying
to make it fit together, not only as part of your story
but as part of the story which everybody else tells us.
That is one of the reasons why we spend such a lot of
time asking you these questions about what time was it,
when was it, how was it, because we are trying to make
it make sense in a wider context.   I also understand
what you have said, which is that you have actually
tried to forget it, which means that I have made you
come back and bring it all forward, but if nothing else
at least the Kewitsons have had the opportunity of
hearing you.

     Mr. Hewitson, may I say we have hardly mentioned
Paul in this.  Irrespective of the situation with the
tickets and goodness knows what else, I am very, very
sorry that you have lost him.  I don't think anybody
can say anything other than that.

     Don't go away thinking, "Oh dear, I wish I had not
come".  I wanted you to come and you have told us your
story.  We will use it in whatever way we think
appropriate, all right?  Thank you for being here.

I want to rise for one moment.   Stay here, because I
want to talk to my Officer about the video, with regard
to the other witness.   You know I have not got much
time today but I need to speak to him to see what, if
anything, has happened.   So can you stay in Court and I
will just go out.

                   (Short Adjournment)
A
                                                                  77




                          JAMES THOMAS Recalled

                          Further by THE CORONER
B
    Q. Can you tell me, you have been outside haven't you? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. You have been looking at these videos again to try and
       find yourself? - A. Yes.

    Q. And I think you actually found yourself on two videos,
       I believe? - A. Yes.

    Q. Tell us about the first one, the earlier one.   What
       time did you see yourself? - A. I did not really see a
       time on it.   The first video, it was not really a
       video, it was a picture, and it has got a time on it at
       6-minutes-pas t-3.

    0. Did you see yourself?  You saw yourself on a video but
       you don't know what time it is now? - A. No.  The
       second video is more relevant because it is a close up
       shot.

    Q. You mean the picture is more relevant? - A. No, the
       second video.

    0. What time was that? - A. This was at 15.03.56.17.

    Q. Where were you on that shot?- A. Outside the perimeter
       fence.

    Q. Right outside or just coming out? - A. I was just being
       carried out.

    Q.   What time did you say it was? - A. It is 15.03.56.17.

    0.    And there   is no doubt in your mind it is you? - A.   No
         doubt.

    Q. And that you are by that time coming out through the
       gate? - A. Yes, I am being carried through the gate,
       being helped along.

              THE CORONER:     I think that that is satisfactory,
         isn't it?

              MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, could you give us the
         reference number for the still photograph.

              THE CORONER:   Yes.    Put the earlier on up,
         Sergeant Griffiths.

              MR. GRIFFITHS:     They are both the same time.


H
     THE CORONER:   Put them up one after the other.
What "C" number is that?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   It has not got a " C " number.         He
identifies himself there.

       THE WITNESS:     That is me, yes,    that is right.

       THE CORONER:     What time is it on that?

       MR. GRIFFITHS      15.15.06.

       MR. RUSSELL:     What is the album number?

       MR. GRIFFITHS:     PR2 and it is photograph 8, sir.

       MR. BEECHEY:     The "C" number is C426.

     MR. RUSSELL:       The time on that is 15.06, not
15.15.06.

        THE CORONER:    15.06.  The first 15 is the date.
Put    it back again, Sergeant Griffiths, and work your
way    through it.   Show the time, 15.15.06.

     MR. CATCHP0LE:   The first one is the         date and the
actual time is 15.06.

     THE CORONER:       That is right.     The corrected time
is 15.05.

       MR. GRIFFITHS;     This is the same time,    sir.

     THE CORONER:       Is he pointing to the right lad
there?

       THE WITNESS:     That is me.   I had short hair then.

     THE CORONER:   That is why I was wondering whether
we had got the right chap.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   Photograph number 9, the same
album and the same time, sir.

       MR. BEECHEY:     C427.

      THE CORONER:   I think it might be as well if you
can put a little mark, Mr. Thomas, on the acetate where
you are because we won't recognise you in a year's
time.   (The Witness marked Exhibit C427)

       MR. RUSSELL:     Can Mr. Griffiths just point to
him?
A
                                                                 79




         MR. GRIFFITHS:     It is the purple tee-shirt, sir.

         MR. RUSSELL:     With back to the camera?
B
         MR. GRIFFITHS:    That is right,    sir.

         MR. RUSSELL:     Considerably shorter hair than he
    has now.

         MR. GRIFFITHS:    That is right,    sir.

         THE COROWER:   Is there anything else?  Miss
    Sinclair, is there anything you want to ask?

         MISS SINCLAIR:     No, thank you.

         THE CORONER:     Ladies and gentlemen,       10.30 on
    Monday morning.


D




E




F




              (In the absence of the J u r y ) ....




H
                (In the absence of the Jurv>

     THE CORONER:   Are you satisfied with these two
witnesses or do you want them back on Monday?

     MR. MANNING:   No, that is not necessary.

     THE CORONER:   Can I say that on Monday the people we
have got proposed are Mr. Dickenson, Mr. Smith, Mr. Mullin,
Mr. Duggin, Mr. Gains, and I think he gave evidence before
Lord Justice Taylor, Mr. Hollinrake and then a Mr. Twydale.
Nearly all of these make some comment or other with regard
to the barrier so far as I remember.  Then on Tuesday we
are hoping to finish off most of the other people who have
got any references to the barrier so far as I am calling
them and so far as I am aware.

     MISS SINCLAIR: Sir, I am very grateful for that
indication.  It is very helpful.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, you have asked me about the
proposals for when I was going to call, what I refer to as
the principal actors in the case, and I had indicated to
you that it was my intention to have Dr. Eastwood, the HSE
and various people the second week.  I understand that, in
fact, it is impossible for Dr. Eastwood to be here that
week and I do not want to have the HSE evidence separately.
I want them to come together.  It is quite likely in that
case that we will be calling the Police principal actors in
that second week rather than in the third.

     MR. KING:   The second week we have identified as the
week beginning Monday, 11th February, sir, because next
Monday is the 4th February.

     THE CORONER:   That is right, yes.   I know it is
important we should all know what is happening with regard
to these people and so I will do my very best to forewarn
you and give an indication but it looks as though we will
be having Dr. Eastwood and that part in the week beginning
the 18th rather than the other way round.

     MR. KING:   That is very helpful, thank you, sir. Can
I mention that I am not yet in a position to respond to you
over the matter regarding Mr. Hicks' evidence but there is
no urgency today I suspect.

     THE CORONER:   No, there is no hurry.  I do not think
it matters but I do not like it if I have noticed something
without drawing it to your attention.

     MR. PAYNE: Sir, may I indicate that over the weekend,
with your permission, we intend to prepare a submission
about the calling of Mr. Phillips to give expert evidence
and perhaps we might make that submission to you at some
convenient time on Monday.  I may say that it is intended
to be quite a short submission.  It will be in two parts,
first of all, as to whether he should be called and,
secondly, at what stage in the proceedings he should be
called.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Sir, will you be calling anybody from
the Fire Service?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I do actually intend to call Mr.
Seaman from the Fire Service.  I do not think we have told
him yet and so please do not pass this on to him.  I
indicated to Mr. Foster that I was thinking about it but I
am almost certain that I will do. Again I will want him
with the Fire Service, the HSE, Dr. Eastwood, the Club,
that section. We are not going to go over the whole of the
Safety Certificate.  I have very limited objectives with
him.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   When he does appear, would we be able
to ask him about evacuation? That is what I am mainly
concerned about.

    THE CORONER:     As to what?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   The evacuation from the terrace.  It
is that side of it that I am particularly interested in.

     THE CORONER:   Probably not but I will think about it.
Can I talk to you about it on Monday because I will miss my
train?

    MRS. McBRIEN:     Yes, sir.

    THE CORONER:     May I leave you.   Have a good weekend.

      (The Inquests were adjourned until 10.30 on the
                 following Monday morning )
