                                                                                         M I R . 15




 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                Date and tim e raised    f°l/o                    Number
                                __         __
 T itle                                                               ~TM                             X h ~ OIL- <=70
^ /p c lu d e source and any document number i f relevantj
                                                                            C=
 Receiver's instru ction s- - urgent action — Y es/N o   ____
                                                                                                                    Receiver




                                                                                                                     Indexer
 Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                Statem ent Reader
 Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                    Indexer
 Indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised

 Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                   S IO




                                                                                                                I53I
 Further action No(s)                                                                                               Indexer



When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                  KEVIN TYRRELL




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci,     B M , B S , MRCGP

             (Her Maje s t y ’s Coroner)




                        At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                        On

                  24th April 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                                 INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                    B
                                                                         Page



                        OPENING BY THE CORONER                              1.

                    C   DR. JOHN CLARK Called

                           By THE CORONER                                   2   .
                        DETECTIVE SERGEANT GRAHAM JOHN McCOMBIE Called

                           By THE CORONER                                   4.

                    D   DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                           By THE CORONER                                   5.




                    E




                    F




                    G




                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        Tuesday,    24th April, 1990


                                         THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                                                  KEVIN TYRRELL
                    B
                                MR. FRASER:   Sir, you are now going to hear
                           evidence about Kevin Tyrrell.   Kevin's mum and dad are
                           in court this morning, as are several members of his
                           family.   I appear on their behalf, sir, through the
                           agency of the steering committee for their own
                           solicitors in Liverpool.

                                THE CORONER:   Mr. and Mrs. Tyrrell and all the
                           other members of the family, I will just briefly tell
                           you what we are going to do so you can follow the
                           procedure more easily.

                                What we are going to do in the first instance is
                           for me to read to you the evidence of the opening on the
                    D      19th April, 1989.   Then I will give you the alcohol
                           levels which have been worked out in relation to Kevin.
                           We will then listen to Dr. Clark who is a pathologist
                           and when he is finished we are going to hear from the
                           summarising Officers who will tell me some more of the
                           background.

                                When you hear the evidence from the summarising
                    E      Officers you will hear references and plan numbers and
                           things like that, don't worry about those.  We need
                           those for the records and it does break it up a little
                           bit, but it is necessary.   Just ignore it when you are
                           listening to it.

                                The only other thing I think I need to say is you
                           will notice nobody is taking the oath.   That is not
                           because they haven't been sworn, on the contrary, they
                           have, they have already taken the oath in respect of the
                           inquest which they are dealing with.

                                This then is a resumed inquest which was opened on
                           the 19th April, 1989 and on that occasion Neil Anthony
                           Parkin, acting Coroner's Officer said:

                                   "The body which is the subject of   this inquest has
                                   been identified to PS 690 Hall of   the South
                                   Yorkshire Police as that of Kevin   Tyrrell by
                                   Francis Tyrrell, his father.   He   was 15 years of
                                   age, having been born on the 19th   of June, 1973 at
                                   Liverpool.

                    H
                                                       -   1   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
    He lived at
    Runcorn, Cheshire.

     He was a schoolboy.   He died at Hillsborough
     football ground following an incident there on
     Saturday, 15th April, 1989.

     PS Hall caused the body to be moved to the Medico
     Legal Centre and there he identified it to
     Detective Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently
     identified the same body to Professor Usher and Dr.
     Clark.

     It is the family wish that the body should be
     buried."

Then I circulated a statement which Mr. Francis Tyrrell
signed on the 26th of April.   You confirmed that all
the details - names and places of birth - were in fact
correct.

     The alcohol was estimated by Dr. Forrest and he
gave evidence in respect of that on the  first day.  As
far as Kevin was concerned the result was negative.

     We now turn to Dr. Clark.

                DR. JOHN CLARK Called

                   By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   I am Dr. John Clark, forensic
pathologist, at the University of Glasgow.

Dr. Clark, this young man is known to you as Kevin
Tyrrell, case number 36, and the evidence you are giving
relates to him? - A. That is correct, sir.

Can you tell me what your findings    are and thebasis on
which you arrived at those? - A. Yes.     I found the
prime cause of death was inhalation of stomach contents.
In other words, the inhalation of vomit.     As a
contributing factor to his death was crush asphyxia.
So it is 1(a) inhalation of stomach contents and under 2
it is crush asphyxia.   This was based on finding there
was clear evidence of vomit in the    airways and
hemorrhage throughout the lungs.      This is a clear sign
of inhalation of vomit during life.

He also had some asphyxial signs in his  face, but these
were relatively mild compared to other folk.    That is
why I felt the crush asphyxia was not the prime cause of
death.   What I think has happened is that his chest has
been crushed and this has caused him to become
                        unconscious fairly quickly and very shortly afterwards
                        this caused him to inhale vomit and that has
                        precipitated his death before the full blown signs of
                        asphyxia have developed.

                        So it is likely, as with every one else, that he was
                        rendered unconscious quickly by the pressure on the
                        chest and that while unconscious because of the
                    B   continued pressure he has inhaled vomit in his lungs and
                        has died very, very quickly after that.

                        How do you postulate the mechanism then, because what
                        you are saying is it was not hypoxic?   Assume for a
                        moment - well, we will assume that this young lad was
                        crushed and he was unconscious and then he inhaled? - A.
                        Yes.

                        Then he died quickly. - A. It is probably partly hypoxic
                        due to the lack of blood but also I think crushing
                        itself, as well as pressure on the chest, I would have
                        felt there was probably pressure on the stomach.

                        What I am trying to ask you is this:  if he inhaled and
                    D   he was therefore unable to get oxygen into the alveolus,
                        you would expect to see the same signs as you do with
                        any crush or traumatic asphyxia with the petechial...? -
                        A. Not necessarily.

                        That is what I wanted you to explain to me. - A. It is a
                        slightly different mechanism of causing asphyxia.   In
                        inhalation of vomit you don't really have any blockage
                    E   of blood vessels.   It is really the blockage of blood
                        pressure on blood vessels in the chest which causes all
                        these florid signs in the face.   Inhalation of vomit
                        does not, by its nature, actually cause any pressure on
                        the blood system and that is why you don't get such
                        florid signs.

                        You would still feel that this lad lost consciousness
                        fairly quickly? - A. Yes.

                        When we say "fairly quickly" what are we talking about?
                        - A. Ten or fifteen seconds or so of the pressure being
                        applied on the chest.

                        Once he is unconscious he does not know what is
                        happening? - A. He does not know what is happening after
                        that.   I would think he probably died within a minute
                        or so of the crushing starting.   Apart from that he had
                        a number of fairly minor injuries on his face, grazes
                        and bruises, consistent with him being forced against
                        the ground or some other surface, or some other people,
                        but no other internal damage at all.   He was not

                    H                         - 3 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
suffering from any natural disease which could have
contributed in any way to his death.

     THE CORONER:    Any questions, Mr. Fraser?

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, Kevin's family have noquestions
for the record, but obviously as with all the families
they are greatly distressed by the manner in which they
lost their son and they very much would welcome an
opportunity to have a   few quiet moments    with Dr.Clark
following the hearing,   if that would be    in order with
you, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I would have no objection at
all.   On the contrary, I would be very pleased, if Dr.
Clark is willing.

     MR. FRASER:    Thank you for that, sir.

     THE CORONER:    Any questions of Dr. Clark?   (No)

   DETECTIVE SERGEANT GRAHAM JOHN McCOMBIE Called

                    By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   Iam Graham John McCombie, a
Detective Sergeant in   the West Midlands    Police.I have
already been sworn, sir.

Yes.  Could you take me through the summary, please? -
A. Sir, at about 0945 hours on Saturday, 15th April,
1989, Brian Welch, Steven Cain, Kevin Tyrrell and
another youth travelled from Runcorn to Sheffield on
anAmberline coach.   They intended to watch the FA cup
semi final at Hillsborough Stadium.

They arrived in Sheffield at about 1 pm and entered the
stadium at about 1.20 pm.   The other youth went to
another part of the stadium and Brian Welch, Steven Cain
and Kevin stood together in enclosure 3 on the Leppings
Lane terracing.

Shortly before the kick-off the three youths were
separated due to crowd pressure.   Brian Welch last saw
Kevin near to the gate in the perimeter fencing in
enclosure number 3.

At about 1506 Police Sergeant Hall went to the perimeter
fencing in front of the West Stand terracing and
assisted spectators from the enclosures.   He entered
enclosure 4 and persons were being passed over the
dividing fence from enclosure number 3.   Unidentified
spectators passed Kevin from enclosure 3 and Police
Sergeant Hall carried him on to the pitch and commenced
  artificial respiration.   He was assisted by PC McManus.
  A doctor who has not been identified, checked Kevin on
  the pitch but could not find any sign of life.

  Police Sergeant Hall was assisted to carry Kevin on a
  temporary stretcher to the gymnasium where a temporary
  mortuary had been set up.

  At 3.45 pm Dr. Curpen examined Kevin in the temporary
  mortuary and certified life extinct.

  At 0050 on Sunday, 16th, Mr. Francis Tyrrell^identified
  the body of his son to Police Sergeant Hall in the
  temporary mortuary.   Sergeant Hall later escorted Kevin
  to the Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the
  identification to DC Weigold.

  On Sunday, 16th April, following identification by DC
  Weigold, Dr. John Clark carried out an autopsy and
  submitted a report giving the cause of death.

   A ticket counterfoil for the game was found in Kevin's
   possessions.

          MR. FRASER:   Kevin's family have no questions,
   sir.

           DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                        By THE CORO NER:

        THE WITNESS:   Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
   West Midlands Police.

(). Yes, officer. - A. Sir, an examination has been made of
    visual evidence and Kevin has been identified alive in
    enclosure number 3.   Police Sergeant Hall has signed a
    plan of the terraces indicating the point at which he
    received Kevin and also a plan of the pitch, indicating
    the point at which he treated him.

   The officer was not able to identify himself on the
   video.

   Sir, those two plans are referenced EH.2 and EH.l.
   Brian Welch has identified himself and Kevin on a BBC
   video tap which has been given the reference number
   MAP.l and it is timed at 1440.56.11.  At this stage this
   shows Kevin alive in enclosure number 3.

   Sir, Mr. Tyrrell, Kevin's father, has assisted us in
   terms of confirming that particular identification.

   Sir, can I refer you to the plan referenced MWJL.58.

                           - 5 -

                                           %
<>. That will be C.71. - A. That is a plan of the terraces
    and refers to that last video identification.   I think
    chronologically, sir, if we can refer to EH.2, which is
    Sergeant Hall's plan of the terraces.

5. Yes, that will be C.72. - A. Would you wish to refer to
   EH.1, sir?

5.   I think so. - A. That is a plan of the pitch.

Q. That will be C.73.   If you would show us, officer. - A.
   Yes.   Sir, if we can refer to MWJL.58, that is the
   large scale plan of the terraces.   This is enclosure
   number 3 and we believe that Kevin is shown on video
   approximately in that position there in enclosure number
   3.

     In respect of the plan EH.2, sir, the plan submitted by
     Sergeant Hall, he has indicated a position h e r e , which
     is exactly on the dividing fence between enclosure 3 and
     enclosure 4.

     Then in respect of his second plan, EH.l, he has
     indicated on the pitch in this area h e r e , slightly to
     the right of gate 4.

          THE CORONER:    Thank you.    Mr. Fraser, any
     questions?

          MR. FRASER:    No, sir.

          THE CORONER:      Mr. and Mrs. Tyrrell and all the
     rest of the family who have come this morning, thank you
     for being here.     We are all very, very sorry indeed
     that this tragedy has struck your family and taken this
     young life.    We sympathise with you.      That is- all the
     evidence we are     taking at this stage, so now we are
     going to rise.       Dr. Clark has said he would be happy to
     spend some time    with you and I am sure you will do that,
     Dr. Clark.   Thank you all for being here and as a I
     say, we are very sorry indeed.

          (The inquest on KEVIN TYRRELL was adjourned to a
          date to be fixed)




                             - 6 -
