                                                                                                        78
 INQUISITION
  An inquisition taken for our Sovereign Lady the Queen

         Coroners Court                        in the   West District                         of South Yorkshire

     On the                   19th                                 April                      19 89
     [And by adjournment on var ious dates up to and including the
     GfiHftgc                                  day of                                         19 91     1
     [Before and by] t1]me                              STE FAN L EO POL D POPPER

     One ofHer Majesty's coroners forthx^Jk             South Yorkshire               (West) District

     [and the undermentionedjurors] touching on thedeath of                           PETER REUBEN THOMPSON


     The following matters are found
                                                                                      PETER REUBEN THOMPSON
1 Name of deceased

2 Injuryor disease causing death: [2]
                                                        1(a) Traumat ic Asphyxia
 )

3 Time, place and circumstances ator in which injurywas sustained: [3]

                orv    iW .    \S    ftp a L            as   &    ta s u lfe .      cn3€U

     So&ta«r\ad a t                                 FootWU <^rOOrvdl                 5Vio.^ikl<l

4 Conclusion ofthejury/coroneras tothedeath: [4]

                               A2cUdL£U^JtO-J                C D c z s ^-k

5 Particulars forthe time being requiredby theRegistration Acts tobe registeredconcerning the death

      a Date and place ofbirth                                          e Date and place ofdeath 13.4.89 She f f ie Id
      ?7 ■A .19^8_______         Whi stnn                                  Hillsborough Football Ground______
      b Name and surname ofdeceased                                       Occupation and usualaddress
         Peter Reuben Thompson                                                   Engineer

     c Sex            Male
     d Maiden surname ofa woman who has married


                                                                        Signature ofcyn^iei

     Signature ofjurors:




                                                                                                             Please turn over
   NOTES

1 Modify this as necessary according to whether the
  inquest isheld with or without a jury or partly
  with and partly without a jury.
2 In the case ofa death from natural causes or from
  industrial disease, want ofattention at birth, chronic
  alcoholism or addiction to drugs insert the immediate
  cause ofdeath and morbid conditions (ifany) giving                     Date             19
  rise to the immediate cause ofdeath.
3 Omit this ifthe cause ofdeath isone to which
  Note 2 applies.

4 a Where the cause ofdeath isone to which Note 2
    applies, itissuggested that one ofthe following
    forms be adopted:
     C.D. died from naturalcauses.
                                                                         Re
     C.D. died from the industrialdiseaseof

     C.D. died from dependence on drugs/non-dependable
     on drugs.

     C.D. died from want ofattentionatbirth.

     (In any ofthe above cases,but inno other,itis
     suggestedthatthe following words may, where
     appropriate, be added:
     "and the cause o f death was aggravated by lack of                  Cause of death
     care/self-neglect*).

  b In any other case except murder, manslaughter,
    infanticide or stillbirth,itissuggested that one
    ofthe following forms be adopted:

    C.D. killed himself/herself (whilst the balance of
    his/her mind was disturbed).

    C.D. died as theresultof an attempted/self­
    inducedabortion.                                                     Verdict
    C.D. died as theresultof an accidenl/misadventure.
    C.D. was killedlawfully.

    Open verdict, namely, the evidence didnot fullyor
    furtherdisclose themeans whereby thecause ofdeath
    arose.

 c In the case of murder, manslaughter or infanticide
   itissuggested that the following form be adopted.

    C.D. was killedunlawfully.
 d In the case of a stillbirth insert 'stillbirth' and do not
   complete the remainder ofthe form.




 Price £4.00 for 25 copies or £14.00 for 100 copies (exclusive of tax)

 ISBN0 11 340764 5
 Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty's Stationery Office
 Dd 291453 C130 11/88
                                                                               MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                    OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR
                                                                               WATERY STREET
                                              SOUTH YORKSHIRE                  SHEFFIELD
                                                   (West District)
                                                                               S3 7ET

   S T E F A N L P O P P E R . LLB., B.MED.Sci.. B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                          CORONER

                                                                                                  19
                                Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721




Your Ref: DC/-IC/TH0


Cuff Roberts North Kirk,
Solicitors,
25 Castle Street,
Liverpool. L2 4TD.



Our Ref: Hills/Sol/4/SLP/JT                                                   17th September 1990



Dear Sirs,

Re: RESUMED INQUESTS 19th NOVEMBER 199CK


 If you are not already aware, I intend to resume the Inquests into the deaths
 of the 95 people w h o died at Hillsborough, one or more of w h o m you
 on the 19th of November 1990 at 10.a.m.                                  Details of venue will be notified in
 due course.

 I do not have to remind you of the fact that a considerable amount of
 evidence has already been taken, nor of the nature and limitations of a
 coronal investigation which you will recollect is not adversarial but
 inquisitorial in nature, and which of course has only limited objectives.

 Subject to the Coroners’ Act 1988 and the Coroners* Rules  the Inquest is
 under my control, and in particular, it is my responsibility to select the
 witnesses who wish to give evidence.  I am at present engaged m considering
 this and in determining who I wish to invite t0 atten •

 Without prejudice in any way to my rights in the matter, I am writing to you
 to give you an opportunity to draw to my attention the names and other
 appropriate details of any witness or witnesses whom you would like me
 consider calling to give evidence at the resumed Inquests.

 May I please ask you in considering whether you wish to draw any names to my
 attention, to bear in mind the scope and limitations of an Inquest.

  I also wan t to make it absolutely clear that the submission of a name or
  names for consideration is nothing more than that, and that the decision
  to w h o to call to give evidence is and remains a matter for me.

  I w o u l d be grateful if you could respond as soon as possible. If I have not
  h e a r d from you by the end of September I will assume you have no names to
  submit.

  Yours faithfully,
■ CUFFS                            CUFF ROBERTS N O R T H KIRK ^
g r w n O                                                             S O L I C I T O R S
        09
             m
                                                                   25 CASTLE STREET LIV E R P O O L L2 4TD

NORTHS
                                            TEL: 051-227 4181          FAX: 051-227 2 58 4             TELEX: 628169             D X: 14126




 HM Coroner,                                                                              Date.                24th August 1989
 Medico Legal Centre                                                                      O u r Ref:           DC/IC/THO
 Watery Street                                                                            Y our Ref:           SLP/JT/H/006
 Sheffield,
 S3 7ET




 DEar Sir,

 Re:   Peter R. Thompson (Deceased) No.78

 We acknowledge receipt of your letter ofrfche 21st August 1989 and note what you say
  therein.

  We confirm we will relay the information on to the family and look forward to
  hearing from yourself with further developments in due course.

  Yours faithfully,

                           u     ^ ________________




                                       W. A. Twemlow                   Elizabeth M . Steel                Patricia A. Cottrell
             K. M . Tamlin
                                       D. I. Hew itt                   D. J. Rawlinson                    Carol E. Mason
             H . Harwood
                                       P. M . Higgins                  Annette E. Griffiths               D. C. Crank
             B. B. W right
                                       P. Smith                        Christine J. Aitken                A. K. M cDonnell
             G . H . E. Birch
             W . R. S. Calvert         P.J. Howell                     N .G .P y e

                                                Consultants:   R. H . Howell   L. B. Kendall

                                     Regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of investment business
                             OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                              WATERY STREET
                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE          SHEFFIELD
                                          (West District)
                                                              S3 7ET

STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                              CORONER


                         Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721
                                                                                 19 .®9*


SLP/JT/H/006

Cuff Roberts, Horth Klsfc,
25 Castle Street,
Liverpool.




 Dear        Slr

 Re: Peter B. Thompson (deceased) Ho.78.
 As you are aware, the Inquest(s) arising out of the Hillsborough
 Disaster stand adjourned to a date to be fixed* You may also
 be aware that it had been in my mind to resume these Inquests
 on the 15th of January 1990.

  I have now been informed that the Director of Public Prosecutions
  has decided to have a c r i m i n a l investigation undertaken on his
  behalf. In these circumstances, I have decided not' to resume the
  Inquest(s) on the date mentioned.

  I will review the matter further after the Director of Public
  Prosecutions has announced his decision as to what action (if any)
  he may wish to undertake.

  I am not in a position to say how long the Police Inquiry
  or the Director of Public Prosecutions consideration of the
  matter will take. I anticipate however that there will be.
  a substantial period of time before I am in a position to communicate
  on this matter further.

   I would be grateful if you could please ensure that this information
   is conveyed to members of the bereaved family so that they may be
   fully informed of the position regarding the Inquest(s).

   Yours faithfully,



    S .L.Popper,
    H.M. Coroner.
  CUFFg                        CUFF ROBERTS N O R T H KIRK
                                                                 S O L I C I T O R S
            os
            m
                                                              25 CASTLE STREET LIV E R P O O L L2 4 T D

NORTH cT!
                                       TEL: 051-227 4181           FAX: 051-227 2 58 4               TELEX: 628169            DX: 14126




                                                                                         D ate:         31st July 1989
"H.M. Coroner,
                                                                                         Our Ref:       D C /IC /T H O
Medico-Legal Centre
                                                                                         Your Ref:      S L P /J T /H /P M /0 0 1
 Watery Street,
 Sheffield,
 S3 7ET




Dear Sir,

Re:   Peter Reuben Thompson (deceased)

We thank you for your letter of the 28th July 1989. We confirm that we are
instructed to act in connection with Mr. Thompson's inquest.

 We apologise for the lack of clarity in our third paragraph.    It was basically
 written in order to explain the reasons why Mrs. Thompson; ;wished us to press
 for the release of the post-mortem.

 We are grateful for the release of the post-mortem and will bring it to our
 client's attention. We note the terms upon which the post-mortem report has
 been released to us and confirm that we will only use it for the two purposes
 specified in your letter of the 27th July 1989.

 Further we enclose our firm's cheque in the sum of £1.65 in respect of the
 photocopying charges for the post-mortem report.

 Yours faithfully,




                                  W . A. Twemlow                  Elizabeth M . Steel                  Patricia A. Cottrell
            K. M . Tamlin
            H . Harwood           D. I. Hew itt                   D. J. Rawlinson                      Carol E. Mason
            B. B. W right         P. M . Higgins                  Annette E. Griffiths                 D. C. Crank
                                  P. Smith                        ChristineJ. Aitken                   A. K. M cDonnell
            G .H .E . Birch
            W. R. S. Calvert      P. J. Howell                    N .G .P y e

                                           Consultants:   R. H . Howell   L. B. Kendall

                                Regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of investment business
                                                     28th July       89.




Cuff Roberta Horth Oik,
Solicitors,
25 Caatle Street,
Mwai..Igffli-


Desu? Sire,

RW t w m m W t m m Thompson

Thank you for your letter of the 1^ ° L ^ *     L^l/thir'5
that ywu are acting in connection with the Inquest, ix tms
ie inoorrect please let ste kw*«
I as not quite dear vhat the purpose of your ^ d p a r a ^ a ^ ia,
but X do not think that I can usefully »ake any coament.on this
at this stage.

Tours faithfully#



 S.I».Pepper,




                \
                                        OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                         WATERY STREET
                                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE          SHEFFIELD
                                                     (West District)
                                                                         S3 7ET

           STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                         CORONER


                                    Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721
                                                                           27thJuly,        19®?*

        SLP/JT/H/E'l/001.


        Cuff Roberta North Kirk,
        Solicitors,
        25 Castle Street,
        Liverpool. L2 4TD.




        Dear Sirs,

        You will be aware that I do not normally release post mortem
        reports until the resumption of the Inquest, when they are
        in fact put in as evidence.

        However, in view of the numerous requests which I have received,
        and the obvious distress which, delay is causing to your clients,
        I have decided that subject to certain conditions set out below,
        I am prepared to release to you upon request, the post mortem
        report of your client(s).

        The release of these post mortem reports are on the basis that:-

                a.     They have to be treated as provisional, and therefore
                       subject to amendment or alteration until such time as
                       they are given or produced in evidence at the Inquest.

                b.      They are to be used only for the purpose of bereavement
                        conselling of the deceased's relatives or for proper
                        legitimate purposes in connection with any legal proceedings
                        in which solicitors may be engaged.

                c.      Subject to thg.'cafeS¥§, they are to be kept confidential until
                        they come into the public domain at the resumed Inquests.

         I have your request for the post mortem report to hand in respect
         of each of the persons listed on the attached sheet, and on the
         assumption that you will confirm that the report in respect of
         each of your respective clients is accepted on the terms set out
         above, and in order to save further delay and upset to your client,
         I enclose a copy of the relevant post mortem report. If for any
         reason you cannot agree to the contents of this letter, please return
         the post mortem report to me, without of course making any use of it.

         The cost for the copy post mortem report(s) is & }>   per sheet (total £ I J r ~           )
         Please make your cheques payable to the City of Sheffield.

         Yours faithfully,



H8606
         S.L.Popper,
         K.I-LCor oner.
Peter Reuben Thompson,
     CUFFg                   CUFF ROBERTS N O R T H KIRK
             00                                                   S O L I C I T O R S
oC           m
                                                               25 CASTLE STREET LIV ER PO O L L2 4 T D
NORTHS
                                       TEL: 051-227 4181           FAX: 051-227 2 58 4               TELEX: 628 1 6 9       D X: 14126




 Mr. S.L. Popper
                                                                                        D ate:               17th July 1989
 HM. Coroner                                                                            O u r Ref:           DC/IC/THO
 Medico-Legal Centre,                                                                   Y our Ref:
 Watery Street,
 Sheffield S3 7ET




 Dear Sir,

 Re:   Mr. Peter Reuben Thompson (Deceased)
       Died 15th April 1989 - Hillsborough

 We write to advise you that we are instructed on behalf of the estate of
 Mr. Thompson in order to pursue a claim for compensation.  We are not
 specifically instructed in the administration of the estate but merely in
 the civil litigation on behalf of the family.

 Administration of the estate is being contacted by Mr. Andrew Moran on
 behalf of Mrs. Thompson.

 We are in contact with Hillsborough Steering Committee and we do understand
 that there is the prospect of the post mortem report being made available
 to the families of the deceased.  We can confirm that Mrs. Thompson,

 is concerned to know what happened to her husband.  She is considering
 watching the full footage of video which was taken on the day in order to
 try and see what happened to her husband but would also wish to know what
 the post mortem revealed with regard to the injuries and cause of death.

 We would be grateful if you could indicate when you anticipate being in a
 position to release the post mortem report to us.

 Yours faithfully,




          K. M . Tamlin        W . A. Twemlow                   Elizabeth M . Steel                  Patricia A. Cottrell
          H. Harwood           D. I. Hewitt                     D.J. Rawlinson                       Carol E. Mason
          B. B. W right        P. M . Higgins                   Annette E. Griffiths                 D. C. Crank
          C. H . E. Birch      P. Smith                         Christine J. Aitken                  A. K. M cDonnell
          W. R. S. Calvert     P.J. Howell                      N .G .P y e

                                         Consultants:   R. H . Howell   L. B. Kendall

                             Regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of investment business
TELEPHONE:                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                      POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                  SNIGHILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                              SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P WRIGHT CBE OSt J CBIM
CHIEF CONSTABLE


1 ,’
   S L Popper                                18 April 1989
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield
S3 7ET



                h '~ 7 y U S '-

I refer to your recent conversation with Superintendent
Sleath concerning the release of the deceased persons from
the Hillsborough incident to their respective next of kin,
following the adjournment of the inquest.

After consultation with Professor Usher, I have no objection
to this course of action.
FROM     CUFF   R OB E R T S                                                                   4.19.1990                 15:37                                             P.   2




 ■ CUEFg                               CUFF ROBERTS N O R T H KIRK
                                                                                         S O L I C I T O R S

                                                                                    25 CASTLG STREET LIVER PO O L 12 4 T D

 n o r th ;
                                                  TEL; 051-227 4181                           FAX: 051-227 2504                TELEX: 028169                 D X : 14126




 •D/Sgt. M* Tredgpld                                                                                                                        19th April 1990
                                                                                                                 Date:
  West Midlands Police Hillsborough Inquiry                                                                                                D C /T .C /T H 0
                                                                                                                 O u r Ref:
  Fumival House                                                                                                  Your Ruf:
  Eyre Street
  Sheffield
  SI 4Qn




       Dear Sir,

       Re:   Mr. Peter Reuben Thompson (dec'd)

       We write further to receipt of the information in relation to the enquiries
       which have been made into what, happened to Peter Thompson at Hillsborough
       and have had the opportunity now of discussing the matter both with his
       wife and his mother. We now write in order to confirm the individuals who
       will be attending at the inquest on Wednesday next 25th April. 1990 at 2-30 pm.
       and also raise certain questions which our client would like to be considered
       by the inquest and hopefully explained. We trust that all the questions \ nci
       we put forward are viewed as reasonable questions, they are ccrtainly advanced
        in a genuine desire to establish what happened to Peter Thompson, not motivated
       by a desire to attribute, blame. We trust Uiat they can be dealt with by the
       presenting officer at the inquest hearing*

       We would confirm that-we have been asked to attend on behalf of Mrs. Thompson
       and will be travelling to Sheffield in time for the hearing, we would
       propose to liaise with Mr, Fraser of the Hillsborough Steering Committee m
       this respect.

       We confirm that the following individuals will be attending at Sheffield next
       Wednesday, Mr. Thompson's widow, Mrs. Linda Thompson, his mother and father
       Mr. Denis and Mrs. Marie Thompson and also his brother John Anthony Thompson}
       who identified the body. We are advised that no social workers are likely to
       attend with the family and do not believe that any other member of the family
       will be attending.

        The wife- and mother of Mr. Thompson did raise certain points in discussing the
        information prepared by the West Midlands Police and we have attempted to
        summarise these in question form for your consideration, they are as follows

                 *1 . In initial discussions that took place with both Mrs. Linda Thompson
                      and Mrs. Marie Thompson and the West. Midlands Police it was indicated
                      that the officer who found Mr. Thompson gave or attempted to give
                      artificial resperation to him, this would not appear to bo the case
                      from PC* Wright's evidence and we wonder whether this information can
                                                                                     ®                                                            Con'd....
                    K.M.Tam lin          W. A . Twemlow                                  Elizabeth M , Sto-1                          Patricia A. Cottrell
                    H . Harwood          D. I.H e w lil                                  Uj.Rawlinson                                 Carol E. MiisOn
                    B. 8, Wright         P .M . Higgins                                  Annette 6. Griffiths                         0 . C. Crank
                    G. H. E, Birdi       p. Smith                                        Christine J. Aitkon                          A. K. McDonnell
                    W. R. S- Calvert     P. I. Howell                                    N .C .fty a

                                                         Consult ArtW: R. H . Howell               I. B. Kendall
                                        D A M ..U t.»4 I• . llv a I m u Cnr*i/ih > >/< <I,A          nf inMncfmrtrti Iv l( In e c c
■£UEE8




                                                              PAGE



         be corroborated or whether- ifc was in fact incorrect?

    b.   Our clients understood from the information given to them previously
         in discussing the matter with the West Midlands Police that Peter
         Thompson was in fact in the middle of pen 3, such photographs ass they
         have seen show this, the evidence of PC. Wright is slightly different
         and we wonder whether the information that he supplied was obtained
         after the meeting with the West Midlands Police?

    c.   Neither our clients were not made aware in discussions of the
         involvement of the supporter, did tliis individual^; involvement
         only come to light after' the visits by West Midlands Police?


    d.   How many people died in the area where Peter Thompson was
         found '■


    e.   How long did PC, Wright spend with Peter Thompson?

    f.   When were Peter Thompson’s driving licence and other personal effects
         found and noted?'

    g.   Is it possible to establish the time of death?

This comprises the sijjn 'total of the questions which we are instructed to ask
at present. We have advised the family that if there are any other questions
they would wish to raise they should do so as quickly as possible in order to
provide an opportunity for the matter to be considered prior to the hearing
of the inquest.

We confirm that we have copied this letter to West Midlands Police and to
Mr. Fraser, If there is any further information please do not hesitate, to
contact Mr. David Crank at our offices.

Yours faithfully,




                                                m

                       ftC' CT   T * 6 T * fc
                                                                                               ■M




J MERVYN JONES M Sc                                       FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                 Furnival Gate
 HILL SB OR OU GH IN Q U IR Y T E A M                     Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                          Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 3 1 5 4 6
                                                          Fax:        0742 731483
WEST M ID LA N D S POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                    Medico Legal Centre
Colmore Circus Queensway                                  Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                         Fax:       0742 726247
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5
                                                          Your Ref:      DC/IC/THO
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                         Our Ref:
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2
                                                          Date:        23 April 1990

           Cuff Roberts North Kirk
           Solicitors
           25 Castle Street
           Liverpool
           L2 4TD




           Dear Sirs

           RE: PETER REUBEN THOMPSON - DECEASED

           Further to your letter dated 19 April 1990, concerning the above-named
           deceased in which you raise several comments in relation to the summary of
           evidence.

           With reference to comment (a) Police Constable 831 Wright in his
           recollection of events and statements details dealing with several
           apparently deceased persons.   He carried out resuscitation on at least one
           body. Police Constable Wright's evidence in the initial stages of the
           inquiry were somewhat confusing and he was seen again. It now transpires
           that Police Constable Wright appears not to have carried out resuscitation
           on Mr Thompson.

           With reference to comment (b), Police Constable Wright has indicated on a
           plan of the terraces (Ref PDW/1) the approximate position he found Mr
           Thompson. This plan was produced in a statement he made dated 20 October
           1989.

           With reference to comment (c) the evidence of Mr Terence Pitt, a supporter
           at the match did not come to light until he made a statement on 11 November
           in which he clarified dealing with Mr Thompson.

           It is understood that                   was seen by West Midlands Police
           Officers on 1 November




                                                                                     Cont...



                                                                                                    $
                                                                                                    $
     PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
                                                                              M




                                    -   2   -




                                                                              If
With reference to comment (d) it is not possible to give any accurate         4
details.
                                                                              I
With reference to comment (e) Police Constable Wright does not state any      i
specific times he was with Mr Thompson.
                                                                              ■
                                                                              f.!
With reference to comment (f) details of Mr Thompson's driving licence and
personal effects were entered in a South Yorkshire Police Major Incident
Scheme Body Book, in the temporary mortuary at the gymnasium. No time is
recorded but it is known that the details were entered some time during the
afternoon/evening of Saturday, 15 April 1989.

With reference to comment (g) it is not possible to establish an exact time
of death.

Yours faithfully




m o p e           i
Detective Chief Inspector
