DRAFT LETTER.
FOR THE ATTENTION OF MR. M JONES
CONFIDENTIAL.




Dear Mr. Dear,

                 Hillsborough Disaster ~ Coroner|J Inquiry.

As you will of course know I in common with other coroners in
the country have been and am still very well served by the
appropriate police forces in connection with coronal inquiries.
In my case the police force usually involved is the South Yorkshire
Police. The inquiries as well as the preparation of documents etc
are undertaken on a no charge basis.

However in the matter of the Hillsborough disaster you have been
dealing with the matter on behalf of the Public Inquiry as well as
myself for reasons which I do not have to set out.

I understand that the oral evidence side of the Public Inquiry is now
probably over and understand that Lord Justice Taylor's interim report
is expected shortly and that consequently your involvment as far as
the Inquiry is concerned may diminish if not cease.

As you know the inquiries on behalf of the coroner have not yet been
completed and I believe that considerable work has still to be done
before it will be possible for the necessary report(s) to be
prepared and handed over to me. In addition I anticipate that there
will be quite a lot of other matters which will require the attention
and time of members of the police force before and during the
inquest(s) and possibly though less likely after completion of these.

It would I suppose be possible for the coronal inquiries now to be
taken over by the South Yorkshire Police and for them to handle them
in the conventional manner. In this instance however I think that it
would be a grave mistake if this were to take to place.

I say this not because South Yorkshire would be incapable of carrying
out such an inquiry nor because I have not been very well served both
in the past as well as at present by South Yorkshire Police in the
many inquiries which have and are being undertaken by them but because
rightly or wrongly the South Yorkshire Police force have been critized
in connection with their handling of the disaster. Where they now to
take over the coronal inquiry they as well as possibly myself would
lay ourselves open to criticism over, for instance, possible lack of
impartiality. The efforts of your force have been rightly praised at
the Public Inquiry and I do not think that should be dissipated.

Furthermore in view of certain allegations which have been publicly
made ( and I express no view with regard to these allegations at the
present time) I think that it would be unwise for South Yorkshire
Police to take over the running of the coronal inquiry(s).
    I also think that a transfer of the inquiry to South Yorkshire at the
    present time would cause delay and probably duplication of effort
    which can be in nobody's interest.

    In all the circumstances I think that it would be best if you
    continued to act as the coronal officers and continued to undertake
    the inquiry on behalf of the coroner on the usual basis until it is
    completed.

    I would also like to take this opportunity of saying what excellent
    help and relationship I have had from Mr. M. Jones and the members
    of his team and it would be good to see it though to the end.


    Yours sincerely,




    S. L, Popper.


%
