                                                                                          M I R . 15




0THERJ50CUMENT FORM                                                ;J2 ^' O S - q - O .
                                               Date and tim e raised                                   Num ber



■R'tle                       p>
                              t       c£~          ^    *2 -0
 Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action - Yes/No
                                                                                                                     Receiver




                                                                                                                        Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                 Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                        Indi
Indexed as indicated                                            (^<S>
No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                 O /M          SIO
Examined - fu rth er action to be taken



                                                                                                                 153/
                                                                                                                        Indexer
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
      HER M A J E S T Y ’S C O R O NER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                          (WEST D I S T R I C T )



              INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

        VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                     STADIUM DISASTER

                  ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



                 INQUEST   INTO THE DEATH OF

                    MARIAN HAZEL McCABE




                             Before

DR.    S.L.    POPPER,   LL.B,    B.MED.Sci,     B M , B S , MRCGP

                  (Her Maj es ty 's C o r o n e r )




                                 At

                 The Me dic o-Le gal Centre,
                      Wate ry S t r e e t ,
                         Sheffield.

                                 On

                         30th April 1990




                 TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




         From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.
              Official Shorthand Writers.
          55, Queen Street, Sheff ie ld SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:




MR.    D. FRASER           Hi llsborough Solicitors'   Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.      CALLAGHAN         Trent Regional Health Author ity and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.      GREGORY           Sheffield City Council

MISS      THORPE           Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR.    P. ISAACS           Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Con stabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                    A
                                             INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT



                                                                    page

                    B   )PENING BY THE CORONER                        1.

                        )R. DAVID SLATER Called

                            By THE CORONER                            3.

                        DETECTIVE SERGEANT JULIE APPLETON Called

                            By THE CORONER                            4.

                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                            BY TH E CORONER                            7
                            Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE            9

                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        onday, 30th April,   1990


                                      THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                    B                        MARIAN HAZEL McCABE


                               THE CORONER:   Now, Mr. Fraser, I believe you are
                          not representing Mr. and Mrs. McEvoy?

                              MR. FRASER:   No, sir.   The situation is quite
                         simply that Mr. and Mrs. McEvoy quite properly have
                         decided they don't want formal legal representation.
                         I understand and respect that decision completely, of
                         course.   I will assist in any way I can, sir, but I
                         will remain silent throughout Marian's hearing.

                               THE CORONER:         That is perfectly okay, Mr. and
                         Mrs. McEvoy.        You are Marian's mother, is that right?
                         Let me explain to you what the format is so you can
                    D    understand the procedure.          I take it you were not here
                         the first day?          I am going to read in a moment what
                         was said right at the beginning, last year, the 19th of
                         April by my Officer          That was the time when I arranged
                         things so you could have Marian's body so you could
                         have the f u n e r a l .   When I have read that if there are
                         any errors in that account we will correct those.          Then
                         I will tell you what the blood alcohol was         if any, and
                    E    when I have finished that Dr. Slater is going to come
                         down.    He is the pathologist and he will tell us the
                         relevant part of his findings.         When he has completed
                         his evidence the Police Officer from the West Midlands
                         Police who have done a lot of the spade work, preparing
                         the summaries and so on, is going to present it.

                               Then we will turn to Inspector Layton.    He is
                          going to deal with what we call the visual part of the
                          evidence.    He will read it out first of all and give
                          us a load of references and numbers, which at that
                          point will be confusing.   We need all those numbers for
                          the record, otherwise we would be confused in a few
                          weeks' time.    Then when he has finished he will come
                          over here and he will show you and everybody else where
                          the various things are he has been talking about.
                          Then we will terminate the hearing.

                               There are limits as to the type of evidence we are
                          taking at this inquest, but I have publicised them
                          quite widely, you probably know them, but if we were to
                          stray outside I would tell you soon enough.

                H
                                                    -   1   -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                    A
                             At each stage I will look to you and ask you
                        whether it is clear and whether there are questions you
                        want to ask.   If there are you can put them, probably
                        better to me so that I can assess them and then we will
                        put them to the witness if that is necessary.     Is that
                        all reasonably straightforward?    (Y e s ) We want you
                    B   to leave having heard as much as we can tell you within
                        the limits of the hearings at the present time, but
                        with the minimum amount of distress which we can cause
                        you arising out of these hearings.

                             These gentlemen here and that lady are all legal
                        representatives of various parties and it is perfectly
                        proper that they should be here.

                             This then is a resumed inquest which was opened on
                        the 19th April, 1989.   Neil Anthony Parkin, acting
                        Coroner's Officer said:

                             "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
                             been identified to PC 3329 Segerius of the South
                             Yorkshire Police as that of Marian Hazel McCabe,
                    D        by Stephen John Oates, her friend.

                             She was 21 years of age having been born on the
                             13th February, 1968, at S t r o o d , Kent. She was a
                             single woman and she lived at
                             Basildon, Essex.   She was a factory worker by
                             occupation.
                    E        She died at Hillsborough football ground following
                             an incident there on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.
                             PC Segerius caused the body to be moved to the
                             Medico Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                             Detective Constable Simon We igold who subsequently
                             identified the same body to Dr. Slater.

                             It is the family wish that the body should be
                             b u r ie d."

                        In fact I think PC Segerius is a lady,      I think her
                        name is Tracy.

                             Now I sent you a form, I don't know if you
                        remember.   On the 26th of April you signed it.    In
                        fact on the form we had typed "Marion", but the correct
                        name is "Marian".   We had also misspelt "Strood",
                        which should be "Strood", but all the rest of the
                        information was correct.

                             Dr. Forrest who did all the alcohol estimations
                        and gave the evidence on the first day and in the case
                        of Marian the result was negative.
                H
                                              - 2 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
     All the witnesses have taken the oath so they are
starting without re-swearing, but if you want to hear
them personally they will take the oath for you.   Are
you happy with what we are doing?   (Y e s )

               DR.   DAVID SLATER Called

                     By THE C O R O N E R :

     THE WITNESS:   My name is Dr.            David Slater.    I am
a consultant histopathologist.

Now, Dr. Slater, can you just deal with the
identification?    I have said it was Simon Weigold.
You, I think, are referring to Inspector Timms.      Can
you just tell us h o w you are satisfied that we are
dealing with this young lady? - A. Yes, sir.     This was
one of the first examinations on the early Sunday
morning and Detective Inspector Timms initially did
this.    Later Detective Constable Weigold was also
present.    The body was clearly labelled for
identification purposes.

You are quite satisfied we are talking of Marian?             - A.
Absolutely.

You prepared a post mortem report and you are now going
to take me through the relevant parts of that? - A. My
examination of Marian showed that the most significant
finding was extensive blueness of the face extending
down to the left side of the tummy.   There was also
congestion of the internal organs.   These findings
were indicative of death having been caused due to
asphyxia.   It was my opinion there had been
compression of the tummy, especially on the left side
and also the left side of the chest.  There were very
few external marks of injury but perhaps significantly
there were scratches over both of the sides of the hips
and also over both of the fronts of the knees.   This
would indicate that possible asphyxia was in a downward
or, as we say medically, a prone position, but that is
opinion and could be altered, sir.

By "prone11 you mean face down? - A. Yes, sir.  My
examination showed that Marian was a normally developed
and fit healthy young lady with no evidence of any
natural disease which could have contributed towards
death.   In my opinion Marian would have had a normal
life expectancy and I submitted my final cause of
death, sir, as traumatic asphyxia.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McEvoy, have you understood
what Dr. Slater has said?
                             MRS. McEVOY:          Yes,

                             THE CORONER:   Is there anything else you want me
                        to ask him regarding the post morte m findings?

                             MRS. M c E V O Y ;    No.
                    B
                             THE CORONER:   Dr. Slater, thank you.    Mrs.
                        McEvoy, would it be helpful to you if Dr. Slater spent
                        a few minutes talking to you about the findings after
                        the inquest?   You don't have to say yes to that, it is
                        just...

                             MR. McEVOY:          We are quite happy with what we have
                        heard.

                             THE CORONER:   In that case,                  Dr.   Slater,   you are
                        free to leave if you wish.

                              DETECTIVE SERGEANT JULIE AP PLETON Called

                                                  By THE C O R O N E R :
                    D
                             THE WITNESS:   Julie Appleton,                  Detective Sergeant
                        of the West Midlands Police.

                      (b. Can you take me through the summary? - A. At about 0820
                          hours on Saturday, 15th April, 1989, Marian McCabe met
                          David Michael Lipworth, Philip Victor Goodman, Daniel
                          Shah and Inger Shah, who also died in the tragedy.
                    E     They met at King's Cross railway station, London.
                          They caught the 0835 hours train to Sheffield, arriving
                          at about 1130 hours.    It was their intention to watch
                          the cup semi final football match at the Hi llsborough
                          football stadium.    All five persons made their way to
                          Hillsborough Stadium where they met other friends,
                          including Stephen John Oates and Gary Oyitch.

                        Whilst there are discrepancies in the times given by
                        the party, there is no doubt that Marian entered the
                        stadium well before the scheduled kick-off time and
                        stood in enclosure 3, the Leppings Lane terracing.

                        Shortly before 1500 hours Marian was was standing with
                        Mrs. Inger Shah, Gary Oyitch and Stephen Oates.

                        Martin Christopher Malone, a Liverpool supporter
                        entered the football ground via turnstile B at about
                        1450 hours.   He made his way along the centre tunnel
                        which runs under the West Stand and into enclosure 3.
                        It was his intention to stand at the rear of enclosure
                        3 but as he attempted to take up this position there
                        was a surge from behind which resulted in him being
                H       carried forward to within one foot of the perimeter

                                                      _   4   _


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                    A
                        fencing.   There was only one person, a woman whom he
                        now knows to be Marian, standing between him and the
                        fence.   It was about 1457 hours and Martin Malone
                        believes that Marian was still alive.

                        The crush was excessive and Mr. Malone was frightened
                    B   for his own safety.    He recalls the football match
                        starting and within a short time became aware that
                        people around him, including Marian, were dying.     Mr.
                        Malone was finding it difficult to breathe and started
                        to vomit.    His recollection from this moment is vague
                        but eventually he managed to make his way out of the
                        pen and into the concourse at the rear of the West
                        Stand.    He had no further dealings with Marian.

                        Shortly after 1510 hours following the severe crushing
                        on the Leppings Lane terrace, Police Constable Melvin
                        Spurr entered the ground from the Leppings Lane
                        entrance and he made his way along the tunnel into
                        enclosure 3.   He saw a number of bodies, including a
                        woman who he now knows to be Marian, lying on the
                        terrace.   Police Constable Spurr with the assistance
                    D   of a fan who has not been identified carried Marian out
                        of enclosure 3 through the gate and on to the pitch.

                        Police Constable Spurr attempted to resuscitate Marian
                        but was unsuccessful.  Together with Woman Police
                        Constable Tracy Segerius and a number of supporters,
                        including Peter McGrath, Police Constable Spurr placed
                        Marian on to an advertising hoarding and carried her to
                        the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had been set
                        up.   Police Woman Segerius remained with Marian in the
                        gymnasium.

                        At 1609 hours Dr. Ma tthew James Bull examined Marian in
                        the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

                        At 0150 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 1989, Mr. Stephen
                        Oates identified the body of Marian to Police Woman
                        Segerius in the temporary mortuary.   The Officer later
                        escorted the body of Marian to the Medico Legal Centre
                        where she confirmed the identification to Detective
                        Constable Simon Weigold.

                        At 2015 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 1989, Mrs.
                        Christine Margaret McEvoy confirmed the identification
                        of her daughter Marian to Woman Detective Constable
                        Christine Wallace.   This occurred at the Medico Legal
                        Centre.

                        On the 16th of April, 1989, Dr. David Slater carried
                        out an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of
                        death.
                H
                                              - 5 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                           Found in the personal effects of Marian was a part
                           ticket for the semi final football match.

                           This concludes my evidence.

                        . In the case of Inger Shah's inquest I think we went
                    B     through all the times of all her various friends? - A.
                          That's right.

                        . I think it varied...   I have had a look at this one
                          and there is a variation of between of about one and
                          ten past two, something of that order? - A. Yes, I have
                          explained to Mr. and Mrs. McEvoy.

                           There is no doubt she was there relatively early,
                           whichever way you look at it? - A. Yes, sir.

                           There are a couple of tiny things which I wanted to
                           clarify with you.   If you turn to page 24, this is
                           Gary Oyitch's statement.   He talks about there being a
                           tight crush at 2.40? - A. Yes, that is correct.

                    D 5.   Then he says that lasted until about four minutes      to
                           three, is that right? - A. That is correct, sir.

                        5 . Then he describes another one or two surges, is that
                           right?    - A. Yes.

                        5 . The "shortly before three o'clock" is based upon that
                           time plus the time it might have taken for these other
                    E      surges to occur? - A. The time referred to in the
                           summaries, you mean, sir?

                        5 . Yes. - A. That comes from Mr. Malone, sir, Martin
                           Malone.

                        5 . That will be page 29? - A. On page 30, sir.

                        3 . Yes, this is the 2.57 you are referring to? -   A.   Yes.

                        5 . The other point from Martin Malone is that you say he
                           entered turnstile B at about 1450, but in fact on page
                           29 he says:

                                "We all got to the terraces at about 1450..."

                           So presumably he entered the turnstile a little bit
                           earlier?   Would that be reasonable? - A. That is
                           correct, sir.

                         . It should really say:

                                "We were on the terraces at 1450"?
                H
                                                   - 6 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                          - A. Yes.

                          PC Spurr, page 36, he says as far as he r e m e m b e r s _there
                          was no Policeman or woman whilst he was dealing with
                          Marian and as far as he can remember no other Police
                          Officer, male or female, accompanied him to the gym?
                          About six lines down, page 36. - A. That is correct,
                          sir.
                    B
                          Then if you look at Tracy Segerius's statement, page
                          49, she describes accompanying Marian across the pitch
                          to the gymnasium? - A. That is correct, sir, and she is
                          the officer who stayed with Marian in the gymnasium.

                          She then explains on page 51 that she was not actually
                          carrying Marian's body.   Can you look at page 51?
                          she says:

                                "I accompanied the body."

                           - A. That is correct.

                          She says:
                    D           "I am not on the photographs because I was
                                following behind."

                           - A. Yes.

                        Q- Presumably PC Spurr did not even know she was there?-
                          A. That is right,    sir.
                    E
                        Q- Though she in fact remembers it because she stayed with
                           Marian's body?   - A. Yes.

                                THE CORONER:      Is that all clear to you as far as
                           we have got?

                                MR. McEVOY:     Yes.

                                THE CORONER:      Do you want to ask any questions?

                                MR. McEVOY:     No questions.

                                THE CORONER:      Thank you, Officer.

                                 DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                                                By THE C O R O N E R :

                                THE WITNESS:   Sir, I am Michael Layton,        Detective
                           Inspector of the West Midlands Police.



                    H                              - 7 -



J. L. Harpham Ltd
 . Yes, Officer. - A. Sir, an examination has been made of
   video film and pho tographic evidence and Marian has
   been identified alive in enclosure number 3.

     She is shown on a video which has been given the
     reference number MAP.l and that, sir, is timed at
     1451.22.24.   That is a BBC tape.   She is also shown,
     apparently unconscious at this stage, on a photograph
     which has been given the reference number PR.1/13A and
     that is timed at 1503.   Police Constable Spurr has
     viewed visual evidence and has identified himself
     carrying Marian across the pitch on a photograph which
     has been given the reference number FB.1/29.   The
     Officer has signed a plan of the terraces indicating
     the approximate location at which he found Marian and a
     plan of the pitch area indicating the approximate
     position at which he placed Marian on the pitch.
     Those two plans are referenced MS.l and MS. 2.

     Martin Malone has not viewed visual evidence, sir.
     However, he states he can identify himself and Marian
     from a photograph that appeared in the Daily Mirror
     newspaper on the 17th of April.   We have a copy of
     that photograph and it is referenced DAC.3/5.
     Basically in respect of Martin Malone he was just too
     upset to actually look at anything.

<b. Yes, I understand. - A. Sir, can I refer you to a plan
    which has been given the reference number MWJL.27?

Q. That will be C.150.    - A. Do you wish to refer to PC
   Spurr's plan, sir?

Q.   I think we should.   - A. MS.l is a plan of the terraces.

Q.   That will be C.151   - A. And M S . 2 which   is a plan of the
     pitch.

Q. Whi ch will be C.152. - A. Sir, in respect of the plan
   MWJL.27 the photograph PR.1/15A, the timed photograph,
   the location Marian is shown in is in this position
   here.    This is the South Yorkshire Police photograph,
   PR.1/15A.    The pho tograph shown on the plan PR.1/15A
   is timed at 1504.There are a series       of photographs
   but they are all in the same position.

}. Just show us again, 1504? - A. That is here, sir.   I
   think it is fair to say that Inger Shah who we have
   already heard about, was directly next to Marian.

     Sir, in respect of PC Spurr's plan, MS.l, the point at
     which he has indicated locating Marian is in this
     position h e r e , which again is in enclosure number 3.
     In respect of the pitch plan, M S . 2, the position he has

                           - 8 -
                             indicated, again PC Spurr, has indicated a position
                             there on the pitch.

                                  THE CORONER:      Mrs. McEvoy is that clear to you?

                                  MR. McEVOY:      Yes.

                    B             THE CORONER:      Do you want       to ask him anything
                             about the plans?

                                  MR. McEVOY:      No,    thank you.

                                       Cross-Examined by MR. C A T C H P O L E :

                        o,   Did you identify where Marian was on BBC video, MAP.l?
                             - A. I think that was the reference made in the
                             summary.

                        (i, That is the reference, it is MAP.l, 1451.22.24.    I
                            wonder if you could identify that position? - A. Yes.
                            It is fair to say that that is in exactly the same
                            position as the first one I referred to.

                    D             MR. CATCHPOLE:         Thank you.

                                  THE CORONER:      Thank you, Officer.

                                  This is as far as we are going to take the
                             evidence today.   Your daughter, of course, was a very
                             much photographed person and I suspect that that made
                             things harder for you because it became an event, so to
                    E        speak, and I feel for you in that.   I am not making
                             any criticism of the photographers because as I said at
                             the opening, although at the time there was quite a lot
                             of criticism made, in the event some of those
                             photographs have proved exceedingly helpful in finding
                             where people were, but that, of course, did not help
                             you at the time.

                                  Be it that she was photographed or not, the really
                             important thing is that you had a daughter who went to
                             a football match and you lost her and I am very, very
                             sorry indeed that this should have happened to her, to
                             her friend, but particularly to you.     Although we are
                             dealing with a lot of cases, we try in each individual
                             case to think that we are dealing with one very special
                             person and this is a special person to you and I quite
                             understand that.    Thank you for coming this morning.

                              (The inquest into the death of MARIAN HAZEL McCABE
                                     was adjourned to a date to be f i x e d )



                H
                                                         - 9 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
