                                                                                           M I R . 15




 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and tim e raised
                                                                           <-7_x oST<*D                 Num ber

             3_<2?sr
 T itle
*rJ Include source and any document number i f relevant)                  31 0 2 _

  Receiv^-'s instructions -- urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                      Receiver




                                                                                                                         Indexer
  Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

  No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                  Statement Reader
  Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                         Indexer
  Indexed as indicated                                     '

  No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                  0 /M         SIO
  Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




                                                                                                                         Indexer
  Further action No(s)


  When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
   HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                       (WEST DISTRICT)



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                  STADIUM DISASTER

               ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



              INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

               RAYMOND THOMAS CHAPMAN




                          Bef ore

DR. S.L.    POPPER,    LL.B,    B .M E D .Sci , B M , B S , MRCGP

               (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                               At

              The Medico-Legal Centre,
                   Watery Street,
                     Shef f i e l d .

                               On

                      30th April 1990




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harphara, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR.    D. FRASER           Hillsborough Solicitors'   Group
                           Steering Committee

MR.    S. SMITH            Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.      CALLAGHAN         Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.      GREGORY           Sheffield City Council

MISS      THORPE           Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR.    P. ISAACS           Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                              INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT



                                                                    Page

                    B
                        OPENING BY THE CORONER                        1   .
                        )R. DAVID NEIL SLATER Called

                             By THE CORONER                           2   .
                             Cross-Examined by MR.   FRASER           3.

                        )ETECTIVE CONSTABLE PETER GATSBY Called

                             By THE CORONER                           4.

                        bETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                             By THE CORONER
                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        Monday,   30th April,   1990


                                        THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                                            RAYMOND THOMAS CHAPMAN
                    B
                                MR. FRASER:    Sir, you are now going to hear
                           evidence relating to Raymond Chapman.   Mrs. Chapman is
                           in court with her daughter Karen and a social worker
                           sits behind them, sir.  Sir, Mrs. Chapman's solicitors
                           are a member of my group and I therefore appear in the
                           usual guise as a member of the steering committee on
                           their behalf.

                                THE CORONER:   Now, Mrs. Chapman, I am very
                           pleased you have been able to make it because I know
                           you have just had an operation and I am glad you have
                           made sufficient recovery to be able to get down to
                           Sheffield.   I have worked on a ward where people had
                           your sort of operation so I know a little bit about it.
                    D
                                Now what we are going to do this afternoon is for
                           me to tell you what happened when I opened the inquest
                           over a year ago now on the 18th of April, 1989.    Then
                           I will correct any errors which there may be in the
                           information there, tell you what the blood alcohol
                           level was.   Dr. Slater, the pathologist, will then come
                           and tell us what is necessary from the post mortem
                    E      findings and then we turn to a police officer from the
                           West Midlands Police who has prepared a summary.    Then
                           Inspector Layton will deal with the visual evidence.
                           When we come to the visual evidence you may find it is
                           a bit confusing, particularly in the beginning because
                           there are a lot of references to plan numbers and so
                           on.    Don't be too concerned about that because
                           Inspector Layton, when he has finished there, walks
                           round to here and shows us on the big plans what he is
                           talking about and then the whole thing falls into
                           place.

                                    This then is a resumed inquest.     It was opened on
                           the 18th of April, 1989.         Neil Anthony Parkin, acting
                           C o r o n e r 's .Officers said:

                                  "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
                                  been identified to PC 3318 Popplewell of the South
                                  Yorkshire Police as that of Raymond Thomas
                                  Chapman, by John Michael Pleavin, his friend.    He
                                  was 50 years of age having been born on the 29th
                                  of June, 1938 at Birkenhead.

                H
                                                       -   1   -



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                 He was a married man and he lived at
                                                     Birkenhead.

                                 He was a fitter by occupation.

                                 He died at Hillsborough football ground following
                                 an incident there on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.
                    B            PC Popplewell caused the body to be removed to the
                                 Medico Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                                 Detective Constable Simon Weigold, who
                                 subsequently identified the same body to Dr.
                                 Slater.

                                  It is the family wish that the body should be
                                  cremated.11

                             Then I adjourned the inquest and I wrote to you and you
                             very kindly replied.    You corrected the a d d r e ss
                             because we had got it w r o n g .   You said it was C D
                                                              Birkenhead.   The
                             occupation we altered from 'fitter11 to "machine
                             setter".

                    D             The only thing I want to check with Mrs. Chapman
                             is that we have got his name as Raymond Thomas Chapman
                             and you confirmed that, but in one of the statements, I
                             think by his son, he refers to your husband as Raymond
                             Thomas John Chapman.   Now what is his name?

                                  MRS. CHAPMAN:      Raymond Thomas Chapman.

                    E                THE CORONER:   John doesn't count, All right,   so
                             long as we have got it right.

                                  I said I would tell you what the alcohol level
                             was.  Dr. Forrest did the estimations and he gave
                             evidence about this on the first day.  The level in
                             respect of Raymond was 91 mg/100 ml.   Dr. Slater.

                                         DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER Called

                                                  By THE C O R O N E R :

                                  THE WITNESS:   David Neil Slater, Consultant
                             Histopathologist and Fellow of the Royal College of
                             Pathologists.

                             This gentleman was identified to you as number 67,
                             Raymond Chapman? - A. That is correct, sir.

                        5.   However, you accept that he might have got more names,
                             as, indeed, he has.   It is Raymond Thomas. - A. That
                             is correct, sir.

                H
                                                     - 2 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
Tell me a little bit about him, please. - A. My
examination of Mr. Chapman showed that he had excessive
blueness of the face which extended to the upper part
of the chest.   This was accompanied by areas of
hemorrhage.   These findings were indicative that Mr.
Chapman had died from asphyxia.   It was my impression
that this was due to compression of the upper part of
the tummy and also lower part of the chest.




In addition Mr. Chapman showed a small amount of vomit
in the mouth, but there was no evidence of any
inhalation of this into the windpipe.

The marks of injury on the body were quite trivial and
I submitted my final cause of death, sir, as traumatic
asphyxia.

I think you said in your view he probably had a normal
life expectancy, given he was aged 50 with that amount
of... - A. Yes.    I would say he would have a normal
life expectancy...

For somebody of his age? - A. Yes,   sir.

           Cross-Examined by MR.   FRASER:

Dr. Slater, for the benefit really of Mrs. Chapman, can
you offer her some reassurance about the timescale for
loss of consciousness in Mr. Chapman?   She is
obviously very concerned to have your reassurance, if
that is possible, that he really did not suffer very
much discomfort? - A. This is clearly very important
and I think I can offer reassurance in that the normal
mode of death with this crushing type of asphyxia is
that unconsciousness comes on very, very quickly,
usually, say, within five to ten seconds, as rapid as
that.   Then there is total unconsciousness and then
there is no awareness of further pain or discomfort at
all.   Death then unfortunately is another one to five
minutes quite frequently, but consciousness is lost
very, very rapidly and no further awareness of what is
going on occurs.

     MR. FRASER:    I am grateful for that and I am
sure Mrs. Chapman is.

     THE CORONER:     Dr. Slater,      thank you.

      DETECTIVE CONSTABLE PETER GATSBY Called

                    By THE C O R O N E R :

     THE WITNESS:   I am Peter Gatsby,        a Detective
Constable in the West Midlands Police.

Yes, Officer. - A. The circumstances in this case are
that at about 1030 hours on Saturday, 15th April, 1989,
Mr. Andr ew Raymond Chapman saw his father Raymond
Thomas Chapman leave the family home with the intention
of travelling to Sheffield.    He was to watch the FA
Cup semi final football match at Hillsborough Stadium.

John Michael Pleavin travelled by car to Sheffield with
a number of friends, including Raymond Chapman and
Thomas Fox.    In fact Thomas Fox is also a man who died
that day, sir.

They arrived in Sheffield at about 1345 hours and
visited a public house for refreshments.   The group
then travelled to Hillsborough Stadium by taxi and
Raymond and Thomas Fox separated from the others as
they had tickets for the West Stand terracing.

Mr. Pleavin last saw    the two men at about 1440 hours
outside the stadium.

Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
terracing, Police Constable 81 Shaune Coller, assisted
to remove persons from enclosure 3.  He recalls
lifting a man he now believes to be Raymond from the
terraces and through gate 3.   He was assisted by other
officers.

Police Inspector Trevor Harvey, Police Sergeant 840
James Wright, Police Constable 2236 Stephen Brown and
Police Constable 1887 Malcolm Beaumont assisted to
carry Raymond on to the pitch where resuscitation
efforts were made but without success.

Ian George Johnston was a spectator at the match and
assisted in carrying injured persons across the pitch.
He helped to carry Raymond on a hoarding to the Spion
Kop end of the ground.   Police Constable Beaumont
remained with the group that carried Raymond across the
pitch and with Constable 465 Geoffrey Glave supervised
Raymond and other casualties being carried into the
gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had been set up.

Police Constable Bruce Russon recalled attempting to
resuscitate a man he now believes to be Raymond in the
penalty area at the Spion Kop end of the ground.  The
officer left to assist other people.

Police Constable Beaumont recalls that a doctor said
Raymond was dead on the pitch, but the identity of this
doctor has not been established.

At 1555 hours Police Constable Esther Popplewell was
directed to the gymnasium and assumed responsibility
for Raymond.

At 1607 hours Dr. Matthew James Bull examined Raymond
in the mortuary and certified life extinct.

At 2315 hours John Michael Pleavin identified Raymond's
body to Police Constable Popplewell at the temporary
mortuary.   The same officer later escorted the body of
Raymond to the Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the
identification to Detective Constable Simon Weigold.

On Sunday, 16th April, 1989, Mr. Andrew Raymond Chapman
confirmed the identification of his father at the
Medico Legal Centre and following the identification by
Detective Constable Weigold, Dr. David Slater carried
out an autopsy and submitted a report giving the cause
of death.

Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
blood sample from the deceased where the presence of
ethanol was detected.  The witnesses proving continuity
of the blood sample are Detective Constable David
Green, Detective Sergeant John Turner and Detective
Sergeant James Fletcher.   Dr. Alexander Robert Forrest
carried out the analysis.

Found in the personal effects of Raymond Chapman was a
full ticket for the match, but in the circumstances it
cannot be established ho w or when he entered the
stadium.

There is some visual evidence,   sir.

The officer to whom Andrew Raymond Chapman identified
at the Medico Legal Centre we have not identified, have
we?   At least, we have not got a statement. - A. That
is right, sir.   There were a number of them who were
treated after the original identification.
                        There was an identification by Mr. Pleavin, of course,
                        so it may have been looked at as viewing rather than as
                        a... - A . That is correct.

                             MR. FRASER:       Mr. Chapman's family has no
                        questions, sir.

                             THE CORONER:      Thank you,      officer.
                    B
                             DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                                             By THE C O R O N E R :

                             THE WITNESS:   Sir, I am Michael Layton,      Detective
                        Inspector of the West Midlands Police.

                        Yes, Inspector. - A. Sir, an examination has been made
                        of video film and photograph evidence and Mr. Chapman
                        has been identified on the pitch.   Police Constable
                        Coller has signed a plan of enclosure number 3
                        indicating where he first saw Mr. Chapman and a plan of
                        the pitch area indicating the position where he carried
                        him from the enclosure.   Those plans, sir, are
                        referenced SAC.l and SAC.3.
                    D
                        On a photograph which has been given the reference
                        number SSSE.1/6, Police Constable Glave and Ian
                        Johnston, the supporter already mentioned, is shown
                        with Mr. Chapman at the Spion Kop end of the ground and
                        both persons have in fact confirmed this
                        identification.
                    E
                        On a photograph referenced CS.1/65, PC Beaumont is
                        shown near to three deceased, including Mr. Chapman.
                        Again this is at the Spion Kop end of the ground.    The
                        officer himself has confirmed this identification.

                        On a further photograph, referenced N G N . 1/46 Mr.
                        Chapman is shown lying on the pitch and the stadium
                        clock can be seen in the background showing the time
                        1532.

                        Sir, I think there was an error originally in the
                        summary initially submitted in the sense that Mr.
                        Andrew Raymond Chapman, that is Mr. Chapman's son, did
                        in fact view visual evidence in an attempt to identify
                        his father alive for us.   This, unfortunately, was
                        unsuccessful.   He felt he did not wish to view any
                        evidence post-event, so to speak, so as such the
                        photograph identifications have not been confirmed.

                        I see.     In fact all the photographic evidence is p o s t ­
                        event?   - A. Yes, I think that puts the matter right,
                        sir.

                H                               - 6 -



J. L. Harpham Ltd
Can I refer you to a plan referenced SAC.l, which is a
plan by PC Coller, of the terraces?

Yes, that will be C.172. - A. Would you wish to go then
to S A C . 3, which is a plan of the pitch area?

Yes, please.   That will be C.173.      - A. Also a further
plan, sir, MWJL.91.

Yes, C.174. - A. Sir, if I can deal with the first plan
which is referenced SAC.l.     This is a plan by PC
Coller.   The point at which he indicates Mr. Chapman
is in this...   This is enclosure number 3 and it is at
this location here in enclosure number 3.     This is
actually gate number 3.

SAC.3, sir, the plan of the pitch area, PC Coller has
indicated a position here actually within the penalty
area at the Leppings Lane end of the pitch.

Then in respect of the plan MWJL.91, there are two
photograph identifications, sir.       One refers to
photograph T O D . 1/27 and the other one is CS.1/65.
They are both at the Spion Kop end of the pitch which
is the other end of the pitch.       One is h e r e , sir and
the second one is approximately this position h e r e .

     THE   CORONER:   Mr. Fraser,    is that clear?

     MR. FRASER:   It is clear and there         are no
questions, sir, thank you.

     THE   CORONER:   Thank you,    Inspector.

     Mrs. Chapman, that is all the evidence we are
going to listen to today.   It is very good of you to
have come, bearing in mind your present situation.  As
I have already said, I am pleased that you are well
enough to have been able to do it.

     I would like you to know that we are very, very
conscious that the loss of your husband must have been,
and no doubt still is, a very great blow to you.    Not
only to you but of course to the children and other
members of your family.

     Although we have to deal with some technicalities
when we deal with inquests,    I try to remember that
inquests are special in the    sense that we are dealing
with people who are loved and that we have got bereaved
people present in court.    I want you to know that
although we concentrate on these plans and the
references and one thing and another, in the end we
were thinking in this particular inquest of your very
                        own husband,   Thank you for coming.   I am pleased   to
                        see you.

                        (The inquest into the death of RAYMOND THOMAS CHAPMAN
                                 was adjourned to a date to be fi xed)



                    B




                    D




                    E




                H                            - 8 -



J. L. Harpham Ltd
