                                                                                            M I R . 15



                                                                                O ST ~°s O               Number
    OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and tim e raised

                 ^ 0 ^ .                                                   n                _
    T itle        - T < ^ v > g c e , p g r-

f   { Include source and any document number i f relevant)

'■i»c        ■
    Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Yes/No
                                                                                                                      Receiver




                                                                                                                      Indexer
    D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

    No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                  Statem ent Reader
    Statem ent reader's instructions


                                                                                                                       Indexer
     Indexed as indicated

     No(s) o f actions raised

     Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




                                                                                                                        ndexer
     Further action No(s)

     When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Number Form
      HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                         • -(WEST D I S T R I C T )



              INQUESTS INTO THE D EATHS OF THE

        VICTIMS OF THE H I L L S B O R O U G H .FOOTBALL

                     STADIUM DISASTER

                  ON THE 15TH APRIL,      1989



                 INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                  PETER FRANCIS TO0TLE




                            Before

DR.    S.L.    POPPER.   LL.B,    B.MED.Sci,   B M , BS,   MRCGP

                  (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                                 At

                 The Medico-Legal Centre.
                      Watery S t r e e t ,
                        Sheffield.

                                 On

                  2nd May 1990




                 TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEE D I N G S




        From the Nores of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.
             Official Shorthand Writers.
         55. Queen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX
                            APPEARANCES:



MR.    D. FRASER                Hillsborough Solicitors'   Group
                                Steering Committee

MR.    S. SMITH                 Medical and Dental Union of
                                Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                                Forrest)

MR.         CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                                South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                                Ambulance Service

MR.         GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS         THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN                Police Federation of England and
                                Wales

MR.    P.    ISAACS             Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS.    B. NORCLIFFE and         Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire
MR.    P. METCALF               Constabulary

MR.    S ., CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.        JACKSON
                                                             INDEX


                        DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Called

                    g     By THE CORONER                                                     1


                        POLICE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCK - Called

                          By THE CORONER ....................
                          Cross-examined by MR. LIMB ..


                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                          By THE C O R O N E R ..............................................6




                    D

                                                        -   00   -   -   00-




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        2nd May 1990

                                INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF PETER FRANCIS TOOTLE

                                MR. FRASER:   Sir, the first evidence you will hear
                           today relates to Peter Francis Tootle. . Peter's parents are
                           in Court with members of his family and I appear in a
                           personal capacity for the family but. also, of course, as a
                           member of the Hillsborough Steering Committee in the usual
                    B     w*y
                                THE CORONER:    Good morning, Mr. and Mrs. Tootle and -
                           everybody else.   Which is mum and dad'? Yes-  Before we take
                           the evidence I am just going to describe to you the
                           procedure so that you can follow and so that you know what
                           comes next, so to speak, because it is easier for you to
                           follow if I do that, I think.   What we are going to do in
                           the first instance is I am going to read to you what
                           happened on 19th April 1989 which is when I was in this
                           Court and I dealt with the initial evidence so that I could
                           allow the body to come home for the funeral and when I have
                           done that, if there are any errors in that, we will try and
                           correct them.   I don't think there are in this particular
                           case and then I will tell you about the blood alcohols.
                           When I have completed that, Dr. Slater, who is sitting up
                    D     there and who is a Pathologist, will give his evidence
                           regarding the pathological investigation-

                                On   completion of that the West Midlands Police Officer
                           who has   prepared a summary for me will present the summary
                           and when he has completed it, Inspector Layton will deal
                           with the visual evidence.   We start over there, Inspector
                           Layton recounts it verbally and tells me all about it.     He
                    E      gives us all the references, the plan numbers and one thing
                           and another so the shorthand writer can get it all down so
                           that we all know what we are talking about.     It is a little
                           confusing at that point but then he walks round here and on
                           his big plans he will show us what he has been* talking
                           about.    So it does become clear as you will find out in a
                           moment.    When that is finished that is all the evidence we
                           are dealing with at that stage.     Is that reasonably clear so
                           that you know what the format is going to be.     It will make
                           sense as we are going along, particularly if you have this
                           in the back of your minds.   If you forget it, it doesn't
                           matter.

                                This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened on
                           19th April 1989 and on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin, my
                           Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                                “The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                                identified to PC 1929 Friend of the South Yorkshire
                                Police as that of Peter Francis Tootle by Paul Raymond
                                Frodsharn, his friend- He was 21 years of age having


                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                          DR.   DAVID NEIL SLATER



                               been born on 2nd F ebruary 1968 at Liverpool         He was a
                               single man and lived at
                               Liverpool-         He was a labourer by occupation.  He died
                               at Hillsborough Football Ground following an incident
                               there on Saturday, 15th April 1989.         PC Friend caused
                               the body to be removed to the Medico Legal Centre and
                               there he identified it to Detective Constable Simon
                               Weigold who subsequently identified the same body to
                               Dr. Slater.         It is the family wish that the body should
                    B          be b u r i e d . "

                               I then wrote to you, I do not know if you remember,
                          Mr. Tootle, but on 13th May you signed a form for rne and in
                          effect you confirmed all this information was correct and
                          that is still so, isn't it?  (indicating; agreement-)

                               Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol level in the case of
                          Peter and he gave  us the evidence on the first day when we
                          resumed, in fact,  a fortnight ago now and the result in the
                          case of Peter was negative.  Perhaps I should mention that
                          everybody who is giving evidence today has already taken the
                          Oath so that has already been done.

                                        DR. DAVID WEIL SLATER - Called

                    D                            Bv THE C O R O W E R ;

                        Q. Dr. Slater, if you would start in the usual way;' -A. Wy
                           name is Dr. David  Weil Slater.   I am a Consultant
                           Histopathologist and a Fellow of the Royal College of
                           Pathology, sir.

                    P   Q. Now this young man we are talking about which you recorded
                           as Peter Tootle because you did not know his middle name at
                           that time, you also knew by identification number o 9 , is
                           that right? - A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q. Although we have said Simon Weigold did the identification,
                           in fact, one of the Inspectors who was with him-  You
                           perceived it was him who was identified to you? - A. He was
                           the initial identifying Officer, yes.

                        Q. You are quite happy that the evidence you are giving relates
                           to this young man Peter Tootle? - A. Certainly, sir, yes.

                        Q. Dr. Slater, perhaps you would be kind enough to tell us then
                           what your findings were - your relevant findings - and cause
                           of death? - A. My examination of Peter showed that the
                           general findings were those of asphyxia.  These were
                           indicated by extensive blueness of the face extending to the
                           upper part of the chest.  This was also accompanied by
                           numerous small haemorrhages on the face called petechial
                           haemorrhages.  Similar haemorrhages were also present
                           internally including in the brain, lungs, heart and also the


                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                    DR.   DAVID NEIL SLATER



                             voice box.  The distribution of this blueness was such to
                             indicate traumatic comp ression of the chest and upper part
                             of the tummy and this was supported by a reasonably large
                             scratch to the right lower side of the chest and also two
                             large scratches to the back.

                                  Ily examination of Peter showed that he was normally
                             developed, fit and healthy, with no evidence of any natural
                             disease which could have contributed towards death.   It is
                    B        my opinion that Peter would have had a normal life
                             expectancy and I submitted my cause of death, sir, as
                             traumatic asphyxia.

                        Q.   I know the Jury have heard this but, of course, the family
                             haven't.  Can you just deal with what your view is with
                             regard to loss of consciousness and the pain and suffering
                             which people suffer because obviously the family naturally
                             are worried about that I would imagine? - A. This nature of
                             death, sir, unconsciousness occurs very rapidly, normally
                             within three to five seconds, and after that there is no
                             awareness of any pain or discomfort and death supervenes
                             after another three to five minutes.

                        Q.   In other words, we have had variations on the loss of
                             consciousness of what you say up to fifteen or twenty
                    D        seconds.  Anyway, it is a very short period of time
                             whichever way you look at it? - A- I was reading a paper
                             last night, sir, which was quite interesting-   It described
                             a case where somebody had actually recov ered after it but
                             unconsciousness occurred virtually instantaneously.

                        Q. Really? - A. Yes, that was the finding,        sir,   yes.
                    E   Q.   I am pleased to hear that because although it doesn't bring
                             the people back it does make it more easier to bear the
                             thought, doesn't it? - A. Yes-

                                  THE CORONER:   Thank you for mentio ning that.
                             Mr. Fraser.

                                  MR- FRASER:   The family have no questions, sir, but I
                             have taken the liberty of asking Mrs- Tootle whether she
                             would like to spend a few minutes with Dr- Slater and if he
                             would be so kind I am sure she would be most g r a t e f u l .

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   Dr. Slater,   you do not have any
                             objection? - A. No.

                        Q. You are here in other cases? - A- Yes-

                        Q. All today, in fact.  I will explain to Mrs. Tootle our
                           normal procedure but that will be fine. - A. Yes.




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                         P.s.   JOHN KILLOCK



                                     POLICE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCK - Called

                                                By THE C O R O W E R ;

                        Q. Yes. - A. Police Sergeant John Killock of the West Midlands
                           Police, sir.  I have previously taken the Oath.

                        Q. Would you please, when you are ready, take me through the
                           summary? - A. At 0900 hours on Saturday, 15th April 1989,
                    B      Mr. Peter Francis Tootle senior woke his son, also named
                           Peter Francis Tootle, who was to attend to the Sheffield
                           football match to be played at Hillsborough.

                                Peter left Liverpool at 1030 hours and travelled to
                           Sheffield with his uncle, Stephen Tootle, and a friend,
                           Colin Frodsham.  They travelled in Stephen Tootle's car
                           arriving in Sheffield at 1230 hours.  After parking the
                           vehicle they made their way to the grpund and stood on the
                           Leppings Lane bridge from 1300 hours until 1440 hours.   At
                           this point Stephen Tootle left to take his seat in the
                           stands.

                                At 1445 hours, Colin Frodsham and Peter joined the crowd
                           at the turnstiles.  Gate C was opened and both Mr. Frodsham
                           and Peter entered the stadium via that gate.   They went
                    D      along the tunnel into Enclosure No. 3.   With the pressure of
                           the crowd from behind they ended up approximately eight feet
                           from the perimeter fence.  Mr- Frodsham became unconscious
                           for a short time-  When he regain consciousness he found
                           himself further up the terrace.  He could see Peter lying on
                           his back about five yards away from him-   There was a Police
                           Officer, who has not unfortunately been identified, who was
                           attempting to resuscitate Peter.  The Officer's attempts
                           were unsuccessful and he left Peter to attend to other
                           casualties.  Mr. Frodsham was assisted from the terrace and
                           subsequently attended hospital.

                                Shortly after 1505 hours following the severe crushing
                           in the West Stand terracing Police Constable Friend went on
                           to the pitch and assisted with several casualties.  At some
                           time between 1520 and 1540 hours he saw a man he knows to be
                           Peter lying on the pitch to the corner of the North Stand
                           and the Spion Kop.  He examined Peter and then, with the
                           assistance of another Officer, PC Griffiths, he carried
                           Peter into the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had been
                           set up -

                                At 1554 hours Dr- Matthew James Bull examined Peter in
                           the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

                                At 2230 hours Mr. Paul Raymond Frodsham identified his
                           friend Peter to Police Constable Friend in the temporary
                           mortuary -



                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                             P.s.   JOHN KILLOCK



                        Q. Yes, it is only a trivial point but we said 1440 they stayed
                           on the bridge and on page three he said 1445 or have I .
                           missed another reference? - A- Are you referring to his
                           s t a t e m e n t , sir?

                        Q.   I am sorry, I am referring to paragraph two and page three
                             of his statement-    I arn sorry, I beg your pardon- This is
                             Colin Frodsharn 's statement.

                    B             Police Constable Friend later escorted Peter to the
                             Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
                             Detective Constable Weigold.

                                  At 0810 hours on Sunday, 16th April 1989, Hr. Peter
                             Francis Tootle senior attended at the Medico Legal Centre
                             where he confirmed that identification to Detective
                             Constable Kinsella.

                                  Later that day, following examination by Detective
                             Constable Weigold, Dr. David Slater carried out an autopsy
                             and submitted a report giving the cause of death.   It has
                             been established that Peter entered via Gate C and although
                             no ticket was found in his personal effects Mr. Frodsham
                             does confirm that Peter was in possession of a ticket when
                             they entered the ground.  That concludes my evidence, sir.
                    D        There is visual evidence.

                        Q.   Can you just bear with me for a moment?        This is only a
                             trivial point but we said 1440 that        they    stayed on the
                             bridge and I    think on page three he said        1445? -A- Are you
                             refer ring to the s t a t e m e n t . sir?

                    E   Q- Sorry, I am referring to paragraph two, page three of his
                           statement.  This is Colin F r o d s h a m 's statement. Yes, I can
                           see where you get 2.40 from-      It is on page four actually.
                        A- Yes. from the statement.

                        Q.   It is halfway down the page actually,     -A.    He does,   in
                             fact, give two times.

                        Q. That is not surprising at all.  The other thing, from the
                           visual evidence we know - this is in paragraph four - you
                           mention 1520.  You say some time between 1520 and 1540
                           hours. - A. That is right, sir.

                        Q    He is identified at 1520 in that area.  Where do we get the
                             1540 from, can you remember? - A. The two times, sir, it is
                             a mixture of two times.  One is a video source and the other
                             is from one of the statements.  1540 hours, pages 16 and 20
                             of your document, sir.

                        Q. Thank you very much.  It was just that I c o u l d n ’t recollect
                           that.  One other point I think you said Francis Griffiths
                           with an 's' but I think it is without an 's'. - A. My
                           apologies, sir, it is Griffith.
                H                                           5



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                 P.s.    JOHN KILLOCK



                                     THE CORONER:      Mr. Fraser,     anything else?

                                     MR. FRASER:      P e t e r ’s family have no questions,      thank
                             you •


                                                 Cross-Examined by Mr. LIMB

                        Q.   Is it known by which opening of Gate C Mr. Frodsham and
                    B        Peter entered? - A. Could I just have a second to refer to
                             Mr. F r o d s h a m 's statement, sir?

                                  THE CORONER:   Certainly.            Page 5, third paragraph, "By
                             this time it was about 2.50".            Then he goes on talking about
                             the Gate.

                                  NR- LIMB:         The greater likelihood,     sir,    is that   it is
                             the 2.52.

                                     THE CORONER:      Sorry?

                                  MR- LIMB:   The greater likelihood           is that entry was by
                             the 2.52 entrance.

                    D                 THE CORONER:     You must bear in mind when people give a
                             time you have, to treat it with a certain amount of caution
                             but he says, "By this time it was about 2.50 and Peter and
                             myself were in about the same position as when we joined the
                             crowd".        So he obviously had not got in at the point.   He
                             c o u l d n ’t have got in at 2.48 but he doesn't then say whether
                             it was the 2-52 or the 2-59 opening.

                    E             THE WITNESS:   He does say further on, sir,             that he
                             recalls being ushered through the gate.

                        Q-        THE CORONER:   Pardon? - A- He does say further on he
                             recalls being ushered through the gate and that confirms the
                             second opening.

                        Q- Where is that?  Can you remind me? ~ A. Further on in the
                           paragraph we have just quoted, about halfway down the
                           statement, sir, "Everybody was being ushered through..."

                        Q.   "A large gate" which would confirm the 2.52 entry,             wouldn't
                             it? - A. Yes.

                                     MR. LIMB:      Thank you.

                                  THE CORONER:         Is that satisfactory?     Is that clear,
                             Mr. Limb?

                                     MR. LIMB:      Yes, thank you,    sir.



                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                             D. I. MICHAEL LAYTON



                                  THE CORONER:     Hr. Catchpole.

                                  MR- CATCHPOLE:     No thank you,       sir.

                                   DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - C a l l e d :

                                                    Bv THE C O R O N E R :

                        Q- Yes. - A- Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector, West ^
                    B        Midlands Police.  Sir, an examination has been made of video
                             film and photographic evidence and Peter has been identified
                             in Enclosure No. 3.

                                  Brian Peter Tootle, Peter's uncle, who in fact is in
                             Court today has viewed visual evidence and has identified
                             his nephew alive in Enclosure No. 3 .on a photograph
                             referenced PR1/10A.  That photograph is timed at 1503 and my
                             perception of the photograph, sir, is that Peter is at that
                             time still alive although it is not possible to say at what
                             stage of the medical process he has reached.

                                  PC Friend has viewed visual evidence but was unable to
                             identify himself actually dealing with Peter on the pitch
                             but the Officer has signed a plan of the pitch area
                    D        indicating the approximate location in which he found Peter.
                             That plan is referenced J E F 1 -

                        Q    Before you move on to the plans, I have already re ferred to
                             his comment.  He identified himself I think on MAP 7 at 15^.0
                             page 22.  Can you just double check that?  He has identified
                             himself in other places but the one he has mentioned is
                             that? - A. That is right, sir-  He refers to MAP 7 timed at
                    E        1520:13:18.  He says, "I can say that I was working in the
                             area to the left of the Gate in the pen itself".   Sir, can I
                             refer you to two plans?

                        Q. Let me get this right.  He goes on to say he hasn't actually
                           identified himself on that film? - A. That is right., sir-

                        Q. At that time had chosen a location where he remembers he was
                           working? - A. That is exactly right, sir, yes.

                        Q.   Yes, because I had misread that slightly.   Thank you.
                        A.   If I can refer you  to a plan MWJL63, the plan of the
                             t e r r a c e s ...

                        Q. That will be C196.      - A. And the plan by PC Friend,       sir,
                           JEF1

                        Q ■ That will be C197. - A. Which is the plan of the pitch
                             (moved to p l a n ) i f we can refer to MWJL63 first- of all t-he
                             plan of the terraces and the photograph we have referred to,
                             the timed photograph at 1503       this is Enclosure N o . 3 and
                             the point at which we believe Peter is shown is

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                           D .I . MICHAEL LAYTON



                             approximately this location here (indicat, i n g ) in Enclosure
                             No. 3.  This here (indicat i n g ) is Gate 3 so in this position
                             here.

                                     In respect of the plan of the pitch by PC Friend, J E F 1 ,
                             the position he has indicated is here (indicat ing.) which is
                             at the Spion Kop end of the pitch, the opposite end of the
                             pi t c h .
                    B   Q.   In fact, it is right a lot of people were taken to that part
                             of the ground? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

                        Q. That is where      it refers to this MAP 7, 1520? - A. Yes, that
                           is right.

                                  THE CORONER:      Mr. Fraser,   any questions on that?
                    C
                                  MR. FRASER:      No, thank you,   sir.

                                  MR. LIMB:      No, thank you,   sir.

                                  MR. CATCHPOLE:      No, thank you,     sir.

                                  THE CORONER:   Mr. and Mrs. Tootle, this is a case
                    D        where we haven't got very much visual evidence.  The Jury
                             who have been here for quite some time will by now have
                             realised, but it will not be quite so apparent to you
                             because first we are dealing with this particular Inquest,
                             there is a great variation in the amount of visual evidence
                             and I think one can only say it is a matter of chance
                             whether a camera was pointing in the right direction or
                             whether it has been possible because there are some scenes
                    E        where we just can't make out who was who.

                                  I do want to draw your attention to something which
                             Mr. Frodsham says and which was recounted in the summary.
                             He says when he saw Peter in the terrace he could see there
                             was somebody trying to give resuscitation and he wasn't
                             successful.  That was Mr. Frodsham's assessment of the
                             situation but it might help you a little bit because
                    F        although the only visual evidence is sort of on the side of
                             the pitch, the verbal or oral evidence which has been
                             summarised for you indicates that people were actually
                             attempting to do something actually very much nearer the
                             scene of the incident itself.

                                  The sad thing is that it was unsuccessful and nothing I
                             can say can possibly diminish the pain and the loss which
                    G        you have suffered and no doubt still are suffering at the
                             loss of this boy.  Please accept my very sincere sympathy to
                             all of you at this loss.

                                  As I have indicated to you, that is all the evidence we
                             are going to take.  We are not going any further now.  We

                H                                           8


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                     D. I ■ MICHAEL LAYTON



                             will rise for a moment or two which is our normal practice.
                             Hr. Fraser will explain to you the arrangements with regard
                             to you speaking to the Pathologist   Thank you for being
                             here.

                                  MR. FRASER:      Mr. and Mrs. Tootle would just                like t.o
                             say something.

                                  THE CORONER:      Can you just find out for me what, it is?
                    B
                                  MR. FRASER:       Sir, Mr. and Mrs. Tootle simply want to
                             express their gratitude to everybody who helped Peter on the
                             day.  They recognise that everybody did everything they
                             could and they are only sorry their efforts were
                             unfortunately s u c c e s s f u l . They recognise that everybody
                             tried their very best.

                                   THE CORONER:   Mr. and Mrs. Tootle, thank you very
                             much.   On behalf of these people I hear that obviously with
                             pleasure because although I recognise and you recognise it
                             turned out to be unsuccessful, it doesn't diminish the fact
                             that people did try.   Thank you.  It is good of you to
                             mention it and it is much appreciated by me certainly.

                    D                              (Short- A d j o u r n m e n t )

                                  THE CORONER:   Can we deal with just one small point on
                             the case of Peter Francis Tootle where I mislead Inspector
                             Layton-

                                   DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Recalled

                    E                            Further by THE C O R O N E R :

                        Q.   Inspector Layton, this is to do with that video
                             identification at 1522 on MAP 7? - A. That is right,                   sir.

                        Q.   I think I put it to you it was at the Spion Kop end of the
                             ground? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

                        Q. Whereas the evidence is that he is seen himself working
                           within the terraces? - A. That is absolutely right, sir.

                        Q.   Just show us, so that the Jury a r e n ’t misl ed on that point r’
                        A.   (moved to p l a n ) If I can just- say, sir, we referred to the
                             photographic evidence relating to Enclosure No. 3 which was
                             absolutely right and we referred to the plan of the Officer
                             in this position here (indicat i n g ) which was a plan and as
                             such we indicated the right.       With reference to the video
                             identification he is actually referred to working in
                             Enclosure No. 3 and not actually at this end of the pitch
                             although he d o e s n ’t actually see himself.

                        Q.   He doesn't see himself or Peter but he just looked at the
                             video and said, "That is where I w a s ” . That is right, isn't
                H            it? - A. Yes.



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             THE CORONER:   Is that satisfactory,       Mr. Fraser?
                        wanted to make sure we got it right.

                             MR. FRASER:    Yes,   sir.

                             THE CORONER:    Thank you, Mr.   Fraser.

                           (The Inquest into the death of Peter Francis Tootle
                    B            was adjourned until a date to be f i x e d )




                    c




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H
                                                      10


J. L. Harpham Ltd
