   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)
                                                  32
        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

           ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                     At

               The Town Hall,
                 Sheffield.

                     On

              17th January, 1991




          TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




    Fro* the Notes of J.L. Harpha*, Ltd.,
         Official Shorthand Writers,
     55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT
                                             Page
DR. C.K. FLENLEY Sworn

     By The Coroner                            1
     Cross-Examined   by   Mr. Payne          16
     Cross-Examined   by Mr. Manning          21
     Cross-Examined   by Mr. Fraser           26
     Cross-Examined   by Mr. Catchpole        32
     Cross-Examined   by Mrs. McBrien         32
     Further by The   Coroner                 35

L . TUDOR Sworn

     By The Coroner                           39
     Cross-Examined   by   Mr.    Payne       52
     Cross-Examined   by   Mr.    Manning     52
     Cross-Examined   by   Mr.    Fraser      54
     Cross-Examined   by   Mrs   . McBrien    58
     Cross-Examined   by   Mr.    Russell     59
P. J. TAYLOR Sworn

     By The Coroner                           61
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne              75
     Cross-Examined by Mrs . McBrien          75
P.V. GOODMAN Sworn

     By The Coroner                           79
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning            90
     Further by The Coroner                   90
     Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning    90
     Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien           92
     Further by The Coroner                   92

G. OYITCH Sworn

     By The Coroner                           93
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne              99
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Fraser             99
     Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien          100

A.D. LEIGH Sworn

     By The Coroner                          101
     Cross-Examined   by M r . Payne         110
     Cross-Examined   by M r . Manning       111
     Cross-Examined   by M r . Fraser        112
     Cross-Examined   by Mr s . McBrien      113
     Cross-Examined   by Miss Addleman       114
     Further by The   Coroner                115

    , MATTERS                                116
          THIRTY-SECOND DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

            THURSDAY. 17th JANUARY 1991

      THE CORONER:    Good morning, Mr. Fraser, how nice
 to see you.

     MR. FRASER: Good morning, sir.    Before you begin
today s proceedings, may I explain that Mr. Timothy
King, who has previously appeared on behalf of the
families, is constrained to be in another place today
and yith your leave, sir, I will appear before you on
behalf of the families for today only.

     THE CORONER: If you please.

     MR. CHAPMAN: Good morning, sir. My name is
Chapman of Hepworth and Chadwick, Solicitors.  I take
the place of Mr. Isaacs with your leave today, sir.
He also is in Leeds Court, I am afraid.

     THE CORONER: We are going to start with Dr.
Flenley, I think, and then we will go back to where we
were yesterday.

           COLIN KERBOTSON FLENLEY Sworn

                     By THE CORONER:

I think you are Colin - is it Kerbotson? - A. That is
right, sir.

Flenley, that is right? - A. Yes.
You are, I think, a GP, are you not? - A. Yes.
Your address is                                |in
Walsall, is that right? - A. Yes

Am I right in thinking that you came to the 1989 semi­
final here in Sheffield at Hillsborough? - A. Yes.

Is it right that you had a ticket for the terracing? -
A. Yes.

I believe you came by car, is that right? - A. Yes.

Do you know approximately what time you set off and
what time you arrived in Sheffield? - A. I know we
arrived just outside Sheffield shortly after 1
o'clock, I would think, north of Sheffield in order to
meet some friends in a village pub.

   fact, you had met them there the previous year? —
A. That is right, yes.
                                                         2



                                       • C. K. FLENLEY


 Q.   From which I deduce that you were at the 1988 match as
      well? - A. That is right.

 Q.   In your statement you said about 1.15, and I suppose
      you would stick to that? - A. Yes.

 Q.   Around that time? - A. Yes.

Q.    We will stay with 1989 at the moment. - A. Right.

Q.    I might ask you one or two questions about 1988 at the
      end. You stayed there and your friends joined you? -
      A. Yes.

Q.    You then set off, I think, at about 2 o'clock? - A.
      Correct, yes.

Q.    Just as a matter of interest, was the pub full or
      empty? - A. It was empty. There was probably another
      group of Liverpool fans there, 4 or 5.

Q.    It was a smallish pub, I assume? - A. Yes.

Q.    Having set off at 2, you then drove towards the
      ground, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q.    You parked your car? - A. Yes.

Q.    What time? - A. I would think probably about 2
      o'clock.

Q.    So you left the pub a little bit earlier than that
      presumably? - A. Yes.

Q.    Anyway around that time? - A. Yes.

Q.    I ought to have asked you, did you have anything to
      drink in the pub yourself? - A. I had two pints of
      lager.

Q.    Having parked, I think you discovered that you were,
      in fact, about a mile or a mile-and-a-half from the
      ground, is that right? - A. Yes, we parked by, I think
      it was a cottage hospital, near a garage.

Q.    I do not actually know Sheffield that well, but anyway
      you parked somewhere near the hospital as far as you
      were concerned? - A. Yes.

Q.    Then you walked towards the ground I take it? - A.
      Correct.

Q.    You approached Leppings Lane entrance? - A. Yes.
                                                       3




                                     • C. K. FLENLEY


         you come over a little bridge, can you remember? -
     A. I can't remember.  I remember turning left off the
     main road towards the Leppings Lane entrance.

Q.   Was the entrance of Leppings Lane on your right-hand
     side, or on your left-hand side? - A. On my right-hand
     side.

Q.   Then you came down Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.

Q. At that point did you see a lot of supporters going as
    well, or what did you see? - A. On arrival, yes, there
    were many supporters outside.

Q. I am talking about the walk down actually? - A. On the
    walk down there, yes , there was an average number of
    supporters you would expect to see.

Q.   Can you remember by chance whether they were all
      walking towards the ground  - "all" is the wrong word,
      whether the majority were walking towards the ground,
      or whether the majority were walking away from the
      ground, or whether the mix was something different? -
     A. No, definitely walking towards the ground.

Q.   Were you in any way alarmed by them, in the sense that
      they were drinking, or misbehaving, or in any other
     way? - A. Not at all, I saw no evidence of
     misbehaviour.

Q.   Did you see any evidence of drink? - A. I remember
     seeing one person with two cans of beer, but that was
     all.

Q.   So minimal as far as you were concerned? - A. Yes.

Q.   You then arrived at the turnstiles? - A. Yes, quite
     with the crowd.

Q.   The approaches, shall we say? - A. Yes.

Q«   ^ you look round at the model for a minute, can you
     see where it says Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.

Q.   That is the road and you were coming from the bottom?
     - A. Yes.

Q.   You approached that area where it is being pointed -
     okay? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you enter into that? - A. I entered in through the
     gates, that gate there, yes.
                                 C. K. FLENLEY


 Before you entered through that gate, what time was
 that approximately? I want to take this fairly
 quickly. - A. I would think probably 20-past/half-past
 z•

Could you get through those outer gates, those
perimeter gates? They look like park gates, do they
not? - A. There was a fair crowd, but I was able to
sort of wend my way through the crowd.

You were at that point not under any crush? - A. No.

At that time how far out was the crowd spilling, if
that is the right word, towards the roadway? - A. The
crowd was milling around outside those outer gates,
but quite compact within the gates.

Could you see the compactness before you joined them?
- A. I could see, yes.

You then went through that gate? - A. Yes, that is
right.

And it was open, I take it, when you went through? -
A. Yes.

Do you know which gate you went through? There are
three sets there actually, the one nearest the river,
then there is a large one in the middle and then there
is a far one. - A. I am not sure.

You do not know, okay. What time did you say that was
about? - A. I would think about half-past 2.

You joined the crowd within that area? - A. Yes.

What happened after that? - A. Well, I remember the
more the crowd came behind me the more compact the
crowd became.  I ended up probably about half-way down
towards the turnstile, and there was quite a severe
crush. I have been in crowds before on the Spion Kop
but to me that was the worst crush I had been in.

That was the worst crush? - A. Yes.

On the outside? - A. On the outside, yes.

Did you see any Officers, be they mounted or on foot?
- A. Yes.  I saw two mounted Officers and I think one
or two foot Officers.

In that area where you were? - A. In that area, yes.
There were two mounted Officers who appeared to me to
be talking. They appeared to be shouting at each
                                                     5



                                • C. K. FLENLEY


other, obviously trying to make a decision of what to
do and one of the mounted Officers reversed his horse
back up towards the main gates, and the next thing I
looked those main gates were closed.




                          /Q.    Did that relieve.
                                              C. K. FLENLEY


Did that relieve! the pressure in any way? - A. No,
not at all.

Does it mean that you were able to look behind you at
all? - A. Yes.

Could you see why the pressure had not been relieved?
- A. Yes, to me that created more pressure because of
the sheer volume of people in that small area. There
were people being sort of pulled out.  I remember one
or two people being pulled up on to the wall above
the turnstile then.

What I cannot understand is that if you close the
entry at the back off, why should that create more
pressure? - A.   I think, no, it did not create more
pressure. The pressure was already there. The
pressure didn't increase but it didn't relieve the
pressure.

Were you in any position to do anything about it once
you had got sort of halfway down? - A. Not at all.
The gentleman next to me said that he felt faint.  I
wasn't in a position to move at all.

Could you have   got back out? - A. No, no.

When you first joined the crowd at the back
presumably you had an option at that point? - A. Yes,
that is right, although looking at the crowd I didn't
realise the crowd was as tight as it was but as more
supporters joined it.

Did you feel any pushing from behind you? - A. There
was no surge but as the numbers increased the
pressure increased.

We will leave that now because we have heard a lot of
evidence about this part of the matter. You
continued to advance, if that is the right word,
towards the turnstile or not? - A. As far as I can
remember there appeared to be no movements at all
because I remember looking at my watch thinking, I am
not going to get in before the beginning of the
match, and I remember it was about ten minutes to
three.

What then happened briefly? - A. Then I remember a
blue corrugated gate to the side being opened.

At the side next to you?    Can you show us on the
plan? - A. There.

Is that Gate C? - A. Yes.
                                                C. K. FLENLEY


You remember that: being opened? - A. I remember that
being opened and that certainly relieved the pressure
and I certainly was carried in as the crowd went in
through that gate.

As you walked up to the model you may have seen that
there is a railing there. Did you notice that? - A.
Yes, I was on the outside of that railing.

You mean on the River Don side? - A. Yes, because I
don't remember crossing that railing at all.

Are you saying that you were in such a crush that you
had never experienced it before when you were in that
area? - A. Yes.

Not on the inside of the railings because you cannot
get to the turnstiles if you are on the side of the
railings where you say? - A. I certainly do not
remember seeing those railings.

You do not remember crossing   them? - A. No.

But you were aiming   forthe turnstiles? - A. Yes,
definitely.

Do you know which one you were aiming for? - A. No.

You entered through Gate C? - A. Yes.

Having got into Gate C things were in fact better
because there was a concourse area which was large,
was it not? - A. Yes, inside Gate C there was
virtually no crowd at all.

So what did you do then? - A. I remember a gentleman
beside me falling over and he was pulled up. I sort
of walked briskly up towards the tunnel.   I first of
all looked to try and buy a programme and I couldn't
see any programme sellers.  I remember there was a
distinct lack of stewards or Police within that area.
I walked towards the tunnel entrance, started to go
down the tunnel but saw the crowd was too large in
the central area of the Leppings Lane end.

When you say that you saw the crowd, are you saying
the crowd on the terraces or the crowd in the tunnel?
- A. All I could see was looking down the tunnel and
just a massive row of people.  I couldn't see down on
to the terrace at that time.

Are you saying the crowd that you saw was in the
tunnel or on the terraces? - A. On the terraces and I
remember last year, the friends I went with, told me
not to go into the central area because it gets very
crowded. They told me that there was an area around
63


                                                             C. K. FLENLEY


                the side of the terracing. I didn't actually go
                inside the tunnel. I had a look and turned back.
             Q. So you never entered the tunnel at all? - A. No.
         B   Q. You just viewed it? - A. Yes.
             Q. Did not like it? - A. Yes.
             Q. And turned away? - A. Yes.
             Q. Do you by any chance when you viewed the scene, could
                you see the pitch? - A. No.

                Then you went round the side and you finished up near
                the Police Control Box? - A.Correct, yes.

             Q. You came round the back ofthe   stand? - A. Yes.

             Q. You knew that because your friends had told you that
                you could get in that way? - A. That is right but I
                mean I must say although they told me, I had looked
                for signposts and there was a distinct lack of
                signposts.

                Did you see any signing at all? There is a small
                sign? - A. I was going to say I think I remember a
                tiny sign.

                Do you remember seeing it? - A. I think I remember
                it, yes.

             Q. But you were not relying on that? - A. No.
             Q. You were really relying upon your friends? - A. Yes,
                and the only stewards I saw, there was a gated
                entrance up into the stand above and those were the
                only stewards I saw in that area.

             Q. Those were the only stewards you saw? - A. Yes.
             Q. You then took up a position on that terrace? - A.
                Yes.

                We will get you to show us on a plan in a minute
                where that was and we will get you to put a little
                spot so that we know where you were? - A. Right.

                The first thing you did presumably was to have a look
                round to see what was going on? - A. Yes.

             Q. Did you look at the pitch? - A. Yes.
             Q. What was happening on the pitch? - A. So far as I can
                remember the pitch was clear.




     H
                                                      9


                                               C. K. FLENLEY


Q. Perhaps we ought to just make sure about one thing.
   When you came through that gate, the one you
   mentioned, the big one? - A. Yes, the outside gate.

Q. Was it wide open? - A. Yes, I had no difficulty
   getting through it.

Q. Were there a lot of people going through it with you?
   - A. Yes.

Q. So far as you remember there was nobody on the pitch
   at that point? - A. No.

Q. Did you see the players come out at all? - A. I can't
   remember because I was concentrating on what was
   happening in the terraces.

Q. You looked somewhere else? - A. Yes.

Q. What did you see? - A. I saw people being dragged up
   on to the stand above the terracing and I remember
   turning to somebody standing next to me and saying,
   "There is going to be another Heysel here" because of
   the sheer volume of people trying to get up from the
   terracing on to the stand.  I thought that the weight
   of the stand, you know...

Q. What concerned you at the time was the fact that the
   stand might collapse because so many people were
   going up? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. Do you know about how many people there might have
   been? - A. I would think twenty or thirty.  I don't
   know.

Q. You could see that from the position where you
   were? - A. Yes, I could see that the central area was
   very crushed.

Q. You had already made that assessment, of course,
   outside as well, had you not, though you had not seen
   it in detail? - A. Yes.

Q. Perhaps I ought to get you to show me on the plan
   where you were because it will be easier? - A. Right.

      MR. BEECHEY:   C.359, sir.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Mark it with a cross. From that
     position which you have marked, could you see the
     front of the terracing, the actual front? - A. I
     could see the tall railings but I couldn't see.
     There was just a mass of people.
                                                       10


                                               C. K. FLENLEY


Q. It was specks of' heads that you could see? - A. Yes.
   I mean the area I was in you could move around in
   quite easily.

Q. Did you do anything? You said, "This is going to be
   another Heysel"? - A. Yes.

Q. What did you do? - A. I can remember people around me
   shouting up at the Police Control Box saying, "Can't
   you see what is going on in there?" and they appeared
   to be taking no notice of that.

Q. You did not know why, of course, know why the people
   were going up at that point? - A. I only presumed
   because of the sheer volume of crowd, yes.

Q. That was the deduction you had made? - A. Yes.




                     /Q. What volume of noise apart.
                                                        11




                                                C. K. FLENLEY


Q. What volume of noise, apart from the shouts of the people
   around you, was going on at the time? - A. There wasn't a
   tremendous volume of noise, no.   Just the normal - I
   can't remember even any singing or chanting at the time.

Q. Can you remember the teams being announced? - A. I can't,
   because my attention was purely looking over to the
   central area so my memories of the team coming on to the
   pitch, I have no...   The only memory I have is of them
   kicking off and the ball being crossed over from a corner
   I think it was.

Q. You do remember the kick-off? - A. Yes.

Q. Taking that as the marker, tell me what was happening
   that you could see at that time? - A. Well, at that time
   people were then beginning to try and climb over on to
   the pitch, and again I didn't think anything more than
   there was a large crowd and they were just trying to
   relieve the pressure at the time.   As more and more
   people got on to the pitch I then saw two Police Officers
   carry a young boy round to the side and start
   resuscitation.

Q. I will come to that in a moment.   I want to take you a
   little way back again.   Your first impression when you
   got on to the terrace - we know what time this gate
   opened.   Were you one of the first, one of the last, one
   of the middle ones? - A. I was one of the middle ones.

Q. You don't know exactly what time? - A. No.

Q. Was it the players had not yet come on to the pitch? - A.
   That's my impression, but I wouldn't...

Q. At that point you could see people going up into the
   stands and you felt that (a) the stand might collapse
   because cf the sheer volume? - A. Yes.

0. And (b) the terraces looked pretty crowded to you? - A.
   Definitely, and that was the opinion of the people around
   me.

Q. You and the people around you were shouting towards the
   Police Control Box? - A. Yes.

Q. Was there anybody on the outside of the Police Control
   Box at that point in time? - A. At that point in time,
   no, although I remember a press photographer going up
   there and trying to take some pictures from up there.

Q. Was that at the time when you were shouting or later? -
   A. That was while we were shouting.
                                            C. K. FLENLEY


How long did the shouting, if that is the right word,
carry on? - A. I would say several minutes.

Apart from seeing the people going up - what I am trying
to do is to take you from that point to the kick-off
point now.   I am trying to fill that gap. - A. Yes.

Apart from the people going up into the stands and the
shouts which you have mentioned and the press
photographer, what else, if anything, did you see or
hear? - A. People going on to the pitch.   I didn't see
anything else.

That is what I am trying to find out.   When is your
first perception of seeing people going on to the pitch?
You have told me when you saw them going up into the
terrace. - A. Yes.   Well, shortly after I arrived people
were already going up on to the stand and then probably
minutes after that people were trying to get over on the
ground.

Could you see the railings separating your pen from the
middle one where the damage was being done? - A. Yes, not
fully though.

Were you able to distinguish the people on the other side
of that railing in any way? - A. It was just a mass of
people.

You couldn't identify individuals or visualise their
distress, if any? - A. No, apart from that they were
obviously in a tight crush, but I didn't realise there
was any further distress than that at the time.

You knew they were tight but they didn't look distressed
to you at that time? - A. Well, they were obviously
having difficulty getting out of there, yes.   I have
been to many football matches before and the instant I
looked I could tell there were problems.

Have you been behind the goal yourself at times? - A.
Yes.   At Sheffield, or...

Were you there in 1988? - A. Yes, but I was on the other
side of the Leppings Lane end.

So you weren't behind the goal? - A. Yes, I was behind
the goal, but near the lighting tower.

No, what I meant was in those two central pens? - A. No,
I have never been in that central...

Because I wanted you to tell me what it was like in there
but you can't because you weren't there.   I think we
                                                       13




                                               C. K. FLENLEY


   will now move on.   You remember the game starting, you
   don't remember much about it? - A. Yes.

Q. You could see the people going over the top? - A. Yes.

Q. You saw somebody being carried on to the pitch and you
   thought, "This isn't right", or words to that effect? -
   A. Yes.

Q. You then made your way on to the... - A. Yes, I made my
   way down to the front of the terracing and I remember the
   gate was closed and I shouted to a Policeman on the
   outside telling him I was a doctor and he opened the gate
   for me.

Q. At that point was the match still in play? -A. No, the
   match had just been stopped.

Q. Did you see it stopped?   Did you see the Officer? - A. I
   remember the Officer running on to the pitch.

Q. You hadn't seen that Officer before anywhere? - A. No.

Q. Can you remember seeing him on the Police Control...   In
   fact you said you didn t see any Officer? - A. I have no
   recollection of that, no.

Q. You went on to the pitch.   The game had been stopped? -
   A. Yes.

0. I know you dealt with a couple of girls. Were those the
   first patients you saw or not? - A. No.   I think to a
   young man who was wearing a Liverpool shirt and tried
   resuscitation with him with a Police Officer. We got his
   heart going but he wasn't breathing and once we got his
   heart going I left the Policeman to it, with somebody
   else carrying on and ran back towards the penalty area.

Q. Was it then that you... - A. Yes, then I remember seeing
   the girl who now turns out to be Sarah Hicks.

Q. Can you recollect - she was already on the pitch when you
   got to her? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you remember whether an ambulance was already in view
   at that point? - A. No, it wasn't.

Q. You don't remember or it wasn't there? - A. It definitely
   wasn't there.

Q. Who was with her when you got there? - A. I remember
   there was a gentleman I now know as Mr. Hicks, because I
   remember him shouting, "Sarah, Sarah, come on Sarah."
                                                          14




                                                C. K. FLENLEY


Q. Are you sure he was there before you, because that is
   what you have just told me? -A. I know he was there
   during the time I was trying to resuscitate her.    I
   can't remember if he was there before, no.

Q. So you might have been there before? - A. I might have
   been, I don't know.

Q. Your recollection of the sequence of attendance - because
   Mr. Hicks, he told us you were there and in fact when he
   got there the ambulance was already on the site and you
   said it wasn't, so presumably you were there before him?
   - A. Yes, I must have been.

Q. Then I think you tried to resuscitate her? - A. Yes.

Q. By an entire coincidence Sarah's sister happened to be
   put down next to her? - A. Correct.

Q. You discovered another GP was trying to resuscitate... -
   A. Yes, because I remember after the incident just having
   a quick word with him.

Q. So that was really an extraordinary coincidence because
   there weren't that many doctors and the two girls next to
   each other had a doctor in attendance, so to speak? - A.
   Yes.

0. I am sure you did your best as indeed everybody did who
   was trying to resuscitate people.   Did you think you had
   any hope with Sarah? - A. No. When I arrived I looked in
   her pupils.    I felt her carotid pulse.   The pupils were
   dilated.    There was no evidence of any pulsation in her
   carotid pulse.    I presumed she was dead but I had to
   have a go.

0. Quite right, I am sure you did the right thing.   Did you
   glance at Victoria at any point? - A. No, not really.

Q. So you can't say anything about Victoria? - A. No.

Q. Perhaps I ought to just ask you this:  if you, as a GP,
   are asked to call and look at somebody and decide whether
   they are alive or dead, what are the things you look for?
   - A. Well, I would with a torch look into somebody's eyes
   to see whether the pupils are fixed, which means they
   don't respond to light, that they are dilated, which is a
   very primitive sign of death and I would feel for the
   carotid pulse and listen to the heart with a stethoscope
   and see if there is any sign of respiration.
                                                                15

                                                         C. K. FLENLEY




         Q. Apart from knowing about the dilated pupils. - A. Yes.

         Q. The signs of death are what one would expect - pulse? -
            A. Pulse, yes.
     B
         Q. Heartbeat, if one can hear it? - A. Yes.

         Q. And breathing? - A. That is right.

         0. And medics add the dilated .... - A. Yes.

         0. In some circumstances it is possible to have dilated
            pupils and not be dead, that is right, isn't it? - A.
            Correct, yes.  It is not a definite sign of death.

         0. But it is an indicator that you are in trouble? - A. It
            is an an indicator that perhaps there is brain damage.

         Q. I don't want to go into too many technicalities about
            this but the crucial bit about the heart is that it
            should be pumping, isn't it? - A. Yes.
 D       Q. Not necessarily that it has electrical activity? - A.
            Correct.

         Q. The assessment of the pumping is why you feel the
            pulses?- A. Yes.

         Q. Because if you know where the carotid pulse is, that is
            a good place to be able to feel it? - A. Yes.  I
            remember some speckled spots on her neck, I think.

         0.   Yes, petechial? - A. Yes,petechiae.

         0.   Yes, she did have them.   Well, everybody did,
              virtually.

         0. And I think Mr. Hicks eventually left you because
            Victoria went off in an ambulance? - A. Yes.

         Q. And Sarah never did go into an ambulance, did she? - A.
            [jo. I just remember her being carried away.  I can't
           .remember if it was on a stretcher.

         0. In your mind, although you were doing your very, very
            best, it really was too late? - A. Yes, I saw no signs
            of any spontaneous respiration or anything.

         0. I am asking you this not because I want to upset you or
            Mr. Hicks, but in fact because it sometimes helps a
            little bit to know.  I know you have met him, I know he
            knows, but the Jury don't know. - A. Right.




H!
                                              C. K. FLENLEY




Your assessment I think was that once it was realised
what had happened everybody was doing their best who
was involved, once it had been realised? - A. Yes, it
was probably organised chaos in a way but, yes,
everybody was doing their best.  I remember asking for
oxygen and such and there was none forthcoming, and I
remember it took a long time for the ambulance to
arrive on the pitch.

Were you really surprised that there wasn't any oxygen
and such, bearing in mind the size of the disaster? -
A. Yes, I was, and indeed after the incident I wrote to
the Football League Clubs in the Midlands area asking
them what their facilities were. Only one club replied
to my letter, but yes, I would expect any major club to
have resuscitation facilities.

They may have, I don't know, but what I am saying is
the fact that there wasn't any available to you, if you
have a major disaster - are you saying that there
should be sufficient facilities to cope with a major .
disaster? - A. Oh,   no. I would expect  ....

Some facilities? - A. Yes.

That is fair enough.     I thought that you meant .... -
A. No, no.

That the facility should be available for whatever the
situation? - A. No.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I have asked Mr. Griffiths to be
kind enough to put up a photograph which I would like
Dr. Flenley to look at please. The reference is
PR1/7A.

     THE CORONER:       What number are we   givingit?

     MR. BEECHEY:      C360.

            Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Dr. Flenley, I would be grateful for your nelp, to help
the Jury please, on the question of how obvious the
disaster was to different people, because there has
been a lot of evidence and different people have given
their different opinions, and this is a photograph
which might help on that point. - A. Right.

I appreciate it is difficult for you to give evidence
behind you but can you do your best? First of all, if
you look in the bottom right-hand corner, very faintly
you can see the timing which has been printed on the
                                                     17

                                             C. K. FLENLEY




   film. That is a 15 and if Sergeant Griffiths moves his
   pointer over to the right, we can see a 3? - A. Yes.

Q. This photograph was taken at 15.03.  If one looks very
   carefully on the original one can see that, 3-minutes-
   past-3. Just to orientate oneself, on the left-hand
   side of the photograph one can see that the crowd is
   standing not absolutely densely packed, then down
   approximately the middle one can see a line of people
   who are standing up on the railing, supporting
   themselves on what we know, we can't actually see the
   railing, but we know there is a radial fence there. -
   A. Yes.

Q. If one goes right up to the back of the stand, you can
   see the gate which is opened against the back there,
   and then from there running down to the front, that is
   where the line of the radial fence is. - A. Yes.

Q. Then to the right it is obvious that the people are
   much more densely packed. - A. Yes.

Q. That is a photograph then of, on the left, the pen that
   you were standing in, although you were off the
   photograph to the left. - A. Yes.

Q. And on the right of the photograph is pen 3. - A. Yes.

Q. We are looking at the time at 3-minutes-past-3.  Can we
   just see what can be seen in this photograph and what
   the effect of the situation is one the people who we
   can see. First of all, in the foreground, this side of
   the fence, if one starts over on the right, right in
   the foreground of the photograph on the pitch side of
   tne fence, right at the bottom, at the very bottom
   there are some photographers. - A. Yes.

Q. If one just looks, starting at the right and goes
   along, and see what those photographers are interested
   in. - A. Yes.

Q. At the rignt-nand side they are turning round, they are
  .looking towards pen 3 - that one looks as if he is
   getting his camera up. - A. Yes.

Q. The next one across has got his camera up at the ready.
   The next one is aiming towards the field. - A. Yes.

Q. Then there is just one more, you can just see the top
   of his head, and it looks as if he is looking towards
   the field. - A. Yes.

0. We go up in the photograph a little bit, go back to the
   beginning to the right-hand side, and now we can see
                                           C. K. FLENLEY




some people this side of the fence, and if we look
across them, starting at the right, there is that one
and the next one, and what we will see is that there is
a stream of people moving from right to left. There is
the next one, there is a Policeman, there is the next
one, now another one, another, there is a Policeman,
and then there are two or three more and we come to
another Policeman. - A. Yes.

So there is a stream of people walking across the
photograph from right to left as we look at it, that is
from pen 3 towards the open gate in pen 1/2? - A. Yes.

If we go into the pen now, on the right-hand side of
the photograph we can see in the foreground of pen 3
there is a very dense crush of people? - A. Yes.

If one looks further back into pen 3 it appears to be
less crushed? - A. Yes.

If one now looks up the radial fence, starting at the
ground end, if one runs one's eye up where the fence
is, to start with it is crowded and a bit obscure. The
first clear picture one comes to is there is a man
standing up and he is looking towards pen 3? - A. Yes.

Go up to the next one standing on the fence. There is
that one. He is looking more or less towards the
field? - A. Yes.

Then there is a chap climbing over? - A. Yes.

Behind him there is one with a red hat on? - A. Yes.




    /Q. Then there is a blue anorak ....
                               C.K.   FLENLEY


Then there is a blue anorak*    He is looking towards
Pen 3? - A. Yes.

As one goes up, now we can come to a lot more people
standing on the fence. There is the next one, and the
next one, and so on. These people are standing on the
fence to get a better view and they are looking
generally down towards the field? - A. Yes.

Go back into Pens 1 and 2 again, and a little bit
further over.  If one looks in the bottom right-hand
corner of the pen as we look at it, there is the white
character looking towards the field, which Sergeant
Griffiths first points out. There are some people
behind the fence there and it is not clear. They are
looking generally towards the front of Pen 3, are they
not, in that little group? - A. Yes.

So, in fact, in that bottom right-hand corner of the
pen they are looking at an angle, but they are clearly
interested in what is happening in Pen 3? - A. Yes.

If one goes back up Pens 1 and 2 towards the stand, I
want to look at the crowd as one works one's way up
the terrace. These people are looking at the field,
are they not? - A. Yes.

As one goes further up these people generally are
watching the match? - A. Yes.

Back down to the field again, and let us go to the
middle now of that pen, and do not go too fast
Sergeant Griffiths, let us just see what these people
are interested in. There is one there, that one who
has been pointed out, he is looking at Pen 3? - A.
Yes.

The rest of them are looking towards the field? - A.
Yes.

These people are all watching the match? - A. Yes.

Then as one gets over to the left of the photograph,
more towards where you were standing, although you are
well off to the left, these people are all watching
the match? - A. Yes.

As we now know, the most significant thing that is
happening at this moment is the dreadful crush at the
front of Pen 3? - A. Correct.

But it is quite clear that except for the people close
to Pen 3 in the front corner of your pen, most of the
                             C..K. FLENLEY


people in the next pen are paying more attention to
the match? - A. Yes.

And they do not realise the desperate scene that is
going on just a short distance from them? - A. Yes. I
would suggest if you are in a large crowd people are
of average height and you can't actually see across.
You are more advantageous higher up to look down.

Quite. The other thing one can notice is that the
people who are coming across the photograph from right
to left, it is likely that they are people who have
come out of the gate at Pen 3 and Pen 4 off our
photographs to the right, because we know that has
been open now for at least four minutes, looking at
other photographs.

     THE CORONER: I think you had better say "open on
and off at least for four minutes”. That is what we
know at the moment.

     MR. PAYNE: I do not think we know that it was
closed after 14.59.

     THE CORONER: I think that point is in dispute and
that is why I want you to put it like that.

     MR. PAYNE: I am not sure that there is any
evidence that it was closed after 14.59. We have got
that photograph at 14.59 and then afterwards we have
got a series of photographs from the Liverpool Echo
and they all show the gates open. I appreciate it was
opened and closed, but I am not sure that there is any
evidence that it was actually closed again after
14.59.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Payne, what I am trying to say
is this. You are right, there are a series of
photographs which show that the gate was open at
14.59, 15.01, probably 15.03 because that is the poor
one which we cannot see very well.

     MR. PAYNE:   Right.

     MR. CORONER: 1502 where it is definitely open
because we looked at that yesterday, 1503 query, 15.05
it was open and 15.06. So we have got a virtual
sequence at'minute intervals where the gate was open.
What one cannot absolutely deduce from that is that
within the minute it may not have been shut.

     MR. PAYNE:   I quite agree.   I entirely agree.
                               C.K.   FLENLEY


           CORONER: All   I am asking you is  when youput
 it to the witness you     put it with a reservation.You
 may be   right.   It may  not be possible to   prove itone
 way or   the other, but   we cannot be sure.   All we can
 say is that at given points of time it was open, and
 there is plenty of evidence that it was open and shut.
 Exactly when that happened is very difficult to
 thik        and we have not quite made      yet» 1 do n°t

      MR. PAYNE: Quite. The only point is that the
 only actual clear evidence we have got, all the visual
 evidence from the photographs, whenever we look at it
 the gates are open after 14.59.  I entirely accept
 that they might have been closed at a time when a
 photograph was not being taken.

        THE CORONER: That is all I am saying.

     MR. PAYNE:     But there is no evidence of that.

     THE CORONER: At the moment. We have not quite
finished. There may not be any, you may be right, but
I do not think we can necessarily deduce that.

     MR. PAYNE: May I just ask this doctor one
further question?

     THE CORONER: I am not stopping you from asking
 u6 ^ est^on# It is just that I am concerned that you
should not ask it in such a way on a supposition which
may prove to be wrong, or where he may give you an
answer which, in fact, is incorrect because the
premise is wrong.

     MR. PAYNE: Certainly.
Dr. Flenley, the only question I want to ask you about
is the people who are flowing from right to left as we
look at the photograph have probably come from Pens 3
and 4? - A. Yes.

What they are doing is they are making their way alon®
away from those pens and heading for probably the open
gate into your pen? - A. Yes.

            Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Dr. Flenley, it probably does seem inconsequential in
terms of the heroic efforts that you have made which
clearly should be mentioned at this stage, but
somebody has to tackle with as much precision as we
can the actual time of when this was happening.  The
learned Coroner was trying to fix a point on the
pitch, which is sometimes helpful because we know when
                                                      22



                                  C.K.   FLENLEY


     certain events took place. Can you help us in this
     way because we can work from a fixed point in that we
     know the earliest time that Gate C was opened, and we
     know the latest time that it was opened before it was
     immediately closed. - A. Yes.

Q.   I have heard you say, "I was probably around the
      middle of the people who went through that gate"? - A.
      Yes.

Q.   Which gives us some clue. Again without detail, how
     long would it have taken you, do you think, to have
     looked around for the programme seller, to have walked
     up at a quick pace to the tunnel, decided that was not
     for you and then looked for the alternative route,
     finally seeing the sign and taking up your position on
     the terrace? - A. I would think no more than 2
     minutes.

Q.   What you say is when you arrived at the terrace you do
     not think that the teams were on the pitch? - A. I
     have no recollection of that, no.

Q.   The facts as we know them are that the earliest
     opening of Gate C, for this particular instance - it
     had been open earlier but I do not think in any way
     would have been at the time you went through - was
     14.52 and 6 seconds? - A. Right.

Q.   Its closing was at 14.57 and 40 seconds? - A. Right.

Q.   As a rule of thumb exercise, if we said a couple of
     minutes after it had first opened that you went in? -
     A. Right.

Q.   That would take us to 14.54? - A. So I must have gone
     in probably just at the beginning because I saw the
     gate being opened.

Q.   You saw the gate being opened? - A. Yes.

Q.   That is very helpful, I think, because that puts a
     fixed point onto it. You were in the turnstile queue
     at that time? - A. I was trying to be in the turnstile
     queue, yes, but I was probably to the outside edge of
     that.

Q.   So a couple of minutes then takes us on to 14.54/14.55
     sort of time? - A. Yes.

Q.   We know as a fact that the Liverpool team came onto
     the pitch at 14.54 and 8 seconds. - A. Right.
                             C . •K. FLENLEY


   it is possible they could have been on there and
you did not first notice it? - A. No.

 It is possible they might have come on subsequently? -


But it must have been around that sort of time? - A.
Yes.

You would agree with me that at its very earliest you
could not really have been on the terrace before
14.54, 2 minutes after the earliest time that the gate
had opened? - A. Correct, yes.  I remember looking at
my watch outside the ground before the gate was opened
and it was about 10-to 3.

Your first impression when you got inside was the
lifting of the people from the part behind the goal to
the stand above it? - A. Yes.

You do not have any particularknowledge of the
Hillsborough ground itself? - A. No, only from one
previous visit.

One previous match.   That was the previous year? - A.
Yes.

Had you seen in   the previous year people also being
lifted up? - A.   Not at all.

You had not seen that? — A. No. In fact, the previous
year everything seemed very well organised outside the
ground.

So if there were evidence that this was something
which had happened the previous year, what you say is,
"Well, I didn't see it"? - A. That is right.

But you were concerned about the numbers of people
being lifted up there because you thought that might
cause a collapse of that stand because of the weight?
~ A. Yes. In fact, the previous year I remember I
think there were some temporary barriers at the head
of Leppings Lane, so that people were in queues before
they actually got to the turnstiles, and that
certainly was not there in 1989.

You have described then looking across and what you
saw, and I just want to look at those descriptions
that you gave.  First of all, you described you and
other people shouting to the Police Control Box? - A.
Yes.
                                                         24



                                     C.- K. FLENLEY


 Q.    There is nothing you   can say to help us as to whether
       what you were saying   or shouting could have been heard
       in that Control Box,   you are not in a position to say
       that they could hear   you? - A. No.

 Q.    And you did not see any Officer, any person in
       authority, outside the Control Box. The only person
       you saw was a photographer? - A. Yes.

 Q.    And he was intent on taking his photographs and not on
       what was being shouted? - A. Yes. I wasn’t looking up
       at the Control Box all the time. In fact, he was
       taking photographs. He must have known what was going
       on because he was taking photographs of the actual
       central area.

 Q.   Again that is an assumption that we have to make. We
      do not know why he was there, or for what purpose, do
      we• “    No, but he was filming the crowd.

Q.    We can gather from the photographs that there were ah
      awful lot of people who had cameras of one sort or
      another for all sorts of reasons.  So you could see
      the railing of the dividing fence from where you were?
      - A. Yes, not completely.

Q.    Not completely you said, and you could see a mass of
      people? - A. Yes.

Q.    You could not see anything in describing that mass,
      other than they were tight, but they were not
      distressed? - A. I couldn't see any signs of distress,
      but they were obviously — ■

Q.    We know what happened afterwards, but we are taking
      your observations at the time and at that time you
      could see they were tight, but you could not see any
      obvious signs of distress at that time? - A. Well, I
      was worried, yes, so there must have been some
      distress for me to be worried, yes.

Q.    But, as you have said, you knew from experience, as
      well as from what other people have told you, that it
      gets tight behind the goal, which is the preferred
      position of many people? - A. It does, but I have
      never been to a match before where I have seen so many
      people trying to get out of one area.

Q.    Of course, we now know why that was. The interesting
      thing, doctor, was as part of the on-going quick-
      walking group of people who had come through Gate C
      together. - A. Yes.
                                                25



                            C.‘ K. FLENLEY


S ? ? - ^ 80!   ,
                th® entrance to the tunnel you had an
                  2°k down U and t0 make UP your mind,
an infr.   m?uS ° pe°ple in there, that that was not
for              7°U thought was sensible, and to look
for another way to go? - A. Yes.




                     /Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER;
                                                        26


                                               C. K. FLENLEY


               Cross-Examined bv MR. FRASER:

Q. Can I just take you back outside the turnstile for a
   few minutes? - A. Yes.

Q. As you approached the turnstiles you came down
   Leppings Lane. Were you asked to produce evidence
   that you had a ticket for the game at any stage? - A.
   No.

Q. Were there Police Officers around as you came down
   Leppings Lane? - A. I didn't see any, no.

Q. You said that as you joined the crowd of people
   outside the turnstile area there was a large crowd of
   people there? - A. Yes.

Q. I think at some stage you said that you could not
   have got out of that crowd if you had wanted to? - A.
   No, that is right.

Q. Over what sort of period did that sort of period did
   that situation develop because as you came to the
   crowd you would have been at the back of it, would
   you not? - A. Yes.

Q. Over what sort of period did such a build up develop
   that you could not have reversed? - A. I would think
   over ten or fifteen minutes.

Q. During that period did you have any reason, apart
   from towards the end of that period, to want to
   escape? - A. No, although it was certainly quite a
   tight crush but I didn't have any feeling, "I need to
   get out of here".   I am quite tall and so I  wasn't
   feeling faint but I   know the gentleman next to me was
   feeling faint and wanted to get out.

Q. Did you see or hear any evidence of any attempts
   being made to prevent the sort of crowd building up
   behind you that subsequently blocked any means of
   escape that you might have had? - A. I am sorry?

Q. Did you see or hear any attempts being made by Police
   Officers or anybody else to prevent the build up of
   crowd behind you so that it got to a stage where you
   could not escape? I imagine that by that stage the
   volume of crowd was   quite substantial? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you hear or see   any attempts being made    to
   prevent that substantial build up developing? - A. I
   saw the two Police Officers on horseback were having
   a heated discussion. They appeared to be raising
   their voices.  I couldn't hear anything of what they
   were saying. One of them backed his horse up behind
   me towards the gate.
                                                        27


                                                C. K. FLENLEY



Q. Did those two Officers appear to be talking to each
   other or to the crowd in general? - A. To each other
   and to the crowd telling them to back off but there
   was nowhere to back off to. There didn't appear to
   be anywhere.

Q. You have mentioned some foot Officers. Whereabouts
   were they in relation to you? - A. I can remember a
   foot Officer by the actual turnstile entrance.

Q. One foot Officer? - A. Yes.

Q. This is around 2.30 I think you said? - A. Between
   2.30 and 2.45.

     THE CORONER:   I think, Mr. Fraser, he said he got
there at 2.30. You got him to say it took 15 minutes
before he couldn't escape and so it cannot be at 2.30.

     MR. FRASER: No, but he did say between 2.30 and 2.45
in his last answer, sir.

     THE WITNESS:  I remember looking at my watch and it
was 2.50 and thinking that I am not going to get into the
ground.

Q.       MR. FRASER: That is a very useful marker. Were
     you at a point then when you could not get out of the
     crowd at 2.50? - A. Yes. Well, I couldn't get out of
     the area I was in.

Q. You say that you were fairly near to the large blue
   gate, Gate C as we know it, as it opened? - A. Yes.

Q. In terms of a fixed point between yourself and the
   Court room, how far from it were you as it opened? -
   A. I would say from me to the back of the hall.

Q. Was that within your direct line of vision or were
   you to one side of it? - A. I was looking down the
   side of it.    I was almost in line but just at an
   angle of about 20 degrees.    I wasn't actually looking
   straight on at it.    If that was the gate I was here
   ( indicating ) looking at it like that.

Q. As the gate opened you would have to move slightly to
   your right? - A. Yes.

Q. To go forward and then turn left to go through the
   gate? - A. Yes.

Q. You do not recall having to negotiate a barrier at
   that stage? - A. I have no recollection.
                                                       28
                                                            : i




                                              C. K. FLENLEY


Q. You would be then at the front or towards the front
   of the group that went through Gate C? - A. Yes.

Q. You looked to see if you could find a programme
   seller? - A. Yes.

Q. You looked down the tunnel and decided that that was
   not the place for you? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you feel that you were able to turn to your right
   fairly easily to move out of the line between Gate C
   and the tunnel and go round the side of the stand or
   was that something you had to do against the flow of
   the crowd? - A. No, I can remember when I got in that
   area it was quite empty. Yes, I had no difficulty at
   all.

Q. There would be people following you in? - A. Yes.

Q. I do not want to put words into your mouth but you
   did not feel any pressure that you were being carried
   through? - A. No.

Q. Can I take you now round to Pen 2? I think you had a
   fairly good view of the Police Control Box? - A. Yes.

Q. At no stage did you see a Police Officer on the
   Control Box steps or landing? - A. No.

Q. I think you have fairly conceded there may have been
   somebody there? - A. Yes.

Q. Your attention was elsewhere? - A. Yes.

Q. When you looked to your left, that is towards the
   radial fence between Pen 2 and Pen 3, people were
   hard up against that fence as you got into Pen 2,
   were they? - A. As soon as I arrived in Pen 2 I could
   see that there was a crush, yes.

Q. Using your medical experience, Doctor, were they
   crushed in the sense that a football crowd is
   comfortably crushed, if there is such a mixed
   metaphor? - A. No.

Q. Or were they in medical discomfort if I can be
   imprecise? - A. I felt they were in discomfort
   because I knew I was concerned and I could see that
   people were having difficulty trying to get out of
   the crowd up on to the stand, their legs being stuck
   by the crowd.

Q. Did you see anybody manage to get, with assistance or
   otherwise, from Pen 3 to Pen 2, that is across what
   we now know is the radial fence? - A. I have no
   recollection of that, no.
                                                          29


                                                C. K. FLENLEY



Q. They were clearly being lifted Into the stand behind
   you? - A. Yes.

Q. I think going over the top of the fence at some
   stage? - A. Yes, on to the pitch.

Q. How close to the fence that separates your pen, if I
   can use that expression, and the Police Control Box
   were you? - A. Between the fence and the Police Box,
   I think I was about halfway between the two.

Q. How much higher than your position is the platform of
   the Police Box? - A. The actual thing, I remember
   looking up and the Police Box was I think perhaps
   halfway up that panel ( indicating \ but that is a
   guess. They certainly would have had a good view of
   what was going on.

Q. When it became obvious to you that people were in
   some distress and you managed to make your way down
   to Gate 2 and you spoke to an Officer, can you
   perhaps explain a little more what exchange of
   conversation took place between you and he? - A. I
   just shouted, "I am a doctor" and he opened the gates
   and I went on to the pitch. That was it.

Q. From your position inside the gate at that stage
   could you see people on the pitch who required, in
   your view from that distance, medical attention? - A.
   Yes.

Q. The Police Officer at that stage did not resist that
   request? - A. No.

Q. I understand that you may - for which the families
   are grateful - attended more than one individual
   before you came to the girl you now know to be Sarah
   Hicks? - A. Yes.

Q. Is that possible? - A. I have a firm recollection of
   attempting to resuscitate at least three people.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Before Sarah Hicks? - A. No, I
     felt there was perhaps two people before Sarah.

Q. You mentioned one to me? - A. Yes. Sorry, no, there
   was one and then Sarah and then there was a large man
   to the right of Sarah.

Q. That is what you told me? - A. Yes.

Q. You had this man and you got his heart going again
   and then you went to the penalty area and you saw the
   girl whom you now know to be Sarah? - A. Yes.
                                                        30       I




                                                 C. K. FLENLEY


Q.       MR. FRASER: ' I do not want to press the point,
     Doctor,  it was obvious you were doing what you could
     in extremely trying circumstances? - A. Yes.

Q. Can I press you on this? Are you certain you
   attempted resuscitation on only one individual before
   you came to the female who you now know to be Sarah
   Hicks? - A. No, I am not certain.

Q. It could have been more? - A. Yes.

Q. When you got to the young lady who you now know to be
   Sarah Hicks, of course, you had no knowledge of who
   she was beforehand? -   A. No.

Q. She was another casualty who required attention? -    A.
   Yes.

Q. I am not a medical man, Doctor, but how quickly can
   you make an assessment of whether somebody is, in
   your own words, beyond help? - A. Within seconds,
   fifteen to thirty seconds.  I could see there were no
   signs of any life.

Q. You say that you were surprised that there was no
   equipment immediately available when you were making
   these resuscitation attempts? - A. Yes.

Q. It is perhaps a little unfair but if equipment had
   been available would you have expected it to have
   been made available at various parts of the ground
   and easily identifiable?

     THE CORONER:    No, I am not going to go into where the
equipment is. We have got enough problems without opening
that field.  I do not think that is within the purview of
this Inquest, sorry.

Q.        MR. FRASER:   When you moved to Victoria? - A. I
     am sorry?

Q. When you moved away from Sarah - you did not in fact
   look at Victoria because somebody else was looking
   after her? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you remember what your chain of movement was
   immediately after that? - A. When I had finished
   attending to Sarah I remember an ambulance was on the
   pitch almost next to me.  I remember the ambulance
   had difficulty getting around to the area behind the
   goal.  I moved to my right where there was a large
   man, I would say in his fifties or sixties, and
   attempted resuscitation on him and then I looked
   round for more people to resuscitate by which time I
   think most people had been removed from the area
                                                       31


                                                C. K. FLENLEY


     behind the goal.’ So I went up towards the Nottingham
     Forest supporters then.

     THE CORONER:   That is it, we are not interested.  I
use the word "interested".  I do not mean that in an unkind
way but it is not what we are dealing with.

Q.       MR. FRASER: Doctor, time plays tricks with
     memory and I do not want to pin you down but can you
     estimate now, or did you estimate then and do you
     recall your estimate, the length of time that you
     might have been on the pitch between getting through
     the gate and feeling you had done all you could for
     those who were before you? I just want to try and
     put the thing into some sort of perspective? - A.
     That is right but when things are happening so
     quickly, the next time I looked at my watch was
     outside the ground going home and that was I think
     five o'clock. When I had finished people were
     handing round jugs of water.

      MR. FRASER:    I am grateful, Doctor.




                        /Cross-Examined bv MR. CATCHPOLE
                                                         32




                                                 C. K. FLENLEY


              Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPQLE:

0. Can I just go back outside the ground very briefly?
   There has been some considerable evidence before the
   Inquests from a variety of sources, including fans
   outside the ground, people, stewards and Policemen on the
   inside of the concourse.   When Gate C opened fans, in
   their own words, were carried through.   Not all of them,
   I have to say.   One fan has described, for example,
   having to have his hand out on the chap in front of him
   just so he doesn't fall over, and being forced through
   that gate, not being able to see where he went. - A. Yes.

Q. Now from what you have been saying to us today, whatever
   time you went into Gate C, and I am not challenging your
   evidence, that wasn't the experience you had? - A. I was
   not walking in.   It was a quite sort of walking/running
   pace.   I remember somebody in front of me tripping over
   as we got in through the gate and we were to have time to
   lift him up and carry on.

Q. You weren't part of this momentum that has been described
   previously? - A. I could not have stopped and turned
   back, no, but I certainly didn't feel under pressure.

Q. When you got inside the gate was it possible that you
   were on the periphery of the crowd, on the edge, you
   could peel off, away?   How did you stop to look round
   for a programme? - A. When I got in the actual area
   between Gate C and the tunnel area was fairly empty.

0. That suggests, if this other evidence is to be accepted,
   that the momentum they were describing hadn't built up by
   that stage? - A. Yes.

Q. We can take it from your evidence that you weren't part
   of the momentum that has been described? - A. That's
   right.   Having seen the gate opened I must have been in
   fairly soon after the gate was opened.

              Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Dr. Flenley, when you arrived at about 2.30 were you
   surprised to see such a compact crowd at the perimeter
   gate? - A. When I looked down there was a crowd, but I
   wasn't surprised.   I was surprised at the lack of
   organisation compared to the year before, but no, I
   wasn't surprised at that time at the crowd.

Q. You were certainly surprised at the way the crowd was
   being fed into the turnstile area? - A. Yes, there was no
   queuing.   There didn't appear to be any organisation to
   me.
                                                             33      t




                                                     C. K. FLENLEY


Q.    You have mentioned barriers in 1988.   Gan you remember
     where the barriers were? - A. Yes, I think they were just
     as you turned off the main road down the lane.

Q. In front of the perimeter gates? - A. Yes, in front of
   the perimeter gates.

Q.   They were? - A. Yes, and I am sure that my     ticket was
     checked at that time.

Q. So you are saying running along a continuation of the
   pavement there there was a barrier, joining up with the
   other pavement that goes up over the bridge, is. that what
   you are saying? - A. I could not be exactly sure where it
   was but I have a recollection of some form of temporary
   barrier.

Q. Yes, other people have told me that as well.         I have
   made enquiries.

Q. The perimeter gates at 2.30, or thereabouts, were they
   open so you could walk straight through them? - A. Yes.

Q.   In 1988 what time did you arrive at the match that year?
     - A. It was about the same time because we met our
     friends at the same time in the same pub.

Q.    Were the perimeter gates closed that year,    apart from the
     ones to let people in in an organised way?

          THE CORONER:   You asked him whether they were
     closed, now let him answer.

          THE WITNESS:   I can't remember.   In 1988 I went
     round the other side of Leppings Lane towards the
     lighting tower.

Q.        THE CORONER:   I think Mrs. McBrien is asking you
     about the perimeter gates, the park-like gates. - A. Yes,
     they were open.

Q.   In 1988? - A. Yes, as far as I can remember.

Q.   In 1988? - A. Yes.

          THE CORONER:   That is right, it is the perimeter
     gate you are after, isn't it?

          MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes:

Q. Did you notice there were six gates altogether?   The
   perimeter gates consist of six, in pairs? - A. I can't
   remember.
                                                            34




                                                    C. K. FLENLEY


Q. You didn't notice? - A. No.

Q. Are you a regular football supporter? - A. I would say I
   have seen Liverpool perhaps six times a year, since the
   early seventies.    I used to go more regularly when I
   lived in Liverpool.

Q. Do you like to go on the terrace? - A. Yes.

Q. Would you say you preferred to go to the outer parts in
   preference to the centre? - A. Yes, there is more
   atmosphere on the terraces.

Q. So when you went      in presumably you would go in to try and
   make your way to      the sides rather than the centre? - A.
   Yes, although as      a teenager I always used to try and go
   in the middle.        As I get older I am heading towards the
   seats!

0. Yes, but these people who came in at the same time as
   you, maybe a lot of them were teenagers and they may just
   prefer the centre? - A. Yes.

Q. Have you ever entered a football stadium through a large
   gate before? - A. The only other time was against
   Wolverhampton Wanderers when the large wooden gate
   collapsed at the end of the season, 1975 or 1976, I
   think.

Q. What was done when the gate collapsed? - A. The crowd
   went in without paying.

Q. There was no danger for them? - A. I didn't feel under
   any danger then.

Q. Was it a semi-final match? - A. No, it was the last game
   of the season, a league match and if Liverpool won they
   won the league and if Wolverhampton lost they were
   relegated.

Q. Can you estimate what the numbers would be that went in
   through the gate? - A. No.

Q. No idea? - A. No.

          THE CORONER:      It was 1975 or 1976.   It is a long
     time ago.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:     Would you say it was a substantial
     crowd? - A. Yes.

Q. Once they had got in did somebody do something?   Did
   they get order outside or did people just come in? - A. I
   think they just went in.   I can't remember.
                                                             35




                                                    C. K. FLENLEY


Q. You obviously assessed the situation when you were in
   pen 2, I believe? - A. That's right, to the side.

0.   Of course you had also assessed the situation     at the
     tunnel as well? - A. Yes.   I had been warned     by some
     friends that it gets crowded in the middle.

Q. Did you see if any Police Officers in the concourse area
   just before the tunnel were also assessing the situation?
   - A. No.

          THE CORONER:   He can't say he saw an Officer
     assessing the situation.   How can he say what an Officer
     is doing?   He has already answered this question because
     he said there was a notable lack of Police Officers in
     the concourse area when he was there:

Q.   Those were almost your very words? - A. Yes.

          THE CORONER:   He has given you an answer.

          MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, I am sorry.    I probably missed
     that part when I was taking notes:

Q. Can you remember the time when you felt things were very
   serious, that there was serious crushing occurring in the
   centre pens? - A. As soon as I arrive don to pen 2 I
   could tell there was serious crushing.

Q.    Can you remember what time that was? - A. No, it must
     have been perhaps five minutes before three, 2.55 - I
     don't know.

Q. Although quite a number of people were desperately trying
   to attract the attention of Police Officers were you
   were, you said there was no response whatsoever from
   them? - A. No.

Q. I know you said the ambulance had taken a very long time
   to arrive.   Have you any idea what time that was? - A.
   No, twenty/thirty minutes.   I don't know.

                    Further by THE CORONER:

Q.   I just want to ask you a couple more questions.    I want
     to go back to these barriers in 1988.    Are vouable to
     position them on that model or shall I get the street
     plan out so you can show me on the street plan? - A. The
     street plan, yes.

Q. Would you look at C.284? - A. I am sure it as at the head
   of Leppings Lane.
                                                         36




                                                 C. K. FLENLEY


Q. When you say the "head", I understand the head to be... -
   A. Towards the A.6102.

        MR. FRASER:   Sir, in fairness to the witness he did
   say in answer to a question previously, "As soon as I
   turned off the main road there were barriers."

        THE CORONER:   That is exactly why I am asking him.

        MR. FRASER:   Then   the question of whether they were
   immediately adjacent to   the turnstile gates was raised
   and then there appeared   to be some confusion planted in
   his mind inadvertently,   of course, but...

        THE CORONER:   Exactly, Mr. Fraser.   That is
   precisely the reason why I want to find out where these
   areas were because my understanding was they were distant
   to the ground in his answer, whereas to Mrs. McBrien they
   were proximal:

Q. Now if we look at the map, we are not trying to catch you
   out in any way.   All we are trying to find out is what
   you saw and where they were, as far as you remember.
   That is all I am interested in. - A. As far as I remember
   it they were as soon as you turned off the main road.

Q. Can you find Middlewood Road there and can you find
   Leppings Lane, where it joins?   Are you saying it was
   around that position? - A. Yes.

Q. So you approached the ground in exactly thesame    way as
   you did in 1989? - A. Yes.

Q. Does that mean that the road was blocked to traffic? Was
   it right across the carriageway? - A. I am just trying to
   recollection which road...   It was off the road we would
   have parked on coming down.

Q. Middlewood Road has got a big hospital on it.   It is not
   a cottage hospital, it is a huge place. - A. Is that on
   this side of Middlewood Road?

Q. Yes. - A. So that is the road we would have walked down.

Q. Then you would turn left into Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.

Q. And right towards the turnstiles? - A. Right.   I am sure
   it was towards the top end of Leppings Lane, near
   Middlewood Road.

Q. Are you saying that the barriers were right across the
   carriageway? - A. I can't remember, but I can't remember
   any cars being there, no.   I can't remember if they were
   right across the carriageway.
                                               C. K. FLENLEY


Because you would accept that if they were across the
carriageway and if they were effective, if cars just
didn't drive over the top of them, they would block the
carriageway? - A. Yes.

The reason why I ask you is there is lots of visual
evidence showing cars going down Leppings Lane in 1988
and also for that matter in 1989, but that is not the
point.   That is why I want to find out because it is
important to know your recollection, - A, Yes, I can't
remember whether the barriers were completely across or
not.

But you do recollect there was a check made? - A, Yes,

What were they checking?   Your tickets? - A, Yes, I
think I just showed my tickets and for any alcohol.

So it was a searching operation that was going on? - A, I
think so, not a body search but just looking, really.
In 1988 I had no recall of going through the turnstiles,
so I presume it must have been fairly easy to get through
the turnstiles then,

     THE CORONER:   Does anybody else want to come back?
I think I have dealt with it all.




           MR FRASER:   Sir, in anticipation
                                                        38

                                             C.   K.   F-LENLEY




         MR. FRASER:  Sir, in anticipation that you have
   finished with the Witness, can I say that this is the
   first time this particular gentleman has given
   evidence, and he quite clearly used valiant efforts to
   assist many people on the pitch on that day. The
   families I represent whose loved ones he tended to.
   some of whom we know about and some of whom we don t,
   want to thank him, sir, through you for all that he did
   on their behalf. They recognise that his efforts were
   in many cases in vain, but they were nevertheless well
   received by the families, and thank you on behalf of
   them.

        THE CORONER:   I am sure we accept that with great
   pleasure:

Q. And I am more than nappy to convey it to you. Perhaps
   I should say, of course, similar sentiments would apply
   to anybody who made any attempt, successful or
   otherwise, in saving somebody s life, but that does not
   diminish in any sense of the word from your efforts. -
   A. Thank you.

0. I have actually thought on one other matter. You know
   you were saying you were in your pen and you could see
   across? - A. Yes.

0. And I think Mr. Payne was taking you through those
   photographs of people who were in the same pen as you
   were. - A. Yes.

0. But closer by "x" number of feet - we d o n ’t know
   because it is difficult to do it without measuring it -
   and were you saying that you felt that you were in a
   better position to see than they were because you were
   further? - A. Yes, that is right. The closer you are
   with a large volume of people at the same average
   height, you have difficulty, whereas I seemed to be up
   on 3   ••••


0. Yes, but surely you are not suggesting that if people
   are being pulled up in large numbers into the stands
  .above, that that was invisible to them? - A. Ho.

Q. You are not putting that, are you? - A. No.

Q. You might have had a better view towards the front,
   because you had a better angle? - A. Yes.

Q. But the activity was almost in front of their eyes? -
   A. Yes, that is right. They should have been able to
   see it, yes.
                                                       39
                                                                t.




                                               C. K. FLENLEY




Q. Similarly presumably, the people in the pen itself,
   where people were actually being pulled up, the people
   behind them - I am not talking about the people in
   front. - A. Yes, that's right.

Q.   You would agree with that? - A. Yes.

Q.    There is one other thing that I wanted to ask you and ]
     have forgotten it.   Would you mind hanging on until
     after coffee, just in case it comes back to me? - A.
     No.

          THE CORONER:   We will break for coffee, a sharp
     quarter of an hour.  It is Mr. Tudor next.

                     (Short Adjournment)

          THE CORONER:   I did remember the question, but I
     decided it was not necessary to ask it.

                 LESLIE TUDOR Called (Sworn)

                        By THE CORONER

0. It is Leslie Tudor, isn't it? - A. Yes.

0* Is it still                                  in
   Liverpool? -^A. Yes^

Q. And you are a clerk, I think, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Before I say anything else, I am sorry that you were
   here all day yesterday, or a good bit of yesterday, and
   we didn't get to you, but we are here now, okay? - A.
   Yes, fine.

Q. You are a life-long Liverpool supporter I believe, is
   that right? - A. As long as I can remember.

Q. Well, we will call that life-long, and on 15th April
   1989 you came to Sheffield to watch the match? - A.
   Yes.

Q. I think you came by train, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. There weren't any problems on the train, it wasn't a
   special, it was just a train, wasn't it? - A. I bought
   an ordinary saver ticket but the train that I actually
   got on, the sign on the front of it said that it was a
   football special, so I am sure what it was actually
   meant to be. It made a lot of stops.

0. You arrived at 1.30 or so at Sheffield, is that right?
   - A. I arrived earlier than that, I think.
                                                      40

                                                    L.. TUDOR




0. Was it the main station in the city centre? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you were then met by Police Officers and were
   guided or directed or steered, or whatever word you
   wish to use, towards the buses, is that right? - A.
   Yes, there were buses laid on from the train to the
   ground.

Q.' You caught one and you got to the ground at about what
    time? - A. I am not sure now to be honest - around 2
    o'clock.

Q. I am not pinning you to a minute, I just wanted to know
   roughly. Then I think you went and bought yourself
   some chips? - A. Yes.

Q. Because you were hungry, quite right, and you stayed
   outside the chip shop while you were eating them for a
   little while, I believe? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you know about till what time? - A. About 20-past-2
   there was a number of Officers came down Leppings Lane
   from the Penistone Road end of Leppings Lane, on
   horseback. There must have been about three or four on
   horseback. They were starting to move people up the
   road towards the ground, so it was about 20-past-2 that
   I headed off towards the turnstiles.

Q. And you were actually encouraged to do that by Officers
   further away from the ground? - A. Yes, they came up
   the road and as far as I could tell they were making
   everybody move up to the turnstiles.

Q.   When you were eating your chips - do youknow where
     that was, where the chip shop was? - A. It was on
     Leppings Lane, about half-way down towards Penistone
     Road.

Q. Towards the big roundabout? - A. Yes.

Q. At that position, you were there for about 20 minutes,
   weren't you, about? - A. Yes.

Q. Did people pass you? Were there lots of people
   standing around or were people moving? - A. There was a
   large queue for the chippy and there were quite a few
   people standing around, but there were also a lot of
   people heading towards the turnstiles.

Q.    In that position where you were did youseeanybody
     drinking anything out of cans? - A. Most people were
     drinking. A lot of people were drinking soft drinks,
     there were other people who obviously had cans of beer
     and that, but ....
                                                        41

                                                    L.- TUDOR




Q.   It was a hot day, wasn't it? - A. Yes.  I didn't   see
     anybody drunk or anybody with a large amount of
     alcohol.

Q. And you weren't concerned about what was happening? -
   A. No.

Q. It sounds as if you had had nothing to drink, would
   that be right? - A. Yes, that's right.

Q. So you went up towards the ground? - A. Yes.

Q.   You had been to Hillsborough before, so you knew the
     layout? - A. I had been once before to the 1988 semi­
     final.

Q. Did you come by train that year as well? - A. No, I
   came by car that year.

Q. We will come to '88 again, if necessary, all right?
   When you first approached the ground what was it like?
   Can you remember the perimeter gates? Do you know what
   I mean by the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

0. The big blue park-like gates? - A. There was quite a
   large crowd milling around the gates, and there was
   quite a big crowd inside the gates who were moving in
   the direction of the turnstiles, but there weren't
   actually any queues or anything like that, just a large
   crowd.

Q. Did you see any Police Officers? - A. There were quite
   a few Police Officers.  I would say the ones on
   horseback had followed those of us from the Penistone
   Road end of Leppings Lane up the streets and were
   ushering people towards the turnstiles, and there
   seemed to be a lot of Officers around who were ushering
   people towards those perimeter gates and towards the
   turnstiles. The reason I noticed that is that I did
   not intend to go in at that time.  I wanted to actually
   wait around until later on.

0.. So it was a bit early for you as far as you were
    concerned? - A. Yes, I didn't particularly want to
    stand around for 30, 40 minutes on the terrace waiting
    for the game to start.

0. So you would say this was about 20-past-2 then still,
   or a bit later? - A. Yes, about 20-past-2, round that
   time.

0. It didn't take you very long to walk from the chippy to
   this position, did it? - A. No, it is not very far down
   the road.
                                                       42   V\
                                                     L.. TUDOR .




Q. You got through the perimeter gates without too much
   difficulty I imagine, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Then you joined the crowd that was going towards the
   turnstile? - A. Yes.

Q. Was it moving at that point? - A. It wasn't moving
   within the gates, I don't think, or ....

Q. Sorry? - A. Within a few feet within the gates I was
   forced to stop by the volume of people.

Q. In front of you? - A. Yes, but there were a lot of
   people converging on that crowd about that time.

Q. What happened then, in your own words? - A. I joined
   the back of the crowd and there were other people
   joining behind me.  It gradually became more crowded
   and more closer in that crowd. There was a lot of
   pressure moving towards the area of the turnstiles and
   that kept up right until I got to the turnstiles and
   got in.

Q. You got through the turnstile, did you? - A. Yes.

Q. Have you any idea what time you got through the
   turnstile? - A. About 2.30.

Q. So it took you about ten minutes to traverse the area?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Then you went down the tunnel I think, is that right? -
   A. Yes.

0. You had been there before, and are you one of the young
   people who likes to stand behind the goal if you can
   get there? - A. Sometimes.

0. Did you stand behind the goal in 1988? - A. In 1988 I
    went to the game with three friends of mine. One of
    them had a young son, and we all went down the tunnel
    behind the goal but it was too crowded, and it was
  . basically very uncomfortable.  Because we had the young
    lad with us we turned back, back up the tunnel, and
    tried to find another entrance. We eventually found
    the entrance which is to the right, which took you into
    the area which Mr. Hicks said he was in yesterday.

Q. Round by the Police Control Box? - A. That was in 1988.

0. That was in '88, so in fact you had been in the central
   pens but because there was a child with you .... - A.
   Basically it wasn't very comfortable for the adults,
   but with the child as well ....
                                                          43

                                                       L. TUDOR .




Q. What time was it that you left in 1988 because you
   weren't comfortable? - A. It was shortly before the
   kick-off.  I think the players were out - I am not
   sure.

Q. The game had not started?   - A. The game        had not
   started.  It started as we got into the        other area.

Q. So it must have been fairly close? - A. Yes.

Q. But it wasn't that bad in   1988 to deter    you fromgoing
   down there in 1989, would   that be right? - A. It made
   me think twice but having said that I thought that
   maybe a lot of the discomfort was caused by the fact
   that the area we were in was near the entrance to the
   tunnel, and I thought maybe if I got further on, nearer
   to the front or further over, then it might not have
   been as much pushing.

Q. So you actually thought about it before you went down?
   - A. The night before I had actually been warned by
   friends not to go into the central pens, by friends of
   mine who support Everton who had been there a couple of
   years earlier for a big Cup match, and they advised me
   not to go into that area, so I was consciously thinking
   of it.

Q. You were conscious that it could be tight, shall we
   say? - A. Yes.

Q. And you knew about the side because you had already
   discovered that the previous year? - A. Yes.

0.     Anyway, whatever it was you,   went down the tunnel and I
      take it there was no problem    getting down the tunnel? -
      A. No.

Q. You entered, I think was it pen 3, the right-hand one?
   - A. Yes.

Q.      When you got in at 2.30 what was it like at that point?
       - A. It was basically very similar to the way it had
     . been the previous year.    It was very densely packed
       around the mouth of the tunnel, that area.    It was
       quite difficult to get through that initial crowd. The
       movement of the crowd was quite volatile. There were a
       lot of surges forward and backwards, sideways,
       whatever, and people falling about, almost falling
       over.    I gradually pushed my way further through and
       got maybe ten feet away from the mouth of the tunnel.

Q. What time would that be? - A. Maybe about 25-to-3.          It
   didn't take very long.
                                                     44       ■

                                                   L.- TUDOR .




Q. Were you distressed at that time? - A. Not really, no.

Q. In fact from the time you got in things kept on
   building up for about 15 minutes or so, is that right?
   - A. Yes.  It was quite uncomfortable because there was
   a lot of movement within the crowd. Quite often the
   people at the back, I don't know whether it was with
   the numbers of people trying to get through because the
   area around where the tunnel let out onto the terrace
   was quite crowded, and the only way to get through that
   was to push through, and that was causing people to
   topple forward quite a bit.

Q. This was in the period between 2.30 and quarter-to-3,
   you are saying? - A. Yes.

Q. At that time, although it was crowded, you were not
   distressed, that is correct, isn't it? - A. Well
   further in there was quite a bit of space, but as I say
   the people were constantly falling forward all the
   time.

Q. Because of pressure coming from behind them, for
   whatever reason? - A. For whatever reason the crowd was
   constantly moving forward and you were being say thrown
   four or five steps down, and then you would ....

0. Is this sometimes called a surge? - A. Yes. Well, it
   is since Hillsborough it has been called a surge. I
   have never heard the term before.

Q. What was it called before? Did it have a name? - A.
   Never thought about it, to be honest.

0. Not a name that you knew anyway? - A. No. The only
   thought I had about it was that it was something that
   seemed to be common with a lot of grounds, other than
   Anfield.

Q. Sorry? - A. The only thought I had about it at the time
    was it was something that seemed to be common with a
    lot of terraces I had been on, other than the ones at
  . Anfield. The terracing on the Kop at Anfield is quite
    steep and it is quite easy to see, but a lot of grounds
    the terracing is not as steep and you find that you are
    standing on tiptoes or leaning on the people in front
    of you to get a view, which means that you are more
    liable to send them toppling over, which happens quite
    a lot.

Q. So these movements happen at other places as well but
   not so much at Anfield because you think the rake is
   different, the steepness? - A. Yes.
                                                    45

                                                  L.. TUDOR .




Q. You may be right or not, I don't know, but that is your
   view anyway? - A. It happens at Anfield, say if there
   is a goal or goal-mouth action or whatever, but it
   doesn t seem to happen for no particular reason, where
   at other grounds it seems to happen quite a lot.




                       /Q. Do you remember
                                  L TUDOR


 Do you remember the teams being announced? - A. Yes.

 You do remember. Was this at a point in time that we
 are talking about now, when you were in this sort of
 situation, or was it afterwards? - A. No, it was later
 on. Before the teams were announced I had moved
 further forward down the terrace to maybe in between
 the first and second row of barriers because there was
 that much movement further back, getting thrown about
 quite a bit, that I moved further forward out of the
 way of that, and by the time the teams came out then
 the terrace had filled up a lot more.

 But you by this time had sort of moved fairly far to
 the front? - A. Yes.

At that point it was crowded you have told me this,
that it was filling up all the time, but were you or
were not not worried? - A. I was not particularly
worried in that before a big game there is often quite
a bit of movement and it gets tightly packed but
things tend to settle down maybe when the crowd finds
its level in the few minutes after the kick-off or
whatever, and that is what I was expecting to happen.

Did you remember the players coming onto the field? -
A. Vaguely.

Before kick-off I meant? — A. I can't recall taking
much notice of whether the players had a warm-up
earlier on or not.

Did you see the kick-off? - A. I did not take much
notice of the kick-off. I was more concerned by that
time with keeping my feet.

What I an trying to do is I am not asking you whether
you were so busy watching the match that you were not
looking at anybody else. I am trying to pin times
down, do you understand? - A. Yes.

Did you remember the big surge at all? - A. No, I
don t remember any particular big surge, no.

Do you remember any surge which made things worse,
other than these little ones? I call them little ones
and they may have been quite big, but at that point
non-worrying as far as you were concerned? - A. Around
the time that the players were being announced, and I
recall that was quite close to the players coming out
  to the P*tch, it was getting quite crowded down at
the front.  It was getting very packed and, as I say,
from that time on I was not really taking that much
notice of what was going on on the pitch.
                                   L TUDOR


  But do you remember the players running out onto the
  pitch? Maybe you did not understand me. - A. I
  remember them running out but, as I say, it coincided
  with me being more concerned with trying to keep my
  feet, trying to keep myself upright in the crowd.

  But you still felt that things would settle down once
  they started playing at that stage? - A. As I say, a
  number of games I have been to in the past,
  particularly say the big games against Everton or big
  Cup matches, or whatever, it is often like that just
  before a kick-off and then things settle down.

 So it was difficult, but it was not anything totally
 unusual in your experience? - A. No.

 At that stage. We know things changed, but at that
 stage that is correct, is it? - A. Yes.

 Was it around that time that you also saw two youns
 girls? - A. Yes.                                  5

 When did you first catch a glimpse of them? - A. It
 was a bit earlier.  I first saw them at the point when
 I moved from near the back to nearer the front of the
 terrace. They were standing just in front of me.

How long did you have them in your vision? - A. Maybe
5 or 10 minutes at the most.

When did they disappear from sight as far as you were
concerned, can you remember? Can you locate that with
any event? - A. It was generally as it became more and
more crowded. These surges were taking place and I
was constantly falling against these girls and other
people who were around.  I eventually found myself in
front of them rather than standing behind them after
one of the many surges which were going on at the
time, and from that point I gradually moved further
forward as the crowd became more densely packed.

I see. So we are now in a position, are we, the teams
had gone onto the field but you do not really know
what was going on because you were beginning to wonder
about falling over and you were tight, but you were
still expecting things to settle - right? - A. Well,
basically all the time I was always expecting things
^ rt   o   a   ^ ^   I m    ®




Did you hear any shouts around you, or did you shout
yourself? — A. I am not sure what time, compared with
the players coming out or the announcement of the
teams, but there was a stage when I was actually
standing up on the step which is in front of the gate,
                                  L TUDOR


 which is the gate in the perimeter fence in Pen 3. and
 there was a man and a boy in front of me - I assume it
 was his son or some relation of his - and I was trying
 to push back with my feet on the step so that I would
 not be putting pressure on these two in front of me.
 and basically everyone around me, and especially the
 man in front of me, was shouting for the gate to be
 opened, and the main reason I was shouting was because
 of the boy in front of me.

 I do not know if he was little, butyou thought that
 the lad should get out? - A. Yes. Basically I thought
 anyone, like.                                     5

You have already told me you do not remember much
about the game, but do you recollect whether this was
before kick-off or after? Have you any way of knowing?
- A . I have no recollection of what went on on the
pitch after the teams running out of the tunnel.

I see. You do not remember seeing the goalkeeper in
the goal, or anything like that? - A. No. After that
point when the teams ran out, I did not really take
any notice of what was happening.

What happened to the gate? You were shouting and the
man was shouting and the boy presumably was shouting
as well, and there may have been others. What
happened? - A. There was no response from the Police
officer °n the pitch side. I don't recall him looking
over.                                                6

You do not recollect him looking over? - A. No, and I
don't recall him showing any signs that he had
actually heard people shouting.

There was quite a lot of other noise as well, was
there not? - A. Yes.

You would expect that. That is no complaint, but that
is, in fact, the fact, is it not? - A. There was a lot
of noise at the time.

Then, in fact, you were moved away from this position,
were you not? - A. I took a step sideways basically
because I felt that that may relieve some of the
pressure on the person in front of me.

So you yourself took a step? You were not moved by
the crowd at that point? — A. I was partly moved by
the crowd and partly I gave in to the pressure and
went sideways.
                                                        49



                                         L TUDOR


 Q.    So there was at that stage still an element of
       voluntary movement insofar as you were concerned? - A.
       A little yes.

Q.    That would be true, would it? - A. Yes.

Q.    Did you then finish right up against the front fence?
      “ A * As 1 stepped to one side I was then up against
      the front fence. Having looked at my statement I put
      down that I was about 6 feet away from the gate, but I
      have actually seen a lot of the video evidence which
      was shown at the Taylor Inquiry and I have seen myself
      on that video.

Q.    I see, you have? - A. Yes, and the position I was in
       was maybe a foot, if that, away from the gate. I was
       a lot closer to the gate than I thought.

Q.    It is very difficult, is it not? - A. It is. There
      was like a stanchion which jutted out from the wall
      which was part of the way it was fastened to the wall.
       Say that was the wall, there was a piece of metal at
      that angle from the floor to the wall.   I had one foot
      either side of that, and the last sort of voluntary
      movement I made was to move my leg around so I was
      standing both feet on the side because I didn't want
      to be stuck with my feet either side of that.

Q.    You, in fact, got trapped by your legs, basically, did
      you not? - A. That was later on. Once I had moved
      that foot around basically the whole of my body was
      trapped up against the fence and my left arm was out
         right-angles to my body.  I don't know how it got
      there, maybe when I moved sideways, and I could feel
      somebody's head between my left arm and the fence, but
      I couldn't move.

Q.    You fortunately were, in fact, able to breathe, were
      you not? - A. Yes.

Q.     Had you noticed whether the gate was open? You may
       not, and if you did not, do not say you did or did
     . not? — A. I didn't notice when the gate was opened.   I
       did notice at one point - I am not sure what time, it
       might have been quite some time after 3 o'clock - that
       the gate was opened and that they were getting people
       out, but it was very slow the rate at which people
       were coming out of the gate and I couldn't see very
      well because I wasn't in a position to turn my head
       round and look.  I was only looking out of the corner
       of my eye, but it appeared that the amount of bodies
       in front of the gate was making it difficult to get
      people out and those that were coming out, basically
       the people on the pitch side were getting hold of them
                                   L TUDOR


 and prizing them through from the crush. It wasn't as
 if the gate was opened and then people began to walk
 out •

No, we know that. But you did not see it open? - A. I
did not see it open, no.

What you are saying is even when you did realise it
was open people were getting out with great difficulty
and had to be pulled out and helped? - A. There didn't
seem to be anybody making their own way out. They
seemed to be being dragged out.

You were actually standing, I think. Did you catch a
glimpse of the girls again, or had they disappeared
totally from your view? - A. I think either just
before or as I moved to the side away from the gate I
looked round and I think I saw the girls, but it was
only a glance round over my shoulder.

There was an elderly gentleman quite close to you as
well who was in a poor way, was there not? - A. Yes,
he was right next to me.

He was next to you? - A. Yes. As I say, I couldn't
look beyond. I was maybe looking over to my right more
than my left. The position I was in, there was no way
I could turn my head to look around at all. So this
man was there next to me on the right-hand side.

Literally next to you? - A. Yes.

I think, in fact, you saw somebody trying to pass some
oxygen to him, did you not, at some point or other? —
A. At some point - it seemed to be quite a long time
after it had all began.

That may be so. — A. I saw them bring the oxygen
bottle across the pitch side in front of me. They
took it quite a way to my right and I lost sight of
it, and then it came back again and it was offered to
this gentlemen. They put it in his mouth and I don't
think he took a breath out of it, and it was offered
to me, but I told the person that I could breathe
okay.

You did not see any barriers break, or anything like
that, did you? “ A. I did not see any barriers break,
but on recollection the crush seemed to get tighter at
one point for no apparent reason, and that was quite a
time after the crush began.

Quite a time after the crush began? - A. Yes.  I was
thinking that I was expecting it to begin to ease off
                                                 51      i




                                  L TUDOR


shortly, and suddenly it became that bit worse and the
only explanation I can give for that is that must have
been the time the barrier snapped because actually,
having looked at diagrams of the layout and that, I
was directly in front of that barrier.




                     /Q.   Could you on a plan ....
                                                        52


                                                    L. TUDOR


Q. Could you on a plan just put a cross where you were?
   I think we will take the position on the fencing
   where you were because you have described the others
   very well? - A. We started off around this area.

Q. I do not want the position where you first came on
   but where you finished up. Now would you put a
   circle at where you were at say 2.45 while all the
   surging was taking place which you did not
   particularly like? - A. Yes.

     MR. BEECHEY:   C.361, sir.

                Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE:

Q. Can you just explain what you mean by "normally
   within two or three minutes after kick-off the crowd
   finds its level"? - A. Generally the type of surges
   that are going on tend to stop and people around at
   that time, you find you tend to stay in the position
   in which you end up in but in the periods before, say
   around the kick-off, you tend to be moved about quite
   a bit involuntarily by the movement in the crowd.   I
   mean I do not know what causes it, whether it is
   people at the back arriving as the game kicks off or
   whatever but there is generally quite a bit of
   movement, moving around, at about the time of kick-
   off in a small terrace like that at least anyway.

               Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING:

Q. It is accepted by you as somebody who I guess has had
   quite a lot of experience of going into matches and
   standing watching them that the place where an awful
   lot of people choose to go is behind the goal? - A.
   Yes.

Q. It is almost part of the thrill, the enjoyment, the
   fun of being   at the match,    to enjoy the whole scene
   of what goes   on behind the    goal? - A. It iswhere
   basically most of the chanting and singing comes
   from, the area behind the goal, and a lot of people
   like to go there.   If you are standing out at the
   sides you basically a lot of time you want to start
   singing and you are going to be singing on your own
   and you look a bit foolish.

Q. I suppose it depends what kind of voice you have got
   but you get the atmosphere      best from behind the goal
   because that   is where it all seems to be? -A. It
   depends on the occasion basically.

Q. As part of that it is not unusual in your experience
   for the people behind the goal to be more closely
   packed than the ones who are at the side? - A. No,
   that is not unusual.
                                                     53


                                                  L. TUDOR



Q. It is not unusual in your experience for there to be
   what we now call this surge but which perhaps before
   we might have called a tumbling, in other words,
   perhaps going four, five or six steps and then back
   up the four, five or six steps again? - A. It is not
   unusual in a lot of the smaller, less steep terraces.
   I think for that reason I have experienced that at a
   lot of grounds where if you have difficulty seeing
   over the people in front of you then you tend to lose
   your balance quite a bit because you are leaning on
   them to try and get a view.

Q. It is not unexpected when you come out on to the
   terrace to find that people have more or less stopped
   where they have arrived and that you have got to get
   two, three or four lines of people or rows of people
   to get a position on a lower part of the terrace
   where there is some room? - A. It depends a lot on
   the stadium and what type of access they have to a
   terrace. You see, on the Kop at Anfield that is not
   the case. People don't congregate around the
   entrances.

Q. When you got to the terrace in 1989, you saw you had
   got to push through a whole crowd of people who were
   at the top of the terrace to get a position, that was
   something you had experienced in 1988 as well? - A.
   Yes, only in 1988 I didn't get very far and so I
   turned back.

Q. You did not get very far and I suppose it was in your
   mind, because of your own thought process of how you
   described the Everton supporter the night before
   talking to you, that if you felt that it was going to
   get so uncomfortable you would turn back again and
   look for another spot again? - A. Yes, initially I
   had intended to stay fairly near the back and fairly
   near the entrance to the tunnel but, as I said, I did
   move further forward and I gave up any idea of going
   back up the tunnel and out.

Q. When you moved further forward you thought that that
   was going to be all right for the match and that if
   there was pressure it would ease off as the crowd
   found its level? - A. Yes, that is what I thought.

Q. Except for the moment unfortunately when this whole
   tragedy unfolded, up to that time that was still in
   your mind. This was a big crowd for a big match and
   that things would ease back once the kick-off had
   started and everybody had settled down? - A. I
   basically could not comprehend anything else
   happening.
                                                          54


                                                       L. TUDOR


                    Cross-Examined bv MR. FRASER:

Q.    Mr. Tudor, can I take you back beyond this game to
     the equivalent fixture in 1988 for a few minutes?   I
     think you said to that game you travelled by car? -
     A. Yes.

Q. Can you remember whereabouts you parked or how you
   .approached the ground in 1988? - A. I can remember
    but I can't remember the name of the road.  It was
   mentioned just by the previous witness, Middlewood
    Road or something like that.

Q.    Did you walk down the same road in 1988 that you
     walked in 1989, that is passed the chip shop, or did
     you approach the ground from the other direction? -
     A. In 1988, is it Middlewood Road?

Q. Yes? - A. We parked in one of the streets off
   Middlewood Road and walked down, turned left down
   Leppings Lane and over the bridge.  In 1989 the buses
   which came from the train station approached from the
   opposite end of Middlewood Road I think and dropped
   us off on the bridge on Leppings Lane. When I got
   off the bus I walked past the stadium and down to
   where the shops were.

Q. In 1988 again as you approached the ground were you
   stopped at any point having parked your car for your
   ticket to the ground to be checked? - A. I can't
   remember.  I wouldn't say I wasn't stopped but I
   don't particularly remember being stopped either.

Q. In 1989 at what stage, if any, was your ticket
   checked? - A. At the turnstiles.

Q. Had it been checked by a Police Officer before
   then? - A. No.

Q. You described the way the mounted Officers gathered
   supporters and ushered them towards the turnstiles.

      THE CORONER:      Pressured?   Shepherded I think he said.

      MR. FRASER:     Ushered.

      THE CORONER:      Did you say pressured?

      MR. FRASER:     No.

     THE CORONER:       All right, I do not remember him saying
pressured.

      MR. FRASER:     No, I said ushered, sir.
                                                         55


                                                   L. TUDOR


     THE CORONER:   I   thought you said pressured. I am
sorry.  I do not mind   ushered. I am more than happy with
ushered.

Q.      MR. FRASER: You were guided by Police Officers
     towards the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. As you got to the turnstiles were you at the front of
   the group that was being guided, in the middle of it,
   to the rear of it? - A. I think I was in the middle.
   What I basically remember is that they were quite
   vociferous in moving people on towards the stadium
   because, as I say, I had nointention of going in at
   that early stage.    I wanted to wait around until
   later o n . It says in my statement I was there on my
   own but I was hoping to bump into other people who I
   knew were going and so I didn't particularly want to
   go in earlier.   If there had been a way I would have
   say crossed the road and sort of avoided the Officers
   on horseback and gone in later on but I seem to
   remember there being a few of them and I gave up any
   idea of that and I decided to go in.

Q. You were almost being swept along with the crowd of
   people who were being ushered along the road? - A.
   That is how I have described it to people, that they
   did a sweep up the road and moved people forward to
   the area around the turnstiles.

Q. Is it possible for you to estimate now how many
   people there might have been in the crowd that was
   being ushered along the road? I appreciate that when
   the ushering begins there is nobody in the crowd but
   by the time it had got to the turnstiles how many
   people would be in the group who had been brought
   down by the Police Officers? - A. I couldn't estimate
   a number but all I could say is that there didn't
   seem to be much way of avoiding being ushered up to
   the turnstiles because I would have done if that had
   have been the case. So I would assume that everyone
   who was standing in between the stadium and say
   further down Leppings Lane, where I was, was moved
   forward. I mean there was quite a large crowd
   milling around in the immediate part of Leppings Lane
   outside the perimeter gates who had basically, a lot
   of whom may have been thinking about whether to
   actually make the move towards the turnstiles or
   whether to try and hang around a bit longer.

Q. The same sort of decision that you had made
   previously but from further back? - A. Yes.

Q. I am sorry to press you but I want to try and get an
   impression of the size of the group that arrive. By
   comparison to this room, would that group have
   exceeded it if they had been standing, walking
                                                         56


                                                    L. TUDOR


     distance apart? I am trying to gain some impression
     of the size of body of people that is all? - A. It
     was a large number of people.  I would have said it
     was in the hundreds, the number of people who were
     moved on towards the turnstile area.

Q.    Could you see the front of that group if indeed it
     had a front?   What I am trying to ascertain is
     whether the group who were ushered along the road was
     added to another group that was already waiting to
     gain admittance or whether this was a fresh sweep as
     it were? - A. It wasn't an identifiable group as such
     that were moved up the road but as we began moving
     forward obviously we were joining those people who
     were already further up the road.

Q.    I understand that. - A. As we got the area of the
     perimeter gates we joined the large crowd which were
     already inside those gates.

Q. This ushering was conducted by Officers on horses? -
   A. Yes.

Q. When you got to the position at which you stopped
   moving, could you see the turnstiles? - A. You could
   see the signs above them. You couldn't actually see
   the turnstiles themselves. Basically you could see
   the top of them.

Q. Apart from the Officers on horses who were then
   behind you could you see any other Officers? - A. I
   don't recall seeing any other Officers.

Q. I think you said that you managed to get through the
   turnstiles and went down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. How long did it take for that process to take place?
   Once you had arrived with your group outside the
   turnstiles, what sort of time scale was it?

     THE CORONER:   He has told me that. He said so but
ask him again to see whether he comes up with the same
answer.

      THE WITNESS:   Approximately ten minutes.

Q.       MR. FRASER: Once you arrived at the mouth of the
     tunnel, that is the pen end, the pitch end of the
     tunnel, and I think you said that you managed to get
     through the people who were waiting at that end and
     then you subsequently made a decision to move down
     the terraces a little? - A. Yes.

Q. You could at that stage presumably make forward
   movement without too much difficulty? I appreciate
                                                        57


                                                     L. TUDOR


   you said that you had to get through a group of
   people at the exit to the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. But you could make some progress down the terraces,
   not easily, but you were able to move at that
   stage? - A. Yes, I think basically I was constantly
   being thrown forward and moving back again and at one
   particular stage I decided not to bother going back
   up the steps and moved sideways a little.

Q. That is what I was coming to. How long did it take
   for you to reach that decision? Having emerged from
   the mouth of the tunnel, what time lapse was there
   between that point and the point of you deciding,
   "There is no way I can go back"? - A. It was about
   five or ten minutes, ten at the most, probably more
   around five minutes before I decided that I wasn't
   going to bother going back to the original position
   and that I would take up a position further forward.




                / Q.   Even though it w a s ....
                                                        58




                                                      L. TUDOR


Q. Even though it was not where you wanted to be you
   accepted that was where you had to be? - A. I accepted
   that if I went further back I would be constantly going
   backwards and forwards for whatever length of time.

Q. Can I just move to the point at which you were as close
   to the front fence as it was possible to be?   I think
   you described yourself as having one arm out to the side?
   - A. Yes.

Q. And the other one folded against you? - A. Yes.

Q. You could see through the fence because you were
   immediately against it at that stage? - A. Yes.

Q. Was there anything going on on the other side of the
   fence that you were aware of? - A. There were people
   shouting over to others behind me.   They were people and
   Police Officers shouting for the crowd to move back, but
   basically the position I was in, and the people at the
   front with me, there was no way of reaching them. There
   seemed to be people trying to reach over the top.

Q. You say people and Police Officers.    Where had the other
   people come from? - A. I don't know.    My vision was
   restricted.

Q. Were they fans? - A. Yes, there were fans.   My vision
   was restricted in that I couldn't move my head.   I was
   restricted to where I could move my eyes.

Q. Yes, I understand that.    It must have been very
   distressing for you.    I don't want to prolong the agony
   but we have to get a picture of what you saw and what you
   were able to do.    Is it possible for you to give us any
   estimate of the length of time you were actually held in
   that position?    It may not be possible. - A. Well, it
   is. As I say, I have seen some of the video evidence, on
   which there was a clock in the corner of the film so I
   know exactly what time I was pulled out from the terrace
   through the gate.    I think it was maybe two or three
   minutes before that I was still quite tightly pinned up
   against the fence.    I would say about between fifteen
   and seventeen minutes I was held in that position, from
   around, say, the three o'clock mark.

              Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Mr. Tudor, when you said it was 2.35 when you were at the
   area of the tunnel, could that time have been an
   approximate time or were you absolutely positive of the
   time? - A. I am quite sure of the time I entered the
   ground because, as I say, I didn't want to go in that
   early and I was quite put out at having to go in that
                                                            59




                                                         L. TUDOR


     early.   I was looking at my watch and thinking, "I have
     got to stand round now for the next thirty minutes with
     nothing to do." So I am quite sure of the time.

Q. When had you checked your watch? - A. I was constantly
   looking at it, watching the minutes go by because there
   was nothing else to do.

Q. You are quite sure it was 2.35 that you were going down
   the tunnel?

          THE CORONER:    I think he said 2.30, actually.

          THE WITNESS:   It was around the 2.30 mark that I
     came through the turnstiles and I went straight down the
     tunnel.   I didn't hang about once I came through the
     turnstiles.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   When you were in pen 3 did you see a
     piece of metal being flung on to the pitch at all? - A.
     No.

Q. You say normally people move about constantly in the
   pens, well, on the terrace and by the time kick-off
   arrives they have found their level on the terrace?

          THE CORONER:   He didn't say that.      He said shortly
     after kick-off people find their level:

Q. That's right, isn't it?     - A.    Yes.

          THE CORONER:   You must try and putto thewitness
     what he actually said, if you are going to put anything,
     because if you put it to him at kick-off he would have
     agreed with you.   It is very difficult for a person to
     remember.   If you put something you must get it right.
     All of us must do that, including me.

          MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you, Mr. Tudor.

          THE CORONER:    Did you want to ask a question
     arising out of that?

          MRS. McBRIEN:   No, thank you.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

Q. Mr. Tudor, on the video which we and the jury have seen,
   have you seen it? - A. Not in this court.     I don't know
   if it is the same   video as I have seen. I would assume
   it probably is.     There can't be that many.
                                                       60




                                                    L. TUDOR


Q. On the video film there appear to be little rushes of
   fans, or little tumbles of fans within pen 3, which
   appear to be generated from within the pen. - A. Yes.

Q. As I understand your evidence, your explanation for those
   little rushes is fans entering the pen from the tunnel
   push their way through the congregation of fans around
   the mouth of the tunnel which sends off these little
   trickles, or rushes, or tumbles, whatever you want to
   call them, of supporters in various directions in the
   pens.   Is that accurate? - A. That is not based on any
   particular knowledge of how movement in crowds develops.
   That was just an assumption I made in that most people
   who were already on the terrace and had taken up their
   positions, would be standing fairly still.   The only
   people making a lot of movement would be those coming in
   at the back.

Q. The people who are pushed forward three or four or five
   steps on the terrace, which included yourself as I
   understand your evidence on several occasions before you
   decided to stand further forwards and not go back, were
   as far as you could determine, the movement was set in
   motion by people entering the terrace and moving through
   the congregation of supporters that you have described,
   tends to build up at the entrance to it.    Is that fair?
   - A. Possibly.    You see, very little movement in a crowd
   like that can create quite a domino effect and anyone who
   stands on football terraces will be quite familiar with
   it.   If there is a goalmouth incident, you tend to lean
   on the person in front of you, if you can't get a good
   view of it.    If they lose balance and fall forward a
   step then they can send any number of people tumbling
   forward, which is obviously why crush barriers are
   installed on terracing to prevent that going too far.

   The reason for someone losing balance and falling forward
   on to the person in front of them can be any number of
   things, but I would say if you are pushing your way into
   a crowd then you are obviously going to create that
   effect in front of you.

Q. You call them little domino effects.   I call them little
   rushes.   We are talking about the same thing? - A. I
   think so, yes.

Q. Before you were able to make your exit from the pen, or
   to be pulled from the pen, you were describing how easy
   it was to make the exit through the gates, and as I
   understand your evidence you are saying it was not just a
   question of when the gates were opened and fans being
   able to simply make their way out, is that correct? - A.
   I don't know what happened when the gate was opened.    I
                                                     L. TUDOR


only know what happened when I noticed that the gate was
open.   I did not actually see it being opened initially.

When the gate was opened there was one feature in
particular which you identified which impeded the easy
exist from the pen by the fans, namely I think you
referred to a pile of bodies, people who weren't on their
feet, is that correct? - A. Yes. Well, there was a
tangle of bodies in front of the gate. Some of them
would have been unconscious, I would assume.   Some of
them would have been conscious but unable to free
themselves from the tangle.

Tangle is a very graphic word which we can appreciate. -
A. That is how it appeared to me.

Yes, but that tangle impeded people's ability to leave
the pen? - A. Yes.

It wasn't a matter of leaving the pen.   In your
experience it was a matter of being dragged out or pulled
out? - A. Yes.

We can see in the photographs and I think we have had
evidence of this as well, there were some supporters who
were making their way to the gate over the top, over the
heads, of others. Did you see anyone doing that in the
direction in which you were able to see? - A. No, I was
only able to look directly towards the pitch and I wasn't
really able to look upwards either.

You didn't see anyone coming over the top.   I am just
wondering whether you might have seen that as a further
impeding factor to people leaving the pens, but you
didn't see it? - A. No, I didn't see that.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed.

     Paul Taylor.

                PAUL JOHN TAYLOR Sworn

                    By THE CORONER:

I apologise to you also Mr. Taylor, because I think you
were here yesterday as well.   You are Paul John Taylor?
- A. Yes.

Of                                    , Liverpool? - A.
That's right.

You too attended the match in 1989? - A. That's right.

I think you came with various friends by car? - A. Coach.
                                                                62
                                                                     t




                                                    P. J. TAYLOR


Q. It was Barnes' Coaches? - A. That's right.

Q* You left about 9.15 in the morning? - A.No, I think it
   was about half past eight.

Q. In your statement you said 9.15, but it doesn't matter.
   You left in the morning sometime. What time did you
   arrive in Sheffield? - A. We got to the roundabout at the
   corner of Leppings Lane at five past two.

Q.   Had you stopped en route   at all? -A. No.

Q.    You   mean the coach drove non-stop without pausing? - A.
     Well, there were delays.  We were caught on the Snake
     Pass.

Q. So you were subject to quite considerable delays in fact?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Did they drop you off at that roundabout? - A. Yes.
   Well, he wasn't supposed to.   He was supposed to go to
   the coach park and as people started alighting the Police
   asked him to move on but so many of us had already got
   off.

Q. So you managed   to get off? - A. We managed   to get off.

Q. Had the Police checked your coach at     anypoint,   as far as
   you remember? - A. No.

Q. It wasn't checked? -A. No.

Q. It was the Snake Pass that held you up.    The road works
   or what? - A. No, the Police were stopping the minibuses,
   but they were passing the coaches through.

Q. So the Police were checking minibuses but the coaches
   were coming through, but it caused the delay? - A. We had
   been checked at Priory Road for alcohol.

Q. Before you set   off? -A. Yes.

Q. Had they found any? -A. No.

Q. Not on your coach anyway? - A. Well, we didn't have any,
   the people I was with.

Q. So they were checking for alcohol before the coaches set
   off in Liverpool? - A. That's right.

Q. Having got off at five past two you were quite close to
   the ground? -A. Yes.
                                             P. J. TAYLOR


Did you make your*way straight there or did you go and do
some shopping? - A. No, we just milled around for a
minute to decide what we were going to do.   Then we just
started walking towards the ground and we stopped off at
a couple of shops.




      Q. Did you stop off at the Gateway
                                                           64      i



                                                   P. J. TAYLOR .




Q. Did you stop off at the Gateway Supermarket? - A. Yes.

Q. That is higher up than the roundabout. - A. Yes, we
   turned around and walked up to the Gateway and then
   walked back. Well we ran back actually.

0. You each had a couple of cans, I think? - A. Yes, we
   bought eight cans and had two each.

Q. There were four of you, were there? - A. Four, that's
   right.

Q. Did you see anybody else doing that? - A. There were a
   few.

0. Pardon? - A. There was a few people buying cans.

Q. I am not complaining about that, I am just trying to
   find out. Then having got them you turned round and
   went back towards Leppings Lane, right? - A. That's
   right.

Q. Had you already drunk the cans before you set off or
   did you drink them as you were .... - A. We opened one
   up as we started walking, then we realised the time and
   we started running.   Once we got to by Leppings Lane we
   finished them off there.

Q. You actually managed to finish them off? - A. Yes.

Q. were you stopped by      any Policemen at that point who
   said drink up? -A.      No.

Q. You had already done it anyway? - A. Yes.

Q. And I think you said you went down Leppings Lane at a
   run? I am not saying it was a sprint. - A. A good
   trot.

Q. What time would you say you actually got to the
   turnstile area? - A. Just after 20-past-2, 25-past.

O..What   was it like at   that point? - A. It was quite   full.

Q. Did you manage to get through the outer perimeter
   gates? Do you know what I mean by that? - A. Yes,
   there was people milling round there and we just went
   through them and it was just what I would estimate as
   choc-a-bloc.

Q. Once you had got through the gates? - A. Once we got
   through the gates.
                                                         65

                                                 P. J. TAYLOR




Q. So up to the gates, there were people, they were
   milling and you could get through, would that be right,
   or not?- A. A good 200 people milling round the gates.
   You didn't have to push, you just said excuse me and
   went through them.

Q.   Did you see any Police Officers on your way up to the
     ground, and  at that position? - A. The last one I
     really took any notice of was by the roundabout at
     Leppings Lane.  Once we got through the gates I seen a
     couple on horseback.

Q.   I think the  group split up and you stayed with your
     brother-in-law, did you? - A. Yes.

Q. How do you pronounce his name? - A. Eifion.     He is
   Welsh.

Q. Yes, that is why I asked you how you pronounced it.
   You were with him, weren't you? - A. Yes.

Q. You were heading towards turnstile B. Had you been to
   the ground before? - A. I have been on numerous
   occasions.

Q. So you knew where you were going? - A. I was there at
   the '88 semi-final as well.

Q. It was quite full in this area, wasn't it? - A. It was
   quite full.

Q.    Everybody has said that, we don't need to go overthat.
     You saw a couple of Police horses thereabouts? - A. One
     was standing near us as we went through the gates, and
     I just didn t think we were going to get into the
     ground for quite a while, and then this horse spun
     around and a big gap opened up, so we ran through it,
     so we were about half-way through the crowd then that
     was enclosed in this area.

Q. Did that Officer attempt to communicate with either you
   or anybody else in the crowd? - A. He was laughing and
  .trying to shout orders, but he was just getting
   sarcastic remarks back like, "How can we move? 1

Q.   Was he trying to suggest that you should not come
     through? - A. Oh no.

Q. He was just standing there and made a space, you saw it
   and       A. Went for it.

Q. And you did not understand that that space was needed
   for some other reason? - A. No, it was just that once
   the horse spun round everyone, no matter how tight it
                                                      66
                                                P. J. TAYLOR .




     was, you are bound to make a move because no one wants
     to get struck on the foot by a horse, do you?

Q. I see. You wanted to get away from the horse, you say?
   - A. Yes.

0. Was this Police Officer not trying to encourage people
   to make lines or anything? - A. No, he was just
   shouting, "Stop pushing".

Q. He was shouting? - A. He was shouting but you just had
   no chance.

Q. Within the area outside the turnstile it was pretty
   crushed, wasn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. There were people crying out in discomfort? - A. Yes, I
   was shouting myself, and the second horse started
   relieving itself, so that created a bigger gap again.
   (Laughter)

Q. That is a method of crowd control we haven't heard of
   yet!   Yes, carry on. - A. So we ran through that again.
   I grabbed my brother-in-law's arm and ran past the
   horse, and we found ourselves only a couple of feet
   away from the turnstiles.

Q. So what you are saying is that you accelerated forward
   in order to get away from this animal and what it was
   doing? - A. So would you.  (Laughter)

Q.   Yes, I am asking what you did - I wasn't there. So you
     got to within a couple of feet within the turnstile.
     Don't worry that we are laughing. We are not laughing
     at you we are laughing because it is quite good for us
     to do that. You got to within two or three feet of the
     turnstiles? - A. That is right and then once the horse
     obviously had stopped doing it the compactness came in
     again, and people were shouting again to stop pushing
     and that.

Q. what I can't understand is you went forward, you have
  . told me that? - A. Yes.

Q. You have also said it was very tight and people were
   screaming, but as soon as this horse misbehaved, if one
   can use that word, there was space. Where did they go?
   - A. You climb up each other out of the way, don't you?
   (Laughter)

Q. You learn all the time! And then you mean they all
   fell down again, and I think you saw something thrown
   at the horse, but I am not too worried about that. - A.
                                                     67

                                               P. J. .TAYLOR




   There was a beer can, but that was at the first horse
   actually.

Q. You eventually got through your turnstile? - A. As we
   were queueing the Policeman in front of us went
   through, because he had had enough of being pushed
   against the wall. They were his words to us, well not
   directly at us. He said he had had enough of this and
   he went through himself, and we were more or less about
   two or three people behind him. Once we got through
   the turnstiles there were quite a number of Policemen
   just standing there, and I was really narked to think
   of what was going on outside and they were just all
   laughing and joking, so I just walked past them with
   disgust. They went to search me and I just swore at
   one of them and walked past them.

0. You mean he was trying to search you? - A. He made the
   gesture to go towards me to search me and I swore at
   him and just walked past him.

0. And he let you go? - A. Yes.

Q. You then went to the tunnel, is that right?- A. That is
   right.

Q. You had been there before and you knew that that was a
   way onto the terraces? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. Do you like to go behind the goal? - A. Yes.

0. And the tunnel was clear, was it? I don't mean that it
   was totally empty. - A. Maybe 10, 15 people in it,
   that's all.

0. So clear passage? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you know approximately what time this was, and if
    you don't know .... - A. Well it all happened so
   quickly.   From standing at the back of the queue we
   were in there within a matter of minutes, whereas I
    thougnt we were going to be -- well, it was only
  . getting to about maybe gone nalf-past-2, 25-to-3 then.

Q. So you managed to traverse this area quite fast? - A.
   Oh yes.

0. For whatever reason but you managed to get through
   quite fast? - A. Yes.

0. You think about five minutes, you would say, or even
   less? - A. I was through the turnstiles for just after
   half-past-2, because it happened so fast.
                                                      68

                                                P. J. -TAYLOR




Q. Which of the enclosures did you go into? - A. To the
   right-hand side.

0. The right-hand one, and I think you chose the right-
   hand one because it looked a little bit emptier than
   the left-hand one, is that right? - A. That is right.
   As you just walked out into the open space there seemed
   a little bit more room onto the right-hand side.

Q. Did you have a job getting onto the terrace? Did you
   have to fight your way through it? - A. No, just the
   normal excuse me and that, because just near the
   entrance there was people who must like to stand back
   near the wall. There was obviously a little group
   there, went through them, and then it opened, up as we
   walked down to near the front, there was quite a lot of
   space at the front.

Q. You actually said that there was enough space - what
   time was that when you took up that position down
   there? - A. When we took up the space by the barrier it
   was probably getting on for maybe 20-to-3.

Q. You said there was enough room to lie down and
   sunbathe? - A. No, that is in the next terrace.

Q. That is the next one, not   the one you were in, number
   2? - A. Yes, number 2.

Q. I misunderstood you, but although you could not
   sunbathe you had sufficient room at this time where you
   were? - A. I was only maybe seven steps off the front.
   There was room at the front. Everyone seemed to be
   going to the back first so they could get a better view
   of the pitch.

Q. People prefer to be higher up, is that what you are
   saying? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. You were near a barrier, is that right? - A. We moved
   along the front to the barrier that eventually went.

Q.. You were a very unlucky man because not only did the
    horse misbehave but a young man decided to do exactly
    the same, near where you were, is that right? - A.
    That's right. We had our backs to the barrier, talking
    to an old man and a young girl, and suddenly when you
    know something's wrong, we turned round and there was a
    lad with a rolled up newspaper just relieving himself
    onto the terrace.

Q. At that point, just as a matter of interest, and I
   don't want to go into this in great detail, was it
                                                          69

                                                 P. J. .TAYLOR .




     still possible to get out of the terrace at that point?
     - A. Yes. Well, I could have if I tried.

Q.   If he had wanted to go back to the "loo" he could have
     done, that is what I am trying to find out? - A. Well,
     what he actually said was, when he was asked why he was
     doing it, he said the toilets were that bad by the time
     he got back he wouldn't have a "spec".

Q. So he didn't want to give up his position basically? -
   A. Tnat's right.

Q.   But you didn't like it? - A. No, well it was quite    hot.

Q.   And you did exactly the same as you did with the horse,
     you moved away? - A. That's right.

Q.    You then went near the barrier between pens 3 --- not
     the barrier, near the fence? - A. I stood to the side
     of the railings, leaning against the railings.

Q. That was, in fact, more or less your last position
   before you actually got out? - A. Yes.

Q.   At that point, when you took up that position, had the
     players yet been announced? - A. No.   It was only about
     quarter-to-3 when I took up that position and I didn't
     hear the players get announced anyway because things
     started to happen then for me.

Q. I will come to that in a minute. At that time did you
   see anybody playing with a beach-ball, or at any point?
   - A. No.

Q. You don't remember that? - A. No.

Q. So there you were by the fence, about quarter-to-3 -
   that is a guesstimate, you didn't actually look at your
   watch, did you? - A. I didn't have one because I don't
   take it to the match.  I was going by the big clock.

0. You could see it? - A. I could see the clock.

Q. So you think your time is accurate, that is all I am
   trying to find out?- A. Yes, thereabouts, quarter-to-3,
   yes.

Q. Assuming the clock is right, of course.  Then describe
   to me what happened after that? - A. Just after we got
   to by the fence, directly in the corner of the terrace,
   people - I would say about six or seven people - came
   in.
                                                     70

                                               P. J. TAYLOR .




Q. Came into the terrace? - A. Sorry, went out and one lad
   actually stood on it and he came in, and then it
   started to get a bit, well, it was starting to get full
   then and people started making their way towards the
   fence.  I mean girls and that, they were starting to
   find it uncomfortable, so alongside with another lad we
   both faced each other against the railings and put our
   thighs into the railings so they could stand on them,
   and we just pushed them over.

Q. You were acting like a stile, in fact? - A. That's
   right. We just started pushing people over.   It just
   seemed endless.  People actually started making a queue
   to go over, and then as it got nearer to kick-off,
   about 5-to-3, the atmosphere changed, where people were
   actually starting to push past the people queueing up
   to get over, and as it got to nearly 3 o'clock I
   noticed as we were passing people over they had wet
   themselves, and I started to worry then.  I realised
   something was ....

Q. Was happening.  Now, up to that point, in fact, it
   sounds as if you yourself weren't distressed
   personally? - A. Well, the size of me I thought I was
   all right.

0. Yes, presumably it was hurting a bit because they were
   climbing on you? - A. No, I never noticed.  It just
   became that urgent to get people out. Girls were
   crying and even fellas were starting to get a bit ....




                  /Q. Are you able to relate
                                                         71    •i



                                         P. J. TAYLOR


Q.    Are you able to relatethis either to the   players
       coming onto the pitch --- - A. I didn't see the
       players come on.

Q.    You did not see the players come on. - A. I took no
      notice because all I was interested in was I was
      facing the pitch, but as one person left my knee there
      was someone else waiting to go over.

Q.    Initially this was being done in quite an orderly
      manner, but as you got nearer to kick-off so the
      urgency got worse? - A. Yes.

Q.     Also people appeared wet   and so on? - A. Yes.

           THE CORONER: I think I have forgotten to look at
      the clock. I am going to stop and have lunch because
      we need to stop, so be back at 5-past 2 and we will
      just carry on. Perhaps I ought to say that this
      afternoon when we have finished with this witness I
      want to take Mr. Goodman and Mr. Oyitch. Then we will
      take anybody else that we can.

                     (Luncheon Adjournment)


Q*         THE CORONER:   Mr. Taylor, I think we had more or
      less got to the point where you were standing there
      with your leg acting as a style, and just remind me
      again what time it was that you began this exercise?
      A. Shortly after 20-to 3.

Q.    Had the team already come out by then? - A. No sir, I
      never saw the team.

Q.    Did you see the team at all? - A. I didn't see anyone
      on the pitch.  I wasn't looking at the pitch.

Q.    Did you see any of the play at all? - A. No.

Q.     I had the feeling that you said it was about quarter-
       to 3 when you began, when you moved to the side
     . railing? - A. Yes.

           MR. MANNING:   That is what he said.

Q.         THE CORONER:  That is right, is it not?  I think
      you were saying that initially people were going, so
      to speak, quite orderly to get over? - A. Yes, they
      did, yes.

Q.    Then, as kick-off approached, I think you said people
      were pushing? - A. A bit more anxiety and trying to
      get over.
                                                         72
                                                              •   t




                                     •   P. J. TAYLOR


Q.   What made you think that kick-off was approaching? -
     A. Just before I assumed it was kick-off my brother-
     in-law was the last person I put over because it was
     getting that tight that all you were going to get in
     the end was what I call a tunnel vision. All I would
     be able to see of the play was down this line and
     suddenly there was what was like a push from the front
     and behind and I suddenly was turned round and was
     facing the stands, and then suddenly a big roar went
     up, which I assumed was the kick-off. At kick-off
     there is a big roar in the crowd, so I assumed that
     was kick-off then.

Q.   Was it just at that point when things became really
     bad as far as you personally were concerned? - A. They
     seemed to be pushing up from the bottom and I could
     see the people coming along the wall at the back and
     coming down towards me and I was getting pushed into
     the railings quite considerably then and getting
     squashed.

Q.   So by then you were definitely being squashed
     yourself? - A. Yes, I couldn't move my arms then.

Q.   Were you able to see people at the side of you and in
     the front at that point? - A. I was only looking up at
     the stands.

Q. What did the people look like who you could see? - A.
    They were in distress as well. There was nothing you
    could do. You couldn't try to do anything. You just
    looked at each other. You were just being pushed.

Q.   Could you see right up to the back of the terrace? -
     A. Yes, I could see the people, yes.

Q.   That is what I mean,   could you see the people? - A.
      Yes.

Q.   Were they getting over the fences into Pen 2, because
      that presumably wasn't that full at that stage yet, or
      was it? - A. No, that is when the actual --- Once I
      ceased passing people over for the time being, when I
      was looking up to the stands that way no one was going
      over because I couldn't move then, and then there was
      a second sway and I was able to turn around and I held
      on to the railings as the people started falling on
      the floor because that is when the barrier must have
     broke and people started to come.

Q.   You did not see the barrier break, though, did you? -
     A. No. It was about   7 feet away from me then. I had
     moved away from it. I was by the railings.
                                                       73




                                        P. J. TAYLOR


Q.    It was after you managed to turn round, after the
      roar, that you noticed people started to begin to fall
      down? - A. People started to tumble over then, yes.

Q.    Before you turned round, there is just one question I
      want to ask about the people who were standing near
      the railings right up at the back end of the terrace.
      - A. Yes.

Q.    There is a gate up there. Maybe you do not know that?
      - A. I didn't know about it.

Q.    Did you see anybody attempt to go through that gate
      because you were actually looking up the railing,
      weren't you? - A. I didn't see anyone go through
      because I thought those railings continued right up
      the wall.

Q.    There is, in fact, a gate up there? - A. I didn't know
      about that.

Q.   Was anybody going through? - A. No.

Q.   Then you got spun round and then there was this pile
     of people? - A. People on the floor, yes.

Q.   Could you see the front fence at that point? - A. Yes.

Q.   Were people climbing over or not? - A. Yes, they were
     using the people on the floor to climb over them.

Q.   So there were people from behind you coming forward
     and climbing up? - A. I didn't take any notice of the
     people, where they were coming from.  I initially
     started picking people up who were near to me off the
     floor.

Q.   What did you do when you were picking them up? - A. I
     passed them where I had been passing them into, just
     lifting them over the railings.

Q. Who were you handing them to, to Police Officers, or
    to other supporters? - A. First there were fans, and
    then two policemen appeared at the side and they
    seemed to be passing them to other people.

Q.   You do not recollect   what time that was, do you? - A.
      No.

Q.   I would not expect you to, but I just had to ask you.
     - A. Yes.

Q.   Can you remember anybody in particular whom you passed
     over? - A. It was just a magnitude - well, not a
                                                      74



                                       P. J. TAYLOR


     magnitude, it was just people. The girl who I spoke
     to when we were standing by the barrier, I passed her
     over unconscious and I have since met her so she is
     all right.

Q.   So she was all right? - A. She just fainted.

Q.   That is a blessing, is it not? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you find another girl, though, who was not all
     right? - A. Yes, when I started initially picking
     people up in the corner and we had moved all them out,
     we started working our way towards what seemed behind
     the goal, and there was a young girl who I spotted
     quite easily because she was on the top with her legs
     trapped and bent backwards with her arms opened up.

Q.   What did you do with her? - A. I went towards her and
     there was quite a large man lying on the bottom of the
     pile with just his T-shirt rolled up and his stomach
     showing, but he was bright blue.  I knew he was dead.
     So I just stood on his stomach and leaned over him and
     pulled her out. Then this lad helped me carry her to
     the side by where I had been standing and I just laid
     her down and I didn't know what I was doing.  I just
     tilted her head back and went to try and give her what
     I thought was the kiss of life and there was all this
     terrible smell coming out of her mouth.

Q.   It is all right, I do not want to upset you. Take a
     drink of water. - A. I saw she had bits of rust in her
     mouth when I slightly opened her mouth and I realised
     then it was from the pole off the barrier when it had
     been thrown over. I had seen all the stuff earlier
     and it must have gone on her and it was around her
     eyes and speckled on her face, and I just took a few
     bits off from her lips and then just tried to blow
     into her mouth, and then someone said, "Leave her.
     she's dead”.

Q.   You thought she was dead. She looked dead to you, did
     she not, or did she? - A. Her lips were rolled back
     and her eyes were really wide open.

Q.   I do not want you to spend too much time describing
     her because it is upsetting for you and it is also
     upsetting for the family, I think. What I want to
     know is did you carry her across out of the pen, or
     did you pass her to somebody? - A. No. As I say, I
     originally carried her to the side of the railings,
     and then when someone told me she had died I just took
     her arm out of her cardigan and covered her face and
     left her.  I just left her there and then carried on.
                                                          75



                                         P. J. TAYLOR


Q.     With somebody else? - A. With somebody else.

Q.     You have mentioned this huge pipe - I do not think you
       mentioned it before. You saw bits of the barrier
       flying across, did you? - A. Yes.  I think I did
       mention it in my statement.

Q.     Yes, you did in your statement, but not in evidence
       yet. - A. No.

Q.     Do you remember when that was? - A. It was after the
       people had fallen onto the floor. Obviously it was
       just one fan who threw it because it bounced on the
       fence and all the stuff tilted out and when it fell
       onto the other side, there were about maybe’three or
       four policemen got started saying, "Come on then", and
       this fellow was saying "Come on".  I thought, 'We
       don't need this now' like.

Q.    Are you saying then that you actually saw it being
      thrown? - A. I saw it leaving his arms.

Q.    Are you saying that it was an aggressive throw? - A.
      It seemed to be because, I don't know, everything was
      just racing so fast.

Q.    Nothing came, but there were some words spoken between
      Officers and that chap? - A. Yes. He said, "Come on"
      to them, and they were saying, "Come on".

           THE CORONER: We will leave it at that I think.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q.    Just for the shorthand note would you give your age,
      height and weight, please? - A. 31 years of age,
      height 5' 10", 18 stone. Can I say something? At the
      time I weighed 13 stone, because I have been very
      nervous since.

Q*          THE CORONER: So you were quite a bit slighter
       then obviously, 5 stone is quite a bit, is it not? -
     . A. I was 13 stone.   I had the same build.

                Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Q.    I am sorry for the delay, I am looking    for your name.
      Mr. Russell, is it not? - A. Taylor.

           THE CORONER:   Did you want the name?   Mr. Taylor.

           MRS. McBRIEN: I am finding myself a bit rushed
      lately, yesterday a little bit and today.
                                P. J. TAYLOR


     THE CORONER: I do not think we are rushing.   In
fact, we are going to go faster in future.

     MRS. McBRIEN: Mr. Taylor, I am sorry about that.
How many mounted Officers did you see outside the
gates or the turnstiles? - A. I thought I had seen
three or four at first, but thinking about it, it was
two.




                         /Q. Would you say
                                                            77


                                                   P. J. TAYLOR


Q. Would you say the mounted Officers were proving to be
   of little use so far as crpwd control went that day?
   Were they doing much to ease the situation? - A. They
   were neither use nor ornament. They tried but they
   were getting nowhere and so they might well not have
   been there.

Q. I am sorry? - A. They might as well not have been
   there. They were neither use nor ornament.

Q. They were just mere ornaments? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you know that two of those horses have been
   retired now to the fields? - A. No.

     THE CORONER:   I know of one horse but I do not know
about two.  It may be that you are right but I cannot
remember that anyway.

     MRS. HcBRIEN:   One was injured at the match and that
was retired because the Officer told us and I read in the
Daily Telegraph that one of the other horses was too old
and he was retired.

     THE CORONER:   Anyway, he does not know about any
horses being retired.

Q.       MRS. McBRIEN:   Are you a regular football
     supporter? - A. Season ticket holder.

Q.     So you go to quite      a lot of matches?    -     A. Yes.

Q.    Have you ever seen    alsatians used when there isa
     crowd problem? - A. Well, only to stop you wandering
     across the roads.

        THE CORONER:    At football matches I think you have to
say.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:  Yes, at football matches? - A.
     It just to keep you together. When you go on away
     specials or something it is just to keep you all in a
     group. They wouldn't charge you. They were just
     walking alongside you as a deterrent to move away.

Q. Would you say that Alsatians are a very good
   deterrent?

        THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, is this man an expert on
dogs?

        MRS. MCBRIEN:    No.

     THE CORONER:   So whatever he says I will tell the
Jury to forget it on that point.  It is not worth asking
that question.
                                                          78


                                                 P. J. TAYLOR



Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Have you ever experienced such
     gross overcrowding that fans actually wet themselves,
     that they had no control over this sort of thing? -
     A. No, I have never experienced it before.

Q. Outside when the horse misbehaved, did you find
   outside that you had ample room to move around, that
   it wasn't a serious crushing out there? - A. If the
   horse had not done it I wouldn't have been able to
   move because I was caught in the middle of the crowd.
   It was just that everyone moved when the horse did
   it.

Q . You were not so tightly packed then that you could
    not move your arms? - A. Oh yes, it was
    uncomfortable. You were just being shunted along.       I
    couldn't move my arms outside.

Q. Outside even? - A. Yes.

Q. Would you say the conditions outside the ground were
   as bad as the ones inside? - A. No. At least if need
   be there was somewhere to go outside in the end.
   Like, there was a wall. There was that fence that I
   was bent over and you just couldn't go nowhere.

       MRS. McBRIEN:      Thank you very much.

Q.        THE CORONER:    Mr. Taylor, I am most grateful to
     you for coming.   I am very sorry that we have brought
     it back but it is very good of you to have come and
     given your evidence. Thank you very much indeed. Oh
     yes, there is just one thing.   I want you to put a
     cross on a plan.   I want you to mark the position
     where you were. We know where the barrier is that
     broke but I want you to put the position where you
     were acting as a stile and helping people over? - A.
     Yes.

       MR. BEECHEY:     C.362, sir.

     MR. FRASER:       Just for the record, sir, I may not have
heard or misheard      but I know that this witness knows the
name of the young      lady who he took from the top of the
railings but I do      not think it is on the record, sir.

       THE CORONER:      I could not hear you.

     MR. FRASER: I do not think he gave the name of the
young lady.  I understand he does know, sir, and it may be
important for the record.

Q.        THE CORONER:   You know the lady who you took
     and who you tried to save? - A. Yes.
                                                            79


                                                   P. J. TAYLOR


Q. Who was it, do you know? - A. Victoria Hicks.

                     PHILIP VICTOR GOODMAN Sworn

                           Bv THE CORONER:

Q. You are Philip Victor Goodman, is that right? - A.
   Y es.

Q. Is it                               Essex? - A. Yes.

Q. You are a chef I believe, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. You have been a Liverpool supporter for many years? -
   A. Y e s .

Q. It has become your habit that quite often you meet up
   with a number of friends and you go together to the
   matches? - A. Yes.

Q. Two of the people you used to meet, there were
   several, one was Inger Shah and another one was
   Marian McCabe? - A. Yes.

Q. Your friend as well, Mr. O'Yitch, is that right? - A.
   Yes, that is right.

Q.   On the 15th April 1989 you decided you    were coming up
     to see the match? - A. Yes.

Q. You had your ticket, that is right, is it not? - A.
   Yes.

Q.   Arrangements were made to go by    train? - A. Yes.

Q.    You met with these three people whom I have already
     mentioned, is that correct?   You met on the train in
     fact, did you not? - A. Gary met up in Sheffield
     anyway.

Q.   But the other       two you met onthe    train? - A. Yes.

Q.    You had to leave really early at 6.20 in the morning
     and you got to the station and got on to the train
     and it was the 8.35 for Sheffield I think, was it
     not? - A. Yes, something like that.

Q. There were some fans on the train as well as
   yourself, was there not? - A. Yes, quite a few.

Q. It was an ordinary train.  It was not a football
   special or anything like that, was it? - A. No, it
   wasn't a football special, just a train.

Q. I suppose everybody had a drink from the buffet
   car? - A. Yes, one or two.
                                                        80


                                               P. V. GOODMAN



Q.   In fact Inger's son was there, was he not, Danny, and
     he might have had a soft drink or something? - A.
     Yes .

Q. Would you say that you had had a lot to drink on that
   train? - A. No, one can at the most.

Q.    Of course, you were on the train with no problems on
     the journey and you got to Sheffield at about noon,
     would that be right? - A. Yes, it would be around
     that time.




              /Q. Actually I think you arrived.
                                                         81
                                                                 I




                                                    P. GOODMAN


Q. I think you arrived early.   You had to wait because
   there was another batch of friends coming from Lincoln? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Their train was late so you just waited? -A. Yes.

Q. Then you took the bus which had been laid on and you came
   to Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.

Q.   You    enteredthe ground through a    turnstile,is that
     right? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you know what time you entered, about? -A. I think it
   was about one.

Q. I think it is right to say you had no problems getting
   through the turnstiles? - A. There was hardly anyone
   around then.

Q.   I think I am right in saying you were searched going in
     and searched coming through? - A.   Yes.

Q. Had you been searched, as a matter of interest, at the
   railway station at all? - A. No.

Q.   Did anybody enquire when you goton to the buses whether
     you had tickets or not?   Do you remember that? - A. I
     can't remember, no.

Q. Are you saying positively they didn't or are you saying
   you can't remember? - A. I can't remember.

Q.   You entered at about one, hardly anybody there, you went
     down the tunnel? - A.Yes.

Q. Had you been to the ground before? - A. Quite a few
   times.

Q. Did you know of any other ways of getting on to the
   terraces other than the tunnel? - A. None.

Q. Do you like watching the matches from behind the goal
   anyway? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you know it was divided with radial fences? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you know there were gates at the back of those radial
   fences? - A. To get through into the other pens?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes.

Q. In fact I think you felt there were quite a lot of Police
   outside the gates when you arrived at the perimeter
                                                        82




                                                   P. GOODMAN


  gates?   Is that right? - A. I thought there were quite a
  few there, just standing around.

Q. There weren't very many people, of course, so they were
   conspicuous?   You could see them easily? ~ A. Yes.

Q. There was no problem that you could see?   No
   difficulties? - A. Not at that time, no.

Q. Anyway, you entered on to the terrace and I think you
   went into enclosure 3 on the right hand side? -A. Yes.

Q. I presume it was virtually empty? - A. About four or five
   people.

Q. Did you go in with Inger and Marian and David, or did
   they come a little bit later? - A. They went in about
   half an hour later.

Q. Gary Oyitch came in with them or not? - A. With them, as
   far as I can remember.

Q. With Inger and Marian? - A. Yes.

Q. Had you come in by yourself? - A. No, I came in with
   Danny.

Q. So you were in first with Danny and half an hour later
   they came? - A. Yes.

Q. What time did you say you came in? - A. About one.

Q. So they came in at about 1.30? - A. About that, yes.

Q. It was still emptyish or not? - A. It was still very
   empty.

Q. So you were all able to take up whatever position you
   wished? - A. Basically, yes.

Q. I think nothing very much happened until about quarter
   past two, would that be right? - A. We just stood around
   talking until about.

Q. What happened then? - A. From where we were standing me
   and Danny couldn't see over the girls so we moved to the
   back.

Q. I am sorry, say again? - A. Where me and Danny were
   standing we couldn't see the top of the girls so we moved
   to the back.

Q. So you and Danny moved away.   Where did Marian and Inger
   and Mr. Oyitch go? - A. Originally Gary went to the back
                                                            83




                                                      P. GOODMAN


     with us but he moved to the front before kick-off.
     Inger and Marian because they were small, they stayed
     down at the front all the time.

Q. When you were in the pen when it was empty, were you
   right up at the front or were you in the middle of it
   somewhere? - A. Me and Danny went to the middle, whereas
   Inger and Marian went straight to the front.

Q. Up against the fencing? - A. Yes.

Q. You decided with your friend Danny to move back at 2.15?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Right against the back wall? - A. Right against the back
   wall, yes.

Q. Near the tunnel end of it, or... - A. Near the end of the
   pen, like next to the gateway to...

Q.   To pen 2? - A. Yes.

Q.    So you were on the back wall near that gate and that gate
     was open, was it? - A. As far as I know there wasn't a
     gate there.    It is just an ordinary walkway through.

Q. As far as you were concerned it was a walkway through? -
   A. Yes.

Q. There is actually a gate but it was pinned back, but you
   didn't notice that? - A. I didn't notice that.

Q. Anyway, there was an open exit near you? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you have any particular difficulty getting to that
   position? - A. No, it was just straightforward.

Q. I mean, there were people... - A. There were people in
   there but you just sort of go under the barriers.

Q.   Forest fans   sang and you sang, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q.    Did you hear the teams announced? - A. I heard them
     announced, yes.

Q. Did you see whether there was any cheering when that
   happened, or any movement of arms, or anything like that?
   - A. There was where I was because there still a fair
   amount of room.

Q. So when the teams were announced you are saying there was
   a fair bit of room up there? - A. Where I was, yes.
                                                      84
                                                               •   I




                                                  P. GOODMAN


Q. Did you see the teams come on to the pitch? - A. Yes, I
   actually saw the first six minutes of the game,

Q. You actually saw the game? - A. Yes.

Q. During that period up to the end of the game, what was
   the conditions like in the pen where you were? - A. Well,
   it was just...   From the moment the teams were announced
   to the kick-off it just seemed to get more and more
   packed.

Q. How packed is "more packed" in your experience there?
   That is what I am trying to find out. - A. Well, at first
   it didn't seem too bad, but it must have been.

Q. Yes, don't worry about that. We all know what happened.
   That is the difficulty.   We know what happened.
   Everybody knows what happened.   What I am trying to find
   out is what you thought you did, what it felt like,
   before anybody knew what had happened.   It is not an
   easy thing, I know that.   My impression from your first
   answer was that in fact from the position where you were,
   certainly when the players were being announced, it was
   quite comfortable? - A. It was packed but it seemed
   reasonably comfortable where I was.

Q. When the players came out, had that changed in any way? -
   A. Just got more packed.   It looked less comfortable but
   a bit more packed.

Q. When the game started, presumably the same? - A. The
   same, yes.

Q. Once the game started to the point where it stopped - did
   you see it stop? - A. Yes.

Q. Was there any change in the packing, if I can use that
   word, around the area where you were? - A. Between kick-
   off and stopping, no.

Q. Can you remember whether you and the people near you were
   still cheering whilst the game was being played? - A.
   Yes, because like we didn't know what was going on.

Q. I am not blaming you.   I am just trying to find out what
   was happening. We will come to that in a minute.    Do
   you remember Beardsley hitting the crossbar? - A* Yes.

Q. Did you see it? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you remember whether anything happened within your
   terrace at that point in time that you saw, or heard, for
   that matter? - A. No.
                                               P. GOODMAN


You, of course, were right at the back and we know there
were lots of problems in the front.   We know that.
What I am interested in is did you see that there were
any problems in the front? - A. The only thing I saw were
people standing on the touchline, sort of like on the
fence, yelling for us to move back.




              Q. Can you repeat your answer
                                                        86
                                                P. V. GOODMAN




Q. Can you repeat your answer and lean forward? I asked
   you whether you had seen anything and you said the only
   thing you could see were people at the touchline saying
   to move back? - A. Yes.

Q. When was that, that was my question? - A. A couple of
   minutes into the game.

          MR. RUSSELL:   Did he say on the touchline?

Q.        THE CORONER:   I think you said touchline, didn't
     you? - A. Yes.

          MR. RUSSELL:   Did he say fence.

          THE CORONER:    I don't remember him saying fence,
     but we will ask him.

          THE WITNESS:   It was on the fence, yes.

Q.        THE CORONER:   You did say the fence? - A. Yes.

Q. When they were saying "Move back", that was quite a
   long way from where you were. How did you know they
   were saying, "Move back"? - A. They had their arms up
   in the air.

Q. They were signalling? - A. Yes.

0.   You presumably would say you could not move back
     because you had the wall behind you? - A. Yes.

Q.   That is right, isn't it? Were these fans   or were they
     Police Officers as well? Was it a mix? -   A. It was all
     fans.

0. When you saw it, it was all fans? - A. Yes, from what I
   saw.

Q. Did you see any Police Officers make signals like that?
   - A. Not that I can remember, no.

0.. Can you remember anybody being hauled up, or climbing
    up into the stand above you? - A. Yes, all around me.

Q. In relation to the events which were happening, when
   did that occur? - A. Just before kick-off.

Q. After the players had been on the field, or before? -
   A. I think it was just after they had come onto the
   field.

Q. And people started being pulled up? - A. Yes.
                                                         87

                                                P. V. GOODMAN




Q. You must have been quite close to those people, is that
   right? - A. Yes, inches.

0. Were you able to see why they were being pulled up?
   Could you see anything about them that made you --
   what did you think was happening, put it that way? - A.
   The year before, in '88, half-time, they were being
   pulled up and going up into the seats, sitting in the
   seats with their mates up there, so I thought it was
   exactly the same happening again.

          MR. MANNING:   Did he say with their mates?

          THE CORONER:   In 1988 he said at half-time:

Q.        Is that right? - A. Yes.

          THE CORONER:   Shorthand Writer, you read it.   The
     Shorthand Writer is having difficulty hearing as well.
     You must lean forward.   Sergeant Griffiths, adjust this
     microphone so that we can hear this young man, please.

0. You were saying that you saw these people being pulled
   up, right? - A. Yes.

0.. I asked what you thought was going on - you said they
    were inches from you, right? - A. Yes.

Q. I wanted to know what you thought was going on and you
   gave me a reply. Now, give it again because the
   Shorthand Writer had a job getting it. - A. About half-
   time the year before they were going up there, being
   pulled up with their mates in the seats.

Q. Did you have any impression that those people who were
   going up into the stands were in any way distressed? -
   A. No.

Q. Did you see any of them who were going up into the
   stands at any time during the whole episode wno
   appeared to be distressed? - A. No.

0.- You were interested in the match, of course - quite
    right, that is why you had gone to Hillsborough? - A.
    Yes.

          MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, can you clarify, is he
     talking about 1988 or 1989, where there was an absence
     of distress.

0.        THE CORONER:   We are talking about 1989, that is
     right, isn't it? - A. Yes.
                                                        88
                                                P. V. GOODMAN




Q. In 1988 did they appear to you to be distressed? - A.
   No.

0. Were you in about the same position in 1988? - A. In
   1988 I was further forward.

0. In '88 you were further forward? - A. Yes.

0. Did you glance across the terrace at any point after
   the players came out onto the pitch and before the
   match ended? - A. No.

Q. You did not see anything on the terrace that alarmed
   you? - A. Not at the time, no.

0. We know what happened.  I am just trying to find out
   what you saw at the time. From where you were standing
   you saw nothing to alarm you? - A. No.

Q. Did you see any crowds coming in at any particular
   point in time from the tunnel, and surge into the
   terrace? - A. No.

Q. Did anybody use that gangway to get into pen 2, that
   you noticed? - A. A couple of people came across that
   way but not that many.

Q. You didn't see where they came from? - A. They came
   from the left so it must have been from the tunnel.

0. But not very many? - A. Not a great deal, no.

Q. The game stopped, right? - A. Yes.

Q. But youstill did not know what had happened,     is that
   right? - A. Not at the time, no.

0. Could you see that people were out on the pitch by
   then? - A. Yes, I saw people on the pitch.

0« What did you think had happened?     Why were they there?
   - A. I don't know.

Q. Did you have any ideas why they were there? - A. Didn't
   have a clue.

0. Did a Police Officer then suddenly appear near you? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Where did he turn up from? - A. From the pen on the
   right.

Q. Did he come in through the gangway? - A. Yes.
                                                      89
                                                             l



                                             P. V. GOODMAN .




Q. Did he say anything? - A. He was pushing and shouting
   to everyone to --- is it all right if I say it?

Q. Sorry, couldn't hear? - A. He came in and was pushing
   everyone out of the way and telling everyone to fucking
   move out the way.

Q. Did people move? - A. They had no choice, he was
   pushing them.

Q. Was he trying to push them out through the gangway or
   was he just trying to get in? - A. He was pushing us
   through the gangway and they trying to get down
   himself.

Q. Did people go when he came - he obviously came in quite
   aggressively, didn't he? - A. Yes, people moved, what I
   saw, yes.

Q. In fact, you stayed more or less in the position you
   had taken for another 15, 20 minutes, and then you left
   through gate 2, I think, when things had calmed down a
   bit? - A. Yes.

Q. That is right, isn't it? So it would be right to say,
   wouldn't it, that once you had left Inger and Marian
   and Gary you didn't see them again until much, much
   later, when Inger and Marian had died - I don't know if
   you saw them then? - A. We never saw them until the
   photographs in the mortuary.

0. That is right, that's what I thought. - A. Gary we saw
   on the pitch.

0. You have told me about the position you were in. How
   many rows would you say the packing that you could see
   - I don't want you to guess - if you don't know, don't
   answer - how many rows forward would you describe the
   condition of the pen similar to wnat you were
   experiencing, between players coming onto pitch and the
   game finishing? - A. How many what?

0.. You were standing right at the back, weren't you? - A.
    Yes.

0. Then there were people going down the terrace? - A.
   Yes.

0. How many rows of these people were in more or less the
   same condition as you were? - A. I can't say, it's that
   many.

Q. You couldn't actually see further down and so you don't
   know where it changed, did you? - A. No.
                                                      90



                                      P. V. GOODMAN


               Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Q.   Mr. Goodman, you are most helpful to us because you
     are one of the people who was, probably at the moment,
     the closest to those who were being lifted up into the
     stand and, of course, you had the experience of it the
     year before as well.

          MR. MANNING: Did you want to pursue that, sir,
     that he had been at the 1988 match?

          THE CORONER: Let me do it because I had
     forgotten it. I had it in mind.

          MR. MANNING:   Of course.

                   Further by THE CORONER:

Q.   I just wanted to ask you a couple of questions about
     1988. - A. Yes.

Q.   You were in the same enclosure, that is right? - A.
     The same enclosure, yes.

Q.   But you were a bit further forward? - A. Yes.

Q.   How far forward were you in 1988? - A. The first crash
     barrier.

Q.   Were you crushed in 1988? I do not mean crushed.
     Were you uncomfortable in 1988? - A. No, there was
     quite a bit of room in 1988, as far as I can remember.

Q.   You were not distressed in 1988? - A. Not at all, no.

Q.   But you remembered at half-time people were going up?
     - A. Yes.

           THE CORONER: That is all I need to ask, Mr.
     Manning.   The other thing is I have got to do the
     plan.   I will do that now.
Q.   Can you just mark a plan for us. Walk round to the
   . overhead projector. What I am interested in is the
     position you were at at the back. Mark it with a
     cross.   (Witness marks plan).

          MR. BEECHEY:   That is C363, sir.

           Further Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Q.   You had been there in the same pen the year before,
     not precisely the same spot but there or thereabouts,
     a barrier which looks as if it is perhaps four or five
     steps in front, looking at the plan there? - A. Yes.
                                                           91

                                       P. V. GOODMAN


 Q.    At half-time in 1988 you saw people   being lifted into
       the stand by what you thought to be   their mates so
       that they could get up there rather   than have to stand
       on the terrace? - A. Yes, they were   sharing seats.

 Q*          right, therefore, that when you saw that
       happening before the kick-off in 1989 you thought,
        Ah, ah, they've tumbled to the same idea. They've
       not waited until half-time to do it, they're going to
       do it right at the beginning'? - A. Along those lines,
       yes.                                                  *

Q.     There were quite a lot of people who were apparently
       being pulled up, or getting themselves pulled up, or
       lifted up, into that stand upstairs? - A. Yes.

Q.     Did that seem to you to stop at all when either the
       players came out, or when the match kicked off, or was
       that a fairly continuous thing? - A. It was fairly
       continuous.

Q.    You must not in any way criticise yourself - and I
       want to make that clear — for not knowing what was
       going on in front of you because this only shows how
       difficult it is from one position to assess what is
       going on in another position, but what you are saying
       is that from where you were standing you could not see
       that there was a problem at all in front of you? - A.
      That is right.

Q.    You had a view of the match, indeed you are almost the
      very first person that we have actually heard who saw
      the six minutes of the match, but you could see it? -
      A. Yes.

Q. You were able to cheer when the teams were announced.
    We have heard and possibly seen people putting their
    hands up into the air in some way, possibly saluting
    the players each time each one was announced.  Is that
    something you did or not? Can you remember? Is it
    something you usually do? - A. I can't remember, but I
    usually do that, yes.

Q.    But you would not have had any difficulty in doing it
       if you had done it because you had enough room to be
       able to do it? - A. At the time, yes.

Q.    You were able to cheer   for the kick-off?   - A. Yes.

Q.    You no doubt either cheered, or then groaned, when
       Beardsley struck his shot and it hit the crossbar
      rather than going into the goal,  but you saw all of
       that? - A. Yes.
                                                           92



                                       •P. V. GOODMAN


Q. The only alert at that time that you had was some
    people - and I am not quite sure whether they were on
    the touchline itself or whether they were at the fence
    before the touchline - doing that, if I may do it, in
    other words with the flat of their hands telling
    people to move back? - A. Yes.

Q.     You could not hear what they were saying obviously? -
       A. No.

Q.    But it was obvious to you that those people were
       trying to say to people to move back? - A. Yes.

Q.    It did not apply to you because you were already right
       at the back, were you not? - A. Yes.

Q.    That was a couple of minutes or so after the game      had
       kicked off? - A. Yes, around that.

                 Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Q.     Mr. Goodman, were there any Police Officers standing
       near the radial gate where you were? - A. No.

Q.    Did you see any Police Officers on the terrace before
      the  game kicked off, or was it afterwards that they
      came in? - A. It wasafter that I saw them come in.

Q.    Did you say Police Officers were doing that with their
      hands? - A. No, just fans.

Q.    Just fans? - A. Yes.

                    Further by THE CORONER:

Q.    Would you just turn to 360?    We think we have found
      you.

           MR.   GRIFFITHS:   He has not got a print of   360.

            THE CORONER: Just put it up then.
Q.    We will just show you a picture and you tell us if you
     . can see yourself on there.  Go and have a look and  see
       if you think that is you. Go a bit nearer.    I am just
       interested. - A. Yes.

Q.    So that would be about the fourth person along, is it
      not, would that be right? - A. Yes.

Q.    On Exhibit 360, right at the back? - A. Yes.

           THE CORONER: Thank you. Mr. Goodman, you have
      walked away.  I thank you for your help, you have
      finished.
                                                         93




                                           G. OYITCH


                        GARY OYITCH Sworn

                         By THE CORONER:

Q.   By the way, I did not ask, is Mrs* McCabe here, do you
      know? Is your friend Marian's mum here? - A. Yes.

          MR. McEVOY:     Mr. McEvoy, sir.

           THE CORONER: That is right, yes, I am sorry.
Q.   Are any of Inger's relations here, do you know? - A.
      No, I haven't seen them.

          THE CORONER: I am sorry about the name.      Please
     forgive me.

Q.   Gary Oyitch,                                 in
     Lincolnshire? - a. l e a .

Q.   You are a supporter of Liverpool? - A. Yes.

Q.   You meet with friends from time to time including Mr.
     Goodman, from whom we have just heard, and Marian and
     Inger, and various other people as well? - A. Yes.

Q.   You came in 1989 to watch the match? - A. Yes.
Q.   You had to meet them because presumably you were
     coming from Lincolnshire? - A. Yes.   I was supposed to
     meet them at Sheffield Station. Once we had pulled
     out of Lincoln one of us had forgotten the tickets so
     we had to get off at the next stop and get a later
     train, so we met them at the ground instead.

Q.   That is why there was a delay? - A. Yes.

Q.   You had an uneventful journey, I presume, apart from
     that mishap? - A. Yes.

Q.   I take it you got to the ground via one of the
     supporter coaches? - A. The Police put is on the bus
     at the station.

Q.   Were you asked whether you had tickets when you got on
     the buses? - A. When we got off the train they said,
     "Liverpool or Forest?" We said Liverpool and they
     pointed us to the Liverpool bus, and then on the bus
     they checked the tickets.

Q.   They did check the tickets? - A. They weren't going to
     take us unless we had one.

Q.   I see. So they actually checked in your case the
     tickets and would not let you on unless you could
     produce it? - A. That is right, yes.
                                                        94




                                        G. OYITCH


 Q.   You then were taken to the ground? — A. We were, yes.

 Q*   Again I think I am right in saying that you got in
      about 1.15, or something like that? - A. We went in
      the ground at 20-past 1, but we got dropped off
      opposite Leppings Lane and got some chips just down
      the road, and just went in.

Q.    Would I be right in saying that you had absolutely no
      difficulty getting in, apart from the usual searching?
        A. Yes, that is right.  I think we might have got
      frisked but that is about all.

Q.    Nothing to worry about and there were no difficulties?
      - A. No.
Q.    You went down the tunnel because you knew where you
      were going and you knew where the others would be, or
      had you met with them? - A. They were waiting outside
      the Leppings Lane gates.

Q.    I see.   You went to Pen 3, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q.    Do you agree with your friend that when you first got
      in there it was virtually empty? - A. Yes, there was
      hardly anybody in there.

Q.    So you just stood around and talked and enjoyed
      yourself? - A. We went right up to the front, but then
      we decided that we didn't like looking through the
      fence.  So me, Phil, Mick and Danny all went to the
      back, but then at 20—to 3 I couldn't see over the
      heads so I went to the front again.

Q.    Inger and Marian stayed at the front? - A. Yes, they
      stayed.

Q.    You left them, went to the back with Mr. Goodman,
      Philip, but you could not see over the heads of the
      people, is that what you are saying? - A. That is
      right.

Q.    So you decided to come back forward? - A. Yes.

Q.    At what time was it? - A. Quarter-to 3.

Q.    You are sure about the time? - A. Yes.

Q.    Did you look at your watch? - A. Yes, I remembered
      looking because I thought, 'It's packed here' because
      I had trouble getting to the front.

Q.    That is what I am trying to find out. How difficult
      was it getting through to the front? - A. It was a
      struggle really.  It took longer than normal.
                                                       95



                                       G. OYITCH


Q.   You managed to push people apart, but you had to do
     some pushing, is that what you are saying? - A. Yes.

Q.   But it was not so bad that you stopped halfway and
     said, "My goodness, I'm not going on"? - A. I sort of
     went like that and had to sort of divert.  I couldn't
     get in a straight path.

Q.   You then joined the two girls? - A. Yes, I was with
     Steve at the front, there were four of us.

Q.   Did you stand next to them? - A. Next to Inger.     I was
     on Inger's right.

Q.   What time did you get to the front? - A. It would be
     between 20-to and quarter-to.

Q.   So it took you about four or five minutes? - A. A
     couple of minutes, yes.

Q.   Did you hear the players being announced? - A. I
     watched the players come out for the pitch inspection,
     and I can't remember them warming up but I remember
     the teams being read out, but I didn't hear the last
     sub and I said to Marian, "Who was that?" and she told
     me.

Q.   I am sorry, I could not hear. - A. I didn't hear who
     one of the subs was and I said to Marian, "Who was
     number so-and-so?" and she said.

Q.   So at that point you, Marian, and presumably Inger,
     were still conversing? - A. Yes.

Q.   About what was going on when the teams were being read
     out? - A. That is right.

Q.   How did it feel? - A. It was getting tight.   It was
     shortly after that that the surges started coming.   I
     think there were two so I climbed up on the fence.   I
     thought it was a bit packed and somebody from
     Liverpool who had a scouse accent said, "Get down, I
     can't see", so I got down. Then there was pushing a
     bit more and I think it was the third surge - well,
     you didn't move again after that.

Q.   Can you relate these surges to any particular event on
     the field, such as the teams coming out, or kick-off,
     or anything else? - A. I think it was just high
     spirits.

Q.   I am not asking you why they happened.  I am trying to
     relate them to what was going on on the field. - A. It
                                  G. OYITCH


was probably when the teams ran out, but I can't
remember seeing them run out.

Do you remember seeing the players on the field at
all? - A. For the pitch inspection, yes, but I think
that was just after 2.

That is right. I am not interested in that because it
is too early. You do not remember? - A. No.

Did you see anything of the game? - A. No.

I think you mentioned that there were three surges, is
that right? - A. Yes, there were definitely three at
least, probably a couple more.




                      /Q.   Did the first surge
                                                         97


                                                   G. OYITCH


Q. Did the first surge coincide with the announcement of
   the team? - A. I think it was afterwards.

Q. Afterwards? - A. Yes.

Q. Then they just progressively went on? - A. Yes.

Q . I want to be quite sure that we have got this right.
    In your statement you say that there was a tight
    crush from 2.40 until four minutes to three when the
    teams were announced. The teams were announced
    earlier than that, I can tell you, but that is what I
    am trying to find out. Are you saying your only
    reference point is the announcement of the teams or
    was there something else at four minutes to three
    that you can remember? - A. The last thing I can
    remember really is the teams being announced and then
    the crushes coming.

Q. After the first one you climbed on to the fence? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Somebody said, "Get down, I can't see"? - A. Yes.

Q. You managed to get down? - A. Yes, I got down again.

Q. Then there was another crush? - A. Of course, it went
   forward and I had got up by then.  It went forward
   and as it went back I got back my space back.

Q. So it gave you back your space? - A. Yes, when they
   all got back.

Q. There was another one where you did not climb? - A.
   You could not climb. You couldn't move.

Q. Then there was the third one? - A. That was it, yes.

Q. You were able to see Inger, were you not? - A. Yes, I
   had my head sort of pressed up like that ( indicating )
   and when they got me to hospital they had to scrape
   blue paint off my head because my head was pressed up
   sidewards.

Q. In fact, your last recollection of Inger is just
   before this third surge, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see Marian at all? - A. No.

Q. When did you last catch sight of her? - A. Well, I
   was talking to her when the teams were announced but
   I think that was it afterwards.

Q. You do not recollect anything more after that? - A.
   No.
                                                        98



                                                   G. OYITCH


Q. When you saw Inger, and I do not want to distress or
   upset you but I want to just try and find out, which
   I think you said was at the third surge? - A. Yes.

Q. What did she look like? Was she still alive at that
   point? - A. Yes, she was still alive and making a
   noise but you couldn't make out what she was saying
   because I was in some pain myself, you see, and I
   couldn't really make it out.  I remember seeing her
   afterwards and she had sort of turned blue really and
   her eyes were shut and her tongue was hanging out.

Q. This was shortly after that or at that time? - A. It
   was after the third surge because I was pressed
   against the fence and I had no choice but to look to
   my left.

Q. We know she died, of course, but she looked dead to
   you at the time, did she not? - A. That is right,
   yes.

Q. Could you see the gate from where you were, the
   perimeter gate? - A. No. All I could see was to my
   left.

Q. So that was behind you? - A. The one on to the pitch?

Q. On to the pitch? - A. No, it was to my right.

Q. So you could not see that? - A. No.

Q. So you do not know what was going on there? - A. No.

Q. Could you see anything else happening on the
   perimeter fencing? - A. I could see through but I
   couldn't see any of the pitch at all, the net or
   anything.  I could just see Police.  I heard an
   ambulance but I didn't know where it was.

Q . That was quite a long time afterwards. Did you lose
    consciousness at all? - A. Well, I was sort of hot
    and there was a lot of noise but I didn't hear
    anything at all then.  I went quiet and all of a
    sudden I shut my eyes and everything was white. Then
    a Policeman was slapping me and sprinkling water on
    saying, "Hold o n ".

Q. Then I think the pressure eased a bit? - A. Yes, and
   it was more a pain round your sort o f ...

Q.    You just couldn't get through the gate because you
     were trapped, is that right? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. Did somebody pull you out in the end? - A. I think it
   just eased off and I had to sort of drag my legs out
   of the bodies behind me.
                                                                 99


                                                           G. OYITCH



Q. You managed to get out? - A. Yes.

                      Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE:

Q. Were you still in a pen when the Policeman slapped
   your face? - A. Yes. My glasses had sort of gone
   like that ( indicating ) and I was worried about them
   smashing my face and some lad was talking to me
   through the fence and I said, "Take them". After
   that, I am sort of blind without them, and I couldn't
   see what was happening but I was still in there when
   he slapped me, yes.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:  I am sorry, sir, but the witness is
not facing the microphone and I cannot hear.

Q.           THE   CORONER:   Speak into the microphone?    - A.
      Yes.

        MR. PAYNE: Perhaps it would be helpful if he marked
the     plan to show where  he was when    this happened, sir.

Q.         THE     CORONER: Yes. Would you do that?        Is   that
      right? -     A. Yes, that's it.

Q. Can you sign it and we will give it a number? - A.
   Yes.

       MR. BEECHEY:      C.364, sir.

                     Cross-Examined bv MR. FRASER:

Q. We know that the teams were announced on the Club's
   tannoy at about nine minutes to three. Were you in
   the position you have just described by then at the
   front of the fence and unable to move? - A. Oh no, I
   could still talk freely then.

Q. You were still talking to Inger then? - A. It was
   tighter than a normal football match, you know, but
   you could talk.

Q. Tighter than normal? - A. Yes.

Q.    At what stage after the first    surge did you   get fixed
     into the position in terms of time that you could not
     move? You mention the second surge and you were
     asked if you could climb the fence and you said no? -
     A. It held you against the fence.   It went back.   It
     eased off a bit and the third one, I don't think it
     was far off after it.

Q. It was as a result of the third surge that you
   adopted the position where you were? - A. That is
   right, yes.
                                                     100

                                                 G. OYITCH



Q. I appreciate time plays tricks with the memory.  Is
   it possible for you to estimate or do you know the
   distance between the first and third surge? - A. No,
   I can't remember that.

Q. I do not want you to speculate and if you do not know
   please say? - A. No, I do not know.

Q. Do you know what time you got on to the pitch? - A.
   On to the pitch? I have no idea really.   I did not
   even know the game had started, finished or anything.

              Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Mr. Oyitch, can you tell me a little bit more about
   the incident when the Police Officer slapped your
   face? - A. Yes, that is when I was starting to feel
   weak.  It all went quiet and everything look white.
   He was slapping me and sort of trying to talk to me
   then saying, "Hold on. You are strong. You can make
   this. You will be all right".

Q. You were still inside the pen then? - A. Yes, I
   couldn't move at that time.

Q. He was the other side? - A. Yes.  I could not tell
   you what he looked like but I know he had a Sheffield
   accent whatever and he had his fingers sort of
   through trying to touch me. I think I can remember
   water being sprinkled as well.

Q. He was trying to revive you, was he? - A. Yes, sort
   of just moral support really.

Q. Yes, but he could not get to you? - A. No, because
   the holes were not very big at all through the fence.

Q. He was doing the best that he could in the
   circumstances? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Oyitch, I am most grateful to you
for coming and thank you. Mr. and Mrs. Mcllroy, it is nice
to see you.  I know that Basildon is an awfully long way.
I have been there many times.  I used to have business
activities down there and so I know where it is.  I am glad
to see you and I am very, very sorry about Marian, Inger
and, of course, everybody else as well. Thank you very
much. We have another witness.   I am not quite sure
whether three-quarters of an hour is going to be quite
enough.  It may be worth stopping for ten minutes now and
then if need be we can go on a few minutes longer. We will
not go on as long as yesterday. Can we rise for
approximately ten minutes?

                    (Short Adjournment!
                                                        101

                                                    A. D. LEIGH



                   ANTHONY DENNIS LEIGH Sworn

                        Bv THE CORONER;

Q. Anthony Dennis Leigh, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Is it still
   Liverpool? -

Q.                  - A. Yes.

Q. You are    a tyre fitter? - A. No, I am unemployed now.

Q. You were at the time? - A. I was at the time, yes.

Q. You were a football supporter and for all I know
   still are a football supporter, is that right? - A.
   Yes.

Q. You supported Liverpool? - A. Yes.

Q. You decided to come to watch the Semi Final here in
   Sheffield? - A. Yes.

Q. On the15th April 1989.     I take it you had a
   ticket?   - A. Yes, I had a stand     ticket to startwith.

Q. To start with? - A. To start with, yes.

Q. What did you do? Did you swap it? - A. I swapped it
   so that I could go on to the terracing with my mates
   who I came down with.

Q.   You decided to travel by train I think, is that
     right? - A. Yes, we came up on the early train.

Q. It was not a football special? - A. No, it was just a
   normal train.

Q. When you got to Sheffield obviously you got off? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Do you know what time it was approximately? - A.
   10.30.

Q. So it was relatively early? - A. Yes, it was very
   early actually.

Q.    Did you then go straight to the ground or what did
     you do? - A. No, we were stopped at the station by
     the Police. They wouldn't let us move. They herded
     us altogether and told us we had to wait there and
     get on a bus they had laid on.
                                                        102

                                                    A. D. LEIGH


Q. Did they check your tickets at that time? - A. Not at
   all, no.

Q. How did they know you were a supporter if you were on
   a normal train? - A. They were just stopping people
   with Scouse accents or with scarves or badges. They
   just would not let them through at all, as you handed
   your ticket i n .

Q. Pardon? - A. As you were handing your train ticket in
   they were stopping you there.

Q. They took it that you were a supporter? - A. Yes.

Q.    So you had to wait for a time.  Did you go on to one
     of the buses or coaches, whatever they had laid on? -
     A. Yes, we all got put on one, yes.

Q.    Did they check your tickets on that bus? - A. Not at
     all, no.

Q. They did not look? - A. No.

Q. Did they check for alcohol or anything like that? -
   A. No, not to my knowledge.

Q. You personally? - A. No.

Q. In fact, the wait was not that long.  It was only
   about twenty minutes or so? - A. It was about eleven
   o'clock by the time that we got to Leppings Lane.

Q. Because that was a bit early, was it not? - A. Yes.

Q. What did you do? - A. Once we got off the bus?

Q. Yes? - A. Just walked around really. We were looking
   for a ticket and a pub, somewhere to have a drink.

Q. How many of you did not have tickets? You had a
   ticket because you have told me that? - A. By the
   time we arrived at Sheffield only never had a ticket.

Q. How many did not have any when you set off? - A. Two.

Q. There were five of you and so three had tickets? - A.
   No, there was only three of us. We met two lads on
   the train going down.

Q. Three of you set off? - A. Yes, I had one and the two
   lads did not.

Q. One of them managed to get one on the train? - A. At
   Manchester.
                                                         103


                                                    A. D. LEIGH


Q. Then the third one got one somewhere in Sheffield, is
   that right? - A. Well, almost straight away as we got
   off.

Q. In Leppings Lane? - A. As we were walking up towards
   the p u b .

Q. You then set off and, in fact, I think you to a pub
   called the Horse and Jockey? - A. The Horse and
   Jockey, yes.

Q. We have had all kinds of estimates of people. How
   many people do you think were in there at its height?
   Inside and outside, how many do you think? - A. All
   in all roughly a couple of hundred I should imagine.
   There was quite a few outside sitting round.

Q. 200 inside plus quite a few outside? - A. It was
   quite full inside.

Q. In fact, it was so packed that you only managed to
   get three bottles of Pils, is that right? - A. That
   was it, yes. That is all they were allowing. They
   weren't serving any more because apparently they...

Q. They were sharing it out, were they? - A. Yes, they
   were.

Q. Everybody was happy, singing and enjoying themselves?
   - A. Yes, it was like a party, a cracking day and all
   that, you know.

Q.    In fact, you had an awfully long queue I notice. It
     says an hour and a hour you waited to get food? - A.
     Waiting to get served, yes.

Q. Inside the pub? - A. Inside the pub.

Q.    In fact, outside in your statement you said about 500
     outside.Would you    stick by that or do you think it
     is too high a number? - A. It might be too high a
     number. There might have been a few less I should
     imagine.

Q. Anyway, having stood there for a good long time you
   got something to eat? - A. Something to drink. We
   didn't get anything to eat. We got that later on.
   We walked back down.

Q. You mean you queued for an hour and a half and all
   you got was a bottle of Pils? - A. Yes.

Q. I had not appreciated that.    You drank it I
   suppose? - A. Yes.
                                                        104


                                                 A. D. LEIGH


Q. Then you set off'. Where in the end did you get
   something to eat, at a chippie or something? - A. No,
   there was like a butty shop further on down, like a
   little grocer's shop.  It was a very small shop and
   we got a sandwich there.

Q. By this time quite a bit of time had passed, had it
   not? - A. Yes.

Q. Actually can you just tell me this because I am
   interested; you were actually going up to the Horse
   and Jockey towards it at what, 11.15 something like
   that? - A. It would be roughly about that time, half
   eleven, yes.

Q. So you were walking away from the ground, in fact,
   were you not? - A. Yes.

Q. Were there a lot of other people walking away from
   the ground at that time? - A. Not a great deal.
   There were a few people milling around but not an
   excessive number.

Q. But not a great deal of people walking away? - A. No.

Q. Presumably very few people coming down because it was
   so early, was it not? - A. There were a few people
   there but, like I say, there wasn't a great amount.

Q. Let us get back to the story. You left the pub I
   think you said at about ten past two, would you agree
   with that? - A. Roughly about ten past two, yes.

Q. These are just approximate times because I do not
   suppose you stood with your watch and said, "It is
   ten past two now"? - A. No, I think it was ten past
   two when we left.

Q. Did nearly all the fans leave at the same time so far
   as you can remember or were you one of the first or
   one of the last? - A. No, there was a steady stream.
   There wasn't a mass exodus. Quite a few left.

Q. You then did the opposite, you walked towards the
   ground? - A. Yes, we went straight there.

Q. What time did you get to the ground, to the entrance?
   - A. Roughly about twenty past two.  It is not that
   far.

Q. When you got to the entrance, have you been before? -
   A. No.

Q. That was the first time? - A. Yes, the first time.
                                                     105


                                                 A. D. LEIGH


Q, Do you remember seeing some perimeter gates? Do you
   know what I mean by perimeter gates? Big gates like
   park gates, railing gates. Do you remember seeing
   anything like that? - A. I think I actually walked
   through them.

Q. You have to do to get in? - A. Yes, walked through on
   either side.

Q. Were you able to walk through those without any
   particular difficulty? - A. We got right up to like
   the top before the turnstiles without much bother
   really. There was a little bit of jostling like.




                           /Q. So you actually managed.
                                                          106


                                                    A. D. LEIGH


Q. So you actually managed to get out of the turnstiles
   without any particular difficulties? - A. Fairly OK.

Q. Did you go through the turnstiles? - A. Yes, through B.

Q. So as far as you are concerned there were obviously
   people there, probably several hundred, maybe more, but
   it wasn't a particular problem? - A. It was tight.

Q. Can you estimate how may people were there at that time,
   at twenty past? - A. I would say a couple of hundred
   people, two or three hundred.

Q. You are sure that it was twenty past that you got down to
   the ground.    In your statement, and this could be a
   typographical error, it says "ten to"? - A. I have seen
   the statement.    I think that is an error.

Q.   That is an error?   - A. Yes.

Q.    It sounds like it from the way you are describing it.
     Were you searched when went through? -A.No, but outside
     I had a leather jacket on and I gave it to one of the
     lads so I just had my shirt on and jeans on.    I went
     through and never got searched but while I was waiting
     for my two mates they got searched as they passed
     through.

Q. This was near the turnstiles where the searching was
   taking place? - A. No, this was once we had got in.
   There was nothing at the turnstiles.

Q. You mean on the inside? - A. On the inside.

Q.   So you weren't searched on the outside at all? - A. No.

Q.    Had you seen any Police Officers outside? - A. There was
     the horse.   That is all I can remember, really, just the
     horse in the middle.

Q. You didn't have any need to contact them so there is no
   reason why you should remember them, but you remember a
   horse? - A. Yes.

Q.    You got in and I think you then went to thetunnel? - A.
     Yes.    Well, you could just see the pitch.   It was clear
     and we just headed straight through.

Q. The tunnel was clear as well? - A. We didn't get stopped
   going through.

Q. You went to the left or the right? - A. To the left.
                                                          107


                                                    A. D. LEIGH


Q. You got on to the terracing.   Do you know what time? -
   A. Roughly it would be about 2.35/2.40, I should imagine.

Q. What was itlike on the terrace at that time? - A. It was
   quite full.    You could move about because we wentinto
   the back and that is where we were going to stay, but it
   was filling up and filling up and it was becoming...

Q.   At 2.40, just remind me what you said happened at 2.40,
     when you first got out. - A. We got on to the terrace.
     It was a little bit tight but not too excessive.

Q.   Were you able to find a position where you would have
     been happy if nothing further had occurred to watch the
     match from?   - A. We were OK at the back.   We were at the
     back.    There was no problem.    We were all together.

Q. I think you and your friends were singing and chanting in
   the usual sort of way? - A. Yes.

Q. Having a good time. - A. Yes.

Q. Did you hear the teams announced? - A. The only one I
   heard was Ian Rush, that was it.

Q. But you did hear that? - A. Yes, that was all I did hear,
   just the one.

Q. Can you remember cheers going up for him? - A. I remember
   cheers going up, yes.   I think that might have been when
   they announced the team, I don't know.

Q. So you heard his name.   Up to that point everything... -
   A. Seemed OK.   Not too bad.    Then there was just an
   almighty surge and we all got separated.    I ended up
   close to the front barrier, the front crush barrier, and
   it became really tight.    I had lost all my mates.    They
   had gone.   I couldn't see them anywhere.    I was just on
   my own.   I just tried to make the best of it there and
   then I a few minutes later there was another surge then
   and I was pushed right on next to the barrier.    That is
   when it became really bad.

Q. What was happening on the pitch at that point? - A. I
   couldn't see the pitch.

Q. So you don't know? - A. No.

Q. Did you see the pitch at all? - A. I did later on when I
   could move.   For a few minutes I stuck.

Q. Which way were you facing?    Towards the pitch or towards
   the... -A. Towards the pitch.
                                                            108


                                                      A. D. LEIGH


Q.   So you couldn't see the stand either? - A. No.

Q.    It is very difficult and if you don't know it, don't
     guess.   Can you say how long it was from the time you
     heard Ian Rush's name announced to this position where
     there was the second surge where you were up against the
     barrier and where things were getting really difficult? -
     A. I would say roughly about five minutes.

Q. At that point you were more than uncomfortable? - A. I
   was uncomfortable, but it was the people who were around
   me.    It was bad for them.   I could move a little bit.
   I could still move my arm.    It was the people to my left
   and to my right.    A girl had gone red in the face.     She
   couldn't breathe and she was starting to panic.      A small
   lad to my right.    He had his back against the crush bar
   looking up towards the stand at the back.      He was going
   under.    He was going blue in the face.    He just
   wouldn't move. I was punching him and shaking him.       At
   the same time it eased off a bit and we were shouting to
   the Police Officer at the front who was walking along the
   perimeter fence, quite a lot of people were shouting at
   him and he just didn't want to know.

Q. We will get you to show   us on the plan in a moment, but
   do you know which crush   barrier you were up against? - A.
   Yes, the one closest to   the front next to the perimeter
   fence, on the left hand   side, in between 4 and 5.

Q. I see.   You say you were shouting and others were
   shouting and he didn't want to know.   What made you say
   that? - A. He was pacing about.   He turned round and it
   looked like he mouthed, "Shut up, you dick-heads.”    That
   is what it looked like.   I can t say that is exactly
   what he said.

Q. You couldn't hear him? - A. No.

Q. So when you say that is what he said? - A. Just reading
   his lips that is what it looked like.

Q. Do you know how to lip read? - A. Well, when someone
   calls you a dick-head, you know they are saying, "Dick­
   head."

Q. Are you saying this was associated with movements or just
   the lips that you were reading?   He may have said it.
   I am trying to find out how it is you are so sure about
   it. - A. The thing is I am not so sure about it, but that
   is the impression I got.

Q. OK, that's fair enough.    You could see him obviously? -
   A. Yes.
                                                            109


                                                    A. D. LEIGH


Q. That means that at' that point you had a view of the field
   to a certain extent? - A. Yes, it had all moved again.
   There was another slight breathing space and you could
   move.

Q. You had him in your eye for long enough to shout and to
   think you could read what he was saying. What was
   happening behind him?    Further on, I mean, on the field.
   - A . I was just looking at him.

Q. So you don't know? - A. Honestly, I really don't know.
   I was just looking at him.

Q. Fair enough.   We don't expect you to stand there with
   your watch but if you know what is going on on the field
   then we can work it out.   Do you understand?   What
   happened after that?   Did anything further develop? - A.
   No.   It just started to get worse, the crush.   This lad
   was still going...   I lost touch.   It moved again.
   The lad next to me hit the barriers and started
   screaming.   It was really bad screams and shouting, "Get
   off" and that, and you just couldn't move back for him.

     Then it moved again and I hit the barrier myself.    I was
     there stuck on it myself.   I tried to get away from the
     barrier by going under.    I got stuck there so I came
     back up.    I don't know how I did it, but I got so far
     and my legs and my thighs got stuck.    I think after
     that I must have blacked out because I cannot remember
     getting from from the barrier to then fence.

Q. You can't? - A. I cannot remember anything at all.

Q. In your statement you said:

          "I remember I was flying through the air and coining
          to the right and the left hand c o me r . . "

     - A. That's about it, but I can't remember how I    came to
     get out.

Q. In other words, you don't really know how you moved from
   that position? - A. No.

Q.    Did you then climb out over the railings? - A. I   was
     helped up the railings and I fell off the top.

Q.   You went into the little pen at the side?    It is a very
     narrow one, isn't it? - A. It's a passageway.

Q. Then in due course you went out on to the pitch? -A. I
   was carried on to the pitch from there.
                                                         110

                                                   A. D. LEIGH


Q. When you were carried out on to the pitch can you
   remember whether any ambulances were already around? - A.
   No. I think I was one of the first out, actually,
   there wasn't a great deal on the outside that I can
   remember.

Q.   It is all a haze? - A. It is hazy, like.

Q.   You know     whenyou were   shouting tothe Officer, how many
     Officers were there, was there just one or were there
     more? - A. I just saw the one.   There may well have been
     others but I was just concentrating on this one.

Q. There was one you saw, or one that impinged on your
   consciousness. - A. Yes.

Q. Don't guess this answer.   Do you know how long it was
   that you were shouting before you got a response, as you
   thought? - A. A couple of minutes.   It might have just
   been a minute.   It happened so quickly.

Q. It was quick? - A. It was over in a flash.

Q. Mark us the plan where you were when you were shouting at
   this Police Officer.

          MR. BEECHEY:   C.365, sir.

Q.        THE CORONER:   One final question: you know when
     you were at the back initially and I think you got moved
     forward after the teams had been announced, I think the
     surging began then? - A. I think so.

Q. You were in this position which you have now shown me.
   That is where you finished up, basically.   Can you
   remember whether any cheering was still going on anywhere
   else?   You were shouting and the people around you were
   shouting, but could you hear whether any cheering was
   going on from behind you? - A. No, because it is just so
   hazy.   I couldn't be definite.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q. On the plan which you have marked you can see from^where
   you were standing down to your right at the front is
   gate 4? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see that opened? - A. I couldn't see that at all.
   I was shouting for them to open the gates.   It may well
   have been opened, but I couldn't see from where I was
   shouting and shouting.   Everybody else was shouting to
   get out.
                                                          Ill

                                                  A. D.- LEIGH




Q. The Coroner asked you to give an estimate of time,
   which I appreciate is difficult, and the time he asked
   you to estimate was from the time that you heard Ian
   Rush, the Liverpool footballer's name, called out, from
   that time, to the time when the surge took you down to
   the barrier wnich you have marked on the plan, and the
   best estimate you could give was five minutes? - A.
   Yes.

Q. I would like you to snow the Jury the implications of
   that in the sequence of events by looking at the folder
   that you have got in front of you. At the front of the
   folder you will find a schedule, C277.  If you look
   down the list of events, about two-thirds of the way.
   down you can see 14.51.07, Liverpool team announced? -
   A. Yes.

0. So if we add five minutes onto that, that would get us
   to 14.56? - A. Yes.

0. If you look further down this list, you can see 14.59,
   gate 4 open? - A. Yes.

Q. So on the estimate that you have given it would look as
   if you were shouting to the Policeman in the three
   minute time between 14.56 and 14.59.  Does that seem
   about right? - A. More than likely, yes.

          THE CORONER:   If you look at 14.59, we have got
     strong surge from tunnel in enclosures 3 and 4, which
     would fit in very well with what this witness said
     about the surge.

          MR. PAYNE:   Thank you very mucn.   It would.

0.        THE CORONER:   Can you see that? If you look just
     about 14.59 there is a surge, and I think you described
     some surging, didn't you? - A. I think that was the bad
     one.

                Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING

0 . 1 just want to ask you about what you can hear and what
     you can't hear, and to illustrate in this way. First
    of all eleven players and is it two substitutes that
    are in the team? - A. Yes.

0. The only name that you recollect hearing clearly was
   the name of Ian Rush? - A. Yes.

Q. From where you were? - A. That's correct, yes.

0. Although of course there is a tannoy system round the
   ground, so that is one difficulty with hearing that is
                                                    112
                                               A. D.- LEIGH




  highlighted. The second is from where you were
  standing that although, and you can't be sure about it
  and I think that is very fair of you, you thought you
  could lip read what the Policeman was saying, you could
  not possibly near him, as to what he was shouting or
  what he was saying at all, and would you accept from
  those two statements in themselves that it must have
  been impossible for the Policeman to have heard what
  you were shouting if you were shouting? - A. I would
  not say that, because there was a lot of people
  shouting, a hell of a lot of people shouting at him.

Q. There is a difference though isn't there between two
   people saying the same thing at exactly the same time -
   in other words two voices are stronger than one, a
   dozen voices stronger by that sort of amount, and of
   course everybody shouting, doing their own thing if you
   like, and of course not with the same words either? -
   A. Yes, but if he wasn't sure why did he just walk
   away? Why didn't he come over and look for himself.

0. Of course, what we don't know is what was in the Police
   Officer's mind.  I can't answer tnat and you can't
   answer that. All I am doing is highlighting for you
   the fact that there were two occasions when you had had
   a problem hearing something that was obviously going
   on. You hadn't heard 12 out of the 13 names that were
   read for Liverpool. You hadn't heard what this Police
   Officer was saying.

               Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER

Q. Let's think about one of your other senses, Mr. Leigh.
   How close to you was the Police Officer when you
   thought you could read his lips? - I would say roughly
   about 15 feet, I think. Where it says, at the bottom
   there , he was close on, I would say about 15 feet,
   something like that.

0. Close enough for you to be able to read his lips, or if
   not read them to see his lips move? - A. Yes.

        THE CORONER:   Can I ask a supplemental question
   to that because it might just help us? we can measure
   the distance assuming he has got his cross right.

0. Do you by chance remember how close to the perimeter
   fence the Policeman was? Tnere is a walkway, isn't
   there? - A. I think he was on the path.

Q. But you can't say whether he was right next to the
   perimeter fence or a couple of yards away, one yard,
   one foot? Do you know now close he was? - A. He was
   fairly close to the fence itself.
                                                              113   \

                                                      A. D.-. LEIGH.




          THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, did you want to come
     back on that at all?

            MR. FRASER:     No, sir.   Thank you.

                  Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Q. MR. Leigh, were you saying you were stopped by Police
   Officers at the station just because of your accent? -
   A. Yes, I think so. Anyone who spoke with a "Scouse"
   accent was stopped, or they had a scarf on or a
   Liverpool badge.

Q. So there was no constructive purpose in it, in the way
   of checking for tickets. You weren't checked for
   tickets? - A. No.

          THE CORONER:      He also said that he was put on a
     bus to the ground.

            MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.

          THE CORONER:   And that the tickets were checked
     on the bus.  I am sorry, I know I interrupt you more
     than everybody else, but it is the way you phrase your
     questions.

0.        MRS. McBRIEN:  When you got to the perimeter
     gates, were they all open, because it is quite a wide
     expanse of gates, isn't it? Were the whole lot open? -
     A. I couldn t tell you about the gates. The only gate
     I went through, if it is a gate, is down the path.  I
     did not see any perimeter gates open.

            MRS. McBRIEN:    Could I have a plan of the gates,
     sir?

            THE CORONER:    Yes, certainly.    C254, it is.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:  Do you remember going up to those
     gates?- A. Yes. They were open.

Q.. Tne whole lot, the six of them? It is difficult to see
    even on the photograph, but there are tnree sets, I
    believe, of gates there, making six all together. - A.
    I can't be definite on them all being open.  I know the
    middle ones were open because they are the ones we went
    through.

Q. Those were the ones you definitely noticed, so you
   wouldn't know that that was the track for the road,
   where vehicles could go along the middle? Those gates,
   I believe, are the gates leading to - it is the access
                                                     114


                                               A. D.- LEIGH




   point for vehicles. - A. I didn't know that, with not
   being there before.

Q. Were people pressed up against the perimeter fence when
   you were shouting to the Police Officer for help? Did
   you notice anybody in real difficulties right in the
   front? - A. Not particularly at the front.  I was just
   looking at the Police Officer, say for a minute or so,
   but it was all going so quickly, you couldn't really


0. So was it immediately round your area that all the
   problems were? - A. In my eyes, yes.  It was all around
   me, the screams, it was unbelievable.

Q. But you could not actually see the perimeter fence from
   the pen side? - A. From where I was I could just see
   the top. There was people there but I couldn't see
   them clearly from where I was.

0. All right, thank you very much.

             Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN

Q. Mr. Leigh, clearly when you saw the Police Officer and
   you were shouting, there was a great deal of shouting
   going on from a number of different people? - A. Yes.

0. You have just told us that there was screaming as well
   as the shouting at the time? - A. Yes.

Q. Clearly you were in some distress? - A. I wasn't that
   bad, it was the people around me. I was trying not to
   panic myself, to try and get help.  It was later on
   that I became stuck.

Q. It all happened very quickly, Ithink you said? - A.
   Very quickly, yes.  It seemed like ages but it was
   quickly.

0. At the same time, of course, you were taking note of
   the condition of the people around you, would that be
   fair? - A. I was trying to, yes.

Q. So you were taking in a number of different visions, if
   I can put it like that, at the same time? - A. Yes.

0. I think you have already said quite fairly that you
   can't be sure what the Policeman was saying, you simply
   saw his lips move at this time? - A. That is correct
   but in my own head I know he said it, in my own
   opinion.
                                              A. D.-.LEIGH




I accept it is your opinion, but you did say that you
could not be sure about that. Would you stand by that?
- A. That is correct, I couldn't be 100 per cent sure.

               Further By THE CORONER

Can we put the plan up again? I would be grateful if
you could just put a circle in the area where you were
when you eventually climbed out, so that we know where
you finished up, and show me on the plan where you were
before the surge and we will decide whether we put a
mark there as well. (The witness marked Exhibit C365
at the position where he climbed out (a circle), and at
the position where he was before the surge (a cross)).
Mark a (l) against the plus, (2) on the cross and then
the (3) on the other, and then we know where we are.

Mr. Leigh, I am grateful to you for coming.   Thank you
very much.

            (In the absence of the Jury)
                                                    116




     THE CORONER: I just wanted to say I am planning
to have Mr. Butler and Mr. Bownes, they are the Local
Authority people, and no doubt will be talking about
the Safety Certificate, that is what I anticipate,
within the limits of this Inquest I hope, on
Wednesday.  It is out of sequence but for various
reasons I have decided to do that and I thought I
ought to mention it so that it does not spring on you
in total surprise because it is a totally different
aspect in a sense to what we are doing at the moment.
That is Wednesday we are planning it for.

     MR. FRASER: I caught the first name, sir, but
not the second.  I apologise.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Bownes and Mr. Butler. Mr.
Bownes gave evidence before Lord Justice Taylor and
Mr. Butler, I think, is a building surveyor. Is there
anything else anybody wants?

     MR. RUSSELL:   Witnesses for tomorrow, sir.

     THE CORONER: At the moment because we were not
sure whether we were going to finish with Mr. Leigh,
and we did, it is P.C. McGuinness, Police Sergeant
Swift, Police Constable Sosnowski, otherwise known as
P.C. Akred, and P.C. Hooson. Now we may add. It
depends how we do with these and if need be we will
get another - I use the word filler.  I do not mean
this in any unkind way at all, but you know what I am
trying to say. We did have some supporters but
decided to scrap them because of the risk of
overrunning so now, with Mr. Leigh, in any event we
could have had them, but there we are. Is that all
clear?

     MR. MANNING: In common parlance, ETA for
tomorrow afternoon?

     THE CORONER: I am sorry, at this stage of the
afternoon ---

     MR. MANNING:   Estimated finish.

     THE CORONER: The finishing time.   I want to
finish at quarter-to 2.

     MR. MANNING:   God bless you!

     THE CORONER: I thought you were going to say it
is too early. That is the time I am aiming at, half­
past 1 /quarter-to 2. I do not want to go beyond that.
Obviously Police Officers are human beings just as
everybody else and it is a stressful thing to have
                                                     117




  them here and away, and so on, and we have got to bear
  that in mind.

        The other thing is perhaps I could just mention -
  perhaps it applies to these Officers but I cannot
  remember - we are going to get at some time next week
  into a group of people where we could go over the
, whole ground all over again, but the reason why I am
  calling them is because I want to pick out a specific
  bit of evidence from them. For example, to take one,
  there are several people whom I want to call, if I
  can, who did either see or hear that barrier go. That
  is why I am interested in them, because they are
  telling us something which nobody else can do. So it
  may well be that, when we get to them, I will draw
  your attention to the fact that these people are being
  called, if you like, purposely for a specific thing,
  so that we do not have to necessarily go over what
  time they got off the bus, how they got in, how many
  horsemen they saw, and so on, because we will have
  heard it by then - I was going to say several hundred
  times and it is almost true actually, but quite a few
  times.   I am hoping that that will speed up the
  proceedings a bit.

      There are also a number of others, Police
 Officers and various other people like that, in
 exactly the same category who we could spend hours on
 if we wished going over things, but I am calling them
 because they say something in my judgment which is
 relevant and which is different and which we have not
 heard from somebody else.

      MR. CATCHPOLE:  In relation to.those witnesses
 who may give evidence about the barrier, might I
 suggest that Dr. Eastwood's solicitors are contacted.

      THE CORONER: Yes, I will let them know.  I have
 got that in mind.  In fact, when one of the witnesses
 said today something about the barrier, I sort of
 looked and noticed that Miss Sinclair was not there,
 but that is as it happens.  I do not know whether it
 mattered very much. But, no, I do have that in mind.
 Is that all satisfactory? Ladies and gentlemen good­
 night. Have a good evening.


      (The Inquests were adjourned until 9.30 a.m.
                 tomorrow morning)
