                                                                                           M I R . 15



 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                 Date and tim e raised                              Number


                                                                                                                 ~2-£=,<?rL+C \,
1Unclude source and any document number i f relevant)


      ceiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/N o   ____
                                                                                                                         Receiver
  /


                                                                                                                           Indexer
 D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                    Statem ent Reader
 Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                           Indexer
 Indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised

 Examined - further action to be taken

                                                                                                                   $   M


                                                                                                                    1*551
                                                                                                                                   sio




 Further action No(s)                                                                                                      Indexer



 When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Number Form
   HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                       (WEST DISTRICT)



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                  STADIUM DISASTER

              ON THE 15TH APRIL,        1989



              INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


                 ANTHONY PETER KELLY




                        Before

DR. S.L.   POPPER,   LL.B, B.MED.Sci,      B M , B S , MRCGP

               (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                          At

              The Medico-Legal Centre,
                   Watery S t r e e t ,
                     Sheffield.

                          On

                  26th April,    1990




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                                    INDEX




                        OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER
                    B
                        DR. S. SIVALQGANATiiAH Galled

                           By The Coroner
                           Cross-axaiTiined by Dr. Dawson

                    C   POL. SGT. J. KILLQCiC Called

                           By The Coroner
                           Cross-examined by lls. Norcliffe


                        PET. ItiSP. ii. LAYTOH Called
                    D
                           6 y Tite Coroner




                    E




                    F




                    G
i




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
    INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF AuTHONY PETER KELLY

     HR FRASER:     Sir, the next evidence you will hear
relates to Anthony Kelly.    In this case, fir. Kelly's
common lav,? wife - it is a horrible term but it is
legally correct ....

     THE CORONER:     I know, yes.

     MR FRASER:     .... Janice is actually in Court.

     THE CORONER:   Which is Janice, can you show me,
so I know which one you are?  Yes.

            EiR FRASER:  And she and Anthony's children are
represented throughout the preceding year, sir, by Hr.
Dawson, who is on uiy left.        I have a personal     ^
involvement on behalf of Mrs. Situs, who is Antnony s
i n u r n , and her new husband, who actually sit there, but
because Janice and the children are effectively the
next of kin, sir, ilr. Dawson will therefore conduct
 this matter on their behalf and I will take the
sidelines.

      THE CORONER:     Yes.  iir. Dawson, what I normally
do is I explain to the families the procedure, and if
you will forgive me, you will obviously be able to near
it as well, because quite clearly although I nave tried
to aiake each Inquest individual in the sense that it is
unique to that particular person, there is clearly a
pattern as well, otherwise we could not possibly cope
with it.   So I aiii going to try and look at all of you,
but I can't look at all of you at once, so you will
have to forgive me if I swing backwards and forwards.

       What is going to happen is that in a izioiaent or two
I arti going to read you what the opening on the Inquest,
which°actually took place on 19th April, 1939, which is
when I opened it so that the bodies could be released
and so that you could have the funeral, I will read it
to you to get all mis takes which there may be in it,
and in this particular case there are one or two
errors.    Uhen I have done that I will then deal with
the corrections, so that we get the record right.       Then
I ain going to tell you what the evidence fro^a Dr.
Forrest was with regard to the blood alcohol and when
that has been done we are going to listen to the
pathologist who is going to take us through the
pathological evidence.    When he has concluded the
presenting Officer will take us through the sunnary and
then Inspector Layton will take us through the visual
evidence.    Two things in connection with that:     in the
visual evidence there are a lot of references to plans
and so on, and numbers.    I have found it a bit
confusing but we need to have those numbers, so when
                        you are listening to it try not to allow tiiose numbers
                        to disturb you, so that you can pick up the sense and
                        don't worry about the numbers and the references.   Is
                        that clear?  Finally, all the people nave already been
                        sworn and unless you specifically want theui resworn I
                        don't propose to do so because we thought this was niore
                        convenient.  This is the resusned Inquest wnich was
                        opened on 19th April, 1989, and on tnat occasion Neil
                        Anthony Parkin, Acting Coroner's Officer, said:
                    B        "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has
                             been identified to PC 1629 Glave, of the South
                             Yorksnire Police, as that of Anthony Peter Kelly
                             by Elizabeth Sims ....“

                        - that is you, isn't it?

                             ililS .   SIMS:   Yes.

                             THE COiiOHEil:   ” ... his mother. He was 29 years
                             of age, having been born on 12th August 1959 at
                             Birkenhead.    He was a married aan and he lived at

                                       Birkenhead.He w a s a s o l d i e r b y
                             profession.   iie died at Hillsborough Football
                    D        Ground, following an incident there on Saturday
                             15th April 1989.    PC Glave caused the body to be
                             reaioved to the Medico-Legal Centre and there he
                             identified it to Detective Constable Si.non
                             sieigold, who subsequently identified the sa.ne body
                             to Dr. Sivaloganathan."

                        - or Dr. Siva, for short -
                    E
                             “ It is the family wish that the body should be
                             buried.“

                        and I then adjourned the Inquest.    Now there are
                        several errors, I know that, and I know it because I
                        circulated a forra to you and I asked you to check that
                        we had all the details right, and you signed it, Mrs.
                        Elizabeth Siias, on 27th April, and you confirmed that
                        it was now correct as you had signed it, and what you
                        told tne then on that form was that the name was right,
                        Anthony Peter Kelly; that the address should have been
                                                                  Wirral,
                        lierseyside; that the date of birth was correct,
                        12 3 59; place of birth was Birkenhead; and the
                        occupation you changed to unemployed, and the status to
                        single: and then you told ;ae about Janice as well, but
                        we don t need to know that, not for this purpose.
                        !5r. Dawson, I a;n not quite sure, that seesns perfectly
                        straightforward.    The only thing I a*a a bit puzzled
                        about is the occupation where we changed it from
                        soldier to unemployed.    Had we just made a complete
                        error there with regard to it?
                H
                                               _ ') -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                 DR. S. SIVALOGANATHAN

                             HR. DAWSON:   I understood that Mr. Kelly was a
                        soldier in his earlier years, sir.

                              . THE COROMER:    And you say, Mrs. Siais, that he
                        w a s n 't?

                             MRS. E. SIMS:       He was a soldier in his earlier
                        years.

                              THE CORONER:   I see, so he had been a soldier,
                    B   yes.   wall Mr. Dawson, I don't know, how long ago was
                        that?

                              MR. DAWSON:      1930.

                             THE CORONER:   I think perhaps unemployed is saore
                        correct than soldier so we will use what you said.   Are
                        you content with the details?  The blood alcohol was
                    C   estimated by Dr. Forrest and he gave the evidence of
                        that on the first day of the resumed hearings, and in
                        the case of Anthony Peter Kelly the result was
                        negative.

                             iJow va are going to listen to Dr. Siva.    i l ait a
                        ainute — there are a couple of other things that I need
                    D   to correct before ....   Ue said in that opening
                        statement that PC Glave caused the body to be moved to
                        tne Medico-Legal Centre.   That is wrong, it was PC
                        Pont, and wa also said that Siinon Wei go Id identified
                        the body to Dr. Siva.   That is wrong as well and that
                        has been corrected in subsequent statements.     Dr. Siva
                        will deal with the identification in a aos^ent.       So we
                        made a few mistakes.
                    E
                                DR. SOMASUNDRUH SIVALOGAMATIIAM Called:

                                               8y THE CORONER:

                              THE WITNESS:   Sivaloganathan, I am a Lecturer in
                        Forensic Medicine at the University of Leeds, and a
                        ilome Office Pathologist for West Yorkshire.    On your
                    F   instructions, sir, I carried out a post .aortesa
                        exaaiination on the body of Anthony Peter Kelly, aged
                        29, on 16th April 1989.   The body was identified to me
                        by Detective Inspector Tisnms, and I also checked the
                        name and the number that was written on the body
                        itself, and having been satisfied I was examining the
                        body of Mr. Kelly.   He was a fairly well built
                        individual and he had numerous tattoos scattered on his
                    G   arms and chest.   He had sorae tninor injuries:  a small
                        split on the left eyebrow; some patchy areas of
                        bruising of the left upper arm; and a bruise on the
                        back of the right hip.   He had numerous petechial
                        haemorrhages on the body and the face.     There was
                        intense congestion and I concluded that ne had died as
                        a result of traumatic asphyxia due to crushing in a
                        crowd.
                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                     DR. SIV A LOGAN ATI IAH

                                  There was no significant natural disease that
                             could have caused or contributed towards the deatfi,
                             sir.  There was sosne evidence of inhalation or
                             aspiration of vOiUit which is not uncoou-non in a crush
                             situation, sir, but it was not of such a degree as to
                             significantly contribute towards the death.

                        o. Yes.   Wow Dr. Siva, of course one of tne things that is
                           so distressing for everybody is that one imagines that
                           people in this situation are suffering for a great
                    B      length of tiae.   Gan you help ae as to the ...? - A.
                           Obviously the time will vary but in general in a
                           situation like this I would suspect that they would
                           lose consciousness quite rapidly, sir.   v ou are talking
                           in terras of 10, 15 seconds maybe.

                        0. And of course, once a person has lost consciousness for
                           whatever reason, he feels nothing further? - A. He
                           faels absolutely nothing, that is quite right, sir.

                        0. And a lot of these signs and symptoms which you have
                           described, the petechial haemorrhages and so on, would
                           in fact have developed? - A. Yes, it would certainly
                           develop over ....

                    D   0. After he has lost consciousness? - A. That is right,
                           yes.

                        0. And indeed the inhalation of the vomit may, in fact
                              probably have ___    - A. That is right, sir.

                        0   . ...occurred while he was unconscious because he would
                             have lost ___ - A. That again is very coraaoa in
                    E        unconscious patients too, yes.

                        Q. Right, so although it sounds awful, in fact    as far as
                           he was concerned, he raay not have perceived  it in that
                           way? - A. Sie probably didn't feel any of that, yes.

                                    THE CORONER:    Mr. Dawson?

                                          Cross-examined by MR. DAWSON:

                        0. Doctor, there are two questions that Mrs. Kelly has
                           asked sae to put to you: firstly, could you tell us
                           whether there was any evidence of fractures? - A. There
                           were no fractures.

                        Q. iJo fractures, thank you.  And secondly, is it possible
                           for you to be in any way, to help us in any way with
                           regard to the actual time of death because we know from
                           the schedule that was supplied by the West Midlands
                           Police that Mr. Kelly was in pen number 3 at 1455, and
                           the next reference to hira is at 1533, when Sergeant Cox
                           saw him actually on the pitch. - A. Yes.

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       DR. SIVALOGANATHAH
                                                                               J. KILLGCK


                        Q. Within that 3 $ minute period is it at all possible for
                           you to give us any indication? - A. Absolutely not,
                           there is no way.   It is impossible, sir.

                        Q. Thank you.

                                  THE COROHER:     fir. Fraser, is there anything you
                             want to ask?
                    B             MR FRASER:     Thank you, sir, no.

                                  THE CORONER:   I will look at you each ti.ne, Mr.
                             Fraser, just in case there is something that you want
                             to ask.

                                  HR FRASER:     I am obliged, sir.

                                   THE CORONER:   Dr. Siva, that is very kind of you.
                             iir. Dawson, Dr. Siva has with soae of the other
                             families, as indeed m o s t of the pathologists have, said
                             that if it would be helpful he would be willing to talk
                             to the families afterwards.

                                  MR. DAWSON:     Thank you.
                    D
                                  THE COROuER:   Do you feel that your client niight
                             wish to take that up?

                                  MR. DAiJSOW:    Yes, please, sir..

                        0.        THE CORONER:   Dr. Siva, would you be kind enough.
                             Ue obviously want the family here until we have
                    E        finished the Inquest, and then if you could see them. -
                             A. Yes, sir.

                             I am very uiuch obliged to you for your help,     thank you.

                                  THE CORONER:   Mrs. Siras, of course that applies
                             to you as well, if you want to see Dr. Siva either
                             together with Janice or separately, I a.*i sure Dr. Siva
                             will do everything he can to make life as easy as
                             possible for you.

                                         POL. SGT. JOHN KILL0C& Called

                                                 8y THE CORONER:

                                   THE WITNESS:   Sir, Sergeant John Killock of the
                             West Midlands Police.   At about 0335 hours on Saturday
                             15th April, 1939, Mrs. Janice Ann Kelly saw her coiaraon
                             lav? husband, Hr. Anthony Peter Kelly, leave their horae
                             to travel by coach to Sheffield.   He was to travel with
                             two friends, Michael Sullivan and Wayne Jenkins.

                                  Anthony was known to have a ticket for the semi
                             final match at Hillsborough and that upon their arrival
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                             J. KILLOCK


in Sheffield, which was at about 2 p.in., he and nis two
friends walked to tne Hillsborough Stadium arriving at
about 1435 hours.

     Anthony, iiicnael Sullivan and Uayne Jenkins joined
a large crowd outside the turnstiles at Leppings Lane.
Anthony and Hr. Sullivan became separated from Mr.
Jenkins before they both entered the ground via
turnstile B.

     At about 1450 hours Anthony and Michael Sullivan
went through the tunnel and slightly to the right into
enclosure number 3.

     At about 1455 hours both raen were being subjected
to intense crushing in the West Stand terracing and
were being gradually pushed towards the perimeter
fencing at the front of enclosure 3. This was the last
point where Michael Sullivan saw Anthony.   Shortly
afterwards Michael was pulled from enclosure 3 onto the
pitch, where he became unconscious.

     THE COROWER:    Can I stop you?  I think he says he
can't remember anything.   Ue assume that he became
unconscious. - A. vJe assume that, sir.

But anyway he has no recollection? - A. None at all,
sir.

Yes, thank you. - A. Michael Sullivan was subsequently
taken to hospital where he regained until the following
day.

     At about 1533 hours Police Sergeant Ian Cox was on
the pitch area when he saw a man he now knows to be
Anthony.  He was lying on the ground near to the
Leppings Lane goal.   Anthony's head was covered and
with assistance from two other Police Officers - sorry,
from other Police Officers, Police Sergeant Cox carried
Anthony towards the gymnasium which was being set up as
a temporary mortuary.   The Officers left Anthony to
assist other persons.

     Special Constable Steven Askham assisted to carry
Anthony into the gymnasiuai where, at 1501 hours, Dr.
Curpen certified life extinct.

     At 1710 hours Detective Constable Philip Pont
assumed responsibility for the body of Antrtony.  He
later escorted Anthony's body to the Medico-Legal
Centre, and confirmed the identification to Detective
Constable Ueigold.

     On Sunday 16th April 1989, both Mr. Wayne Jenkins
and Mrs. Elizabeth Sims, Anthony's mother, identified
Anthony.  If I can come back to the identification in a
moment, sir, I will continue.
                                                 J.   KILLOCK


0. Yes. - A. On Sunday 16th April 1989 Dr. Siva carried
   out an autopsy and submitted a report giving tne cause
   of death.

        As far as the identifications are concerned, sir,
   whilst there is no dispute whatsoever of the actual
   identification, there have been some discrepancies in
   the evidence as to the times the two identifications
   were .Made and the place at which those identifications
   were made.   If I can deal firstly with u'ayne Jenkins'
   identification - Anthony's friend - Wayne has made a
   statement saying that that identification was made by
   him at 7.30 a.m. here in this building at the Medico-
   Legal Centre.   Unfortunately that was shown initially
   on the summary as being at the Stadium, and lirs. Sims
   was under the impression from U'ayne tnat that
   identification was conducted at the Stadium.    I have
   caused Wayne to be seen again and confirmed from him
   tne time was 7.30 and from the description of the place
   where the identification took place, it is obviously
   this building.

        Furthermore, there exists an ambulance log which
   shows that Anthony's body was taken from the Stadium to
   the Medico-Legal Centre at 4.57 in the morning,
   therefore Anthony must have been here at 7.30.

        As far as Mrs. Sims' identification is concerned,
   initially the Officer who took the statement from Mrs.
   Sims, PC Glave, stated that that identification was
   made at 5.30 a.m.  ile subsequently realised that that
   was a mistake and it could not have been 5.30 a.m.   I
   have spoken to the Officer yesterday, sir, and he
   apologises for any error that has been caused.
   Obviously he was dealing with a number of
   identifications that morning.   He assumed that 5.30
   a.m. was incorrect, and mistakenly assumed that he had
   made a mistake in the a.m. and p.m.   He thought the
   time should be 5.30 p.m. and he amended that by way of
   a statement.

         Ue know, sir, that the identification could not
   nave been made at 5.30 p.m.   I have spoken to lirs. Sims
   and as far as she recalls, the identification was made
   at round about 8.30 in the morning, Sunday morning, the
   16th.   PC. Glave says that he cannot recollect the
   exact time.   He has made no other note other than the
   mistaken one in the statement.   He is quite content
   that 8.30 would probably be the time.   I hope that
   clears that up.

0. Yes.  I suppose a possibility is that - sometimes my
   fives look a little bit like eights - I wonder if it is
   worth at some point having a real good look at PC
   Glave's .... - A. In the original statement it does
   appear to be five, sir.



                        -   7 -
                                                                             J. KILLOCK
                                                                              M. LAYTON


                        0. Does it appear to be five?  Uell I hoped that :naybe we
                           would find poor handwriting. - A. No, sir.

                        Q. But firs. Sisns is quite sure that it was 8.30. That
                           seeais to make sense. - A. She is - round about 3.30.

                        0. Yes, and her recollection, as I understand it, is that
                           she did identify her son to PC Glava, and it is a
                           matter o£ the ti«ie which has been at issue here? - A.
                    B      Purely the time, yes, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:      Mr. Dawson, any questions?

                                 Mil. DAWSON:      Ho, thank you, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:      Mr. Fraser?

                                  MR FRASER:    Mo, sir, but thank you, Officer, for
                             the clarification.   It was obviously something tnat
                             caused sorae distress to the family and will you thank
                             the Officer concerned?

                                  THE WITNESS:      I will, sir, yes.

                    D                  Cross-exasiined by MS. NORCLIFFE:

                        Q. Belinda Norcliffe, for the Chief Constable of the South
                           Yorkshire Police.  I wonder, Officer, just for the
                           record, if there is, if there was found w i t h i n t h e
                           personal effects possibly a half ticket or a ticket
                           counterfoil? - A. I don't think there was, sir, but I
                           will just check.  No, sir, there is no record of any
                    E      tickets being found in Anthony's personal effects.

                        0.        THE CORONER:   Yes, but in paragraph 2 it says,
                             “Mr. Kelly was known to have a ticket ...." - A. Yes,
                             that comes from the evidence of 'Jayne Jenkins and
                             Michael Sullivan.

                        0. Yes.  I think you said they went through the
                           turnstiles, didn't they? - A. Turnstile B, yes.       Affain
                           that is the evidence of Uayne and Michael.

                                  MS. NORCLIFFE:      Thank you.

                                      DET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                                                   3y TBS CORONER:

                                  THE WITNESS:    Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
                             Inspector, West Midlands Police.    Sir, an examination
                             has been aiade of video filra and photographic evidence
                             and Anthony has been identified in the process of being
                             lifted froju enclosure number 3 by a number of
                             unidentified Police Officers, and that, sir, is tiraed
                             at 1528.   Sir, that sequence is shown on a BBC video
                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                          I-!. LAYTON

                          tape which has been given tha reference number .'SAP 7,
                          and as I have said, timed at 1523:17:24.

                               Sir, Hr. Kelly has also been identified lying on
                          the pitch near to, in fact outside, gate nuiaber 3, and
                          that is shown on a further BBC video tape, again
                          reference MAP 7, 1531:20:01.

                               On a photograph, sir, which has been given the
                          reference number PR7/11, Anthony is shown being carried
                    B     across the pitch on a temporary stretcher, and Police
                          Sergeant Cox has confirmed his identification.  The
                          Officer has signed a plan of the pitch area indicating
                          the approximate location at which he found Anthony, and
                          that plan, sir, is referenced IRC1.

                               Mr. John Liam Boyle, a nurse, was a spectator at
                          the aatch and went onto the pitch to assist casualties.
                          He attempted resuscitation on two casualties but
                          without success.  Mr. Boyle has viewed photographs of
                          Anthony and has identified hi.Ti as one of the men that
                          he attempted to resuscitate.    Ha has signed a plan of
                          the pitch indicating the point at which he attended to
                          Anthony, and that, sir, is reference JLB2.

                    D           Mrs. Janice Kelly has viewed visual evidence and
                          she has identified Anthony on a photograph,
                          specifically referring to a photograph PR1/10A.    I
                          should perhaps add, sir, that Mrs. Siais has also had
                          tne opportunity of seeing this photograph, and I think
                          I ain right in saying they both agree that it is
                          Anthony.   Sir, that photograph shows hira in enclosure
                          number 3 and it is timed at 1503, which aay assist the
                    E     earlier question.

                        Q. So in fact - and we do think that he was alive at that
                           point? - A. I would say at that stage he is still
                           alive, sir.

                        0. Yes, as far as one can tell? - A. As far as you can
                           tell, yes, sir.

                                Sir, can I refer you to a plan which has been
                           given the reference number MUJL77, which is a plan of
                           the terraces?

                        0. Yes, and that will be C119. - A. And a further plan,
                           sir, HWJL78, which is a plan of the pitch area.

                        Q. C120. - A. I don't know, sir, whether you wish to refer
                           to any of the other plans at all?

                        0. I will just have a quick look.   I think we will have
                           Mr. iioyle's because he said he attempted resuscitation.
                           - A. Yes, sir, that is JLB2.

                H
                                                _   9   _

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                              ;i. LAYTOH


                        Q. And that will be €121.

                              (The witness referred to the large scala plan)

                           - A. Sir, if I can refer to the plan MWJL77, and
                           specifically the first --- this is enclosure nu.nber 3,
                           ciwv* specifically in r
                           and                        --lation tophotograph
                                                                  thi ^_    PR1/10A,
                           the location at which Anthony is saown is approximately
                           here.    There is a further video identification on a
                           video tape MAP 7, which is to all intents and purposes
                    B      virtually next to that spot, again in enclosure nuinber
                           3.    If I deal with John Liam Boyle's plan first, JLB2,
                           the point at which he locates being concerned with
                           Anthony is at that point there on the pitch, and then
                           referring to the plan MUJL78, the point at which
                           Anthony is shown on video on the pitch, first of all,
                           is there, very near to Gate 3, and then there is also a
                           photograph which we have referred to, which shows hirn
                           being carried across the pitch and that is about there.
                           In fact, if you can bear with ;ne for one second I can
                           perhaps give you a tiaie for that photograph.

                        0. Yes. -   A. Yes, sir, that is ti.Tied at 1535.

                        0. Just point where it is, if you would be kind enough -
                    D      1535, I think you said? - A. 1535.  That is in this
                           location here.

                                THE CO ROMEi.l:     Mr. Dawson, any questions of the
                           Officer?

                                 MR. DAWSOil:      Mo, thank you.

                    E           THE CORONER:        Mr. Fraser?

                                 Mil FRASER:      No,    thank you.

                                THE COROWER:   Thank you very jnuch. As I
                           understand it, Janice, you have got some children as
                           well, haven't you?

                                 MRS. J. A. KELLY:           Yes.

                                THE CORONER:   So really we have got a very, very
                           tragic situation here because we have got mum and dad
                           who have lost a son; we have got Janice wno has lost
                           her husband; and then we have got the children who have
                           lost their father, and that is obviously very sad
                           because there is a big - loads of family connections,
                           all of whom have lost somebody who has been very
                           precious to them, and I want you to know that as far as
                           I am able to acknowledge it I do acknowledge that you
                           have all suffered a raost grievous, grievous loss in
                           losing this lad in this disaster.

                                 MR. DAWSOH:   May I just say, sir, that the family
                           ■would like to express their grateful thanks to all
                H

                                                        - 10 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        tixose who attempted to help iir. Kelly on the day, and
                        also to yourself and to your staff and to the uest
                        .iid lands Police for the sensitivity in conducting these
                        proceedings.

                             THE GO ROW Eii: Well that is exceedingly kind of
                        you to say that, and on behalf of everybody, including
                        myself, I accept it with great gratitude and humility.
                        Thank you very much indeed.
                    B        UR FRASER:   Sir, those sentiments are, of course,
                        snared entirely by l i e s . Sicas.

                             THE CO ROWER:     Indeed, thank you, Mr. Fraser, and
                        the saoie cooiaient, of course, applies.

                             Can I just say one other thing to Mrs. Sims
                        particularly, because in a sense you have had all the
                        added things about the timings with the identification
                        and so on.   I am very sorry that these things happened
                        but at the time, last year, we thought about what to
                        do.  I aai not saying we thought of everything "but we
                        thought about it, and one of the things that I realised
                        right fro;a the word go, that if we were going to try
                        and release people's bodies to their loved ones, so
                    D   that the funerals could take place, and so that the
                        bodies could go back hooie, w would have to take, it
                        you like, risks and cnaybe snake a few rais takes, and I
                        knew that we would be having a further hearing at some
                        point or other, and I thought wall never :aind, we will
                        correct the errors then rather than wait until we have
                        got everything completely right, and I thinic - people
                        aay not necessarily agree with me - but I still th im c
                    E   that tnat was the right decision taken overall, but I
                        accept that of course it does add a bit to your stress.

                             I asn going to rise again for just a aiOujent and we
                        will have the next Inquest and then we are going to
                        have lunch.


                         (The Inquest into the death of ANTHONY PETER KELLY
                                was adjourned to a date to be fixed)




                H
                                              - 11 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
