OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and tim e raised                               Number

    rn<2DS~
jitie                                        C_TJ         N >^T           C o u <~o A^SAc:^ e^^-—
                                                                                                i____A
{[include source and any document number i f relevant)                              ^     ^ > “0

 Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                 Receiver




                                                                                                                     Indexer
 Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                             Statem ent Reader
 Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                     Indexer
 Indexed as indicated               cTX                  o t-^   .

 No(s) of actions raised

                                                                                                                ’M         S IO
 Examined - furth er action to be taken




                                                                                                                     Indexer
 Further action No(s)


 When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


              COLIN MARK ASHCROFT




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER,   LL.B, B.MED.Sci,    B M , B S , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Co r o n e r )




                        At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                        On

               26th April,     1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                                     INDEX

                                                                          Page


                         LEGAL SUBMISSION BY HR. FRASER (in the absence
                            of the Jury)                                     1
                     B
                         THE CORONER'S RULING                                3


                         OPElilaG STATEMENT BY THE COROflER


                         DR. S. SIVALOGAHATUAJ CALLED

                            By The Coroner


                         PET. SGT. J. APPLETQtt Called

                            By The Coroner
                     D
                         PET. IilSP. MICHAEL LAYTOii Called

                            By The Coroner                                  10



                     E




                     F




                     G




                     H

J. L. H arpham Ltd
                         26th A pr i l » 1990


                             INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF COLIK MARK ASHCROFT


                              li.’
                                 v FRASER:   Sir, before v/e start the day's
                         proceedings, a .natter has been brought to my attention
                         overnight.    It is a matter which has legal implications
                         and perhaps, sir, in the circumstances it would better
                     B   if I addressed you on that problem in the absence of
                         your Jury.

                              THE CQROUER:   In other words, it is a legal
                         submission you are wanting to make?

                               iill FRASER:     Yes, sir.
                     C         THE COROi! 15R: Ladies and gentlemen, this is the
                         first tiine this has happened at this Inquest, but it
                         can happen more than once.    What normal practice is
                         that when solicitors or counsel want to address me on a
                         point of law we ask you to go out because you are to
                         find the points of fact, and so we d o n ’t want you, in a
                         sense, to"listen to the legal argument.     when that has
                     D   been resolved then we will bring you back.     If there is
                         something that has to be said to you as a result of the
                         submission then I will say it so that you know where
                         you are.   If not we will just proceed.    It depends on
                         what iir. Fraser has to say - I can't tell you.    So if
                         you would like to go back we will ask you to come back
                         as soon as we are in a position to do so.     I don't know
                         how long that will be because it depends upon the
                     E   argu.neat.

                              HR FRASER:    Sir, while the Jury is leaving, can I
                         just assure iir. and iSrs. Ashcroft this has nothing to
                         do with them?   I see a look of slight anxiety.   It has
                         nothing to do with the first family.

                              THE COROiiER:  Yes.  You have heard that?    You are
                     F   very welcome to stay because you aren't Jurors.    You
                         don't have to if you want to leave but these things do
                         happen from time to time.  You slight, as wall stay and
                         hear.what Mr. Fraser has to say.

                                        (In the absence of the Ju r y )

                              MR FRASER:   Sir, it has been brought to m y
                     G   attention overnight that a Member of your Jury has what
                         appears to be
                                 I am not a local man but I understand that that
                         motif indicates that he may well be a fairly keen
                         supporter of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

                              The people who instruct me are, of course,
                     H   solicitors, but there is of course, as you know, a


                                                      1.
J. L. H arpham Ltd
group who support the families, the Hillsborough Family
Support Group, and this information has cope through
them, sir.  They are concerned because of the presence
of this Juror that the individual may not have
responded properly to the question you put to the Jury
as part of the swearing in process on the opening day.
For the sake of the record, sir, the question that you
put whica causes them concern, and I read from the
transcript of the first day's evidence, sir, the
question was:

     "Do you any of you know   any other reason which I
     may not nave put to you   why you feel you are
     disqualified and may be   biased in dealing with the
     evidence which you will   be hearing in relation to
     these deaths?"

and m y instructions are to put the emphasis on the word
"biased", sir.

     It is, of course, a matter for you.  I can
identify the Juror by description only.  I have no
knowledge of him individually.  Neither do any members
of the Family Support Group, but the presence of this
motif has been noticed by more than one member of that
group and its presence concerns them.

     THE COROWER:    Yes, anything else you want to say
on that?

     HR FRASER:   Sir, it is a matter for you in the
light of that information what steps you take.  I am
simply instructed to draw it to your attention.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, indeed.   Ur. Fraser may I ask
you, perhaps you can just confirm that my understanding
is correct, can you just remind me of the teams that
were playing on this particular day, 15th April 1939?

     HR FRASER:   Nottingham Forest Football Club were
playing a semi final cup match against Liverpool
Football Club at Sheffield Wednesday's ground, sir.

     THE COROWER:   And is it correct, and again I am
asking you for your assistance in this, that the venue
was chosen by, I believe, the Football Association, is
tnat right?

     HR FRASER:     It was, as I understand it, sir, yes.

     THE CORONER:   And is it right that - I am not
asking you to give evidence but just to see whether you
would accept this - that in fact the reason why the
game is not played at either Nottingham or Liverpool is
because an independent venue is sought by the Football
Association, as far as they can achieve it?
                                 dil FiiASCil:   I understand that to be correct, sir,
                         ye s.

                              TiiE COtiOiiER: Thank you, Sir. Fraser, I am obliged
                         to you for your help.   Before I say what I fael, shall
                         we work our way through in case you want to address ae
                         on the submission which has been made?    (;lo response)

                              i'ir. Fraser, I have listened to you with interest
                         and I entirely accept that if you are instructed to
                     B   raise a .natter then you must do so, because it would be
                         improper for you not to, and I want you to understand
                         that I fully and entirely accept the need for you to
                         rise and make a point.

                              I must confess I have not noticed the motif, but
                         we have not stripped the Jurors, and for all I know •
                     C   there are other members of the Jury who have got all
                         kinds of tattoos on thair arms, or other marks which
                         may indicate a relationship either with Sheffield
                         Wednesday, or indeed any other football club.

                               Secondly, a l though it is possible, of course, to
                         construe a tattoo                 as meaning a keenness of
                         support, it does not necessarily follow that something
                     D   which a person perhaps in his youth - and we don't know
                         because I am not going to as k tne Juror when this
                         tattoo was p u t _____________ - but another construction
                         which one could construe that this had been put on at
                         soiae earlier time, and it is an inference to say tnat
                         that means that this man is a keen supporter of
                         Sheffield Wednesday.     So although it is possible, and I
                         am not saying that that is not the case, it is also
                     E   perfectly possible to take the view that he is not,
                         that this is the main thing, and the short answer is
                         that we don't actually know what his affiliation or his
                         feelings with regard to football and Sheffield
                         Wednesday in particular are.

                              Three, if - you may sit down, by the way, Mr.
                         Fraser.  Don't feel that you have to stand.   Even if
                     F   the Juror were a supporter of Sheffield t/ednesday, and
                         it would not surprise me if there are not Jurors there
                         who have got an interest in football to a certain
                         extent, I have no idea, it isn't a matter for me to
                         enquire, it does not follow that that means that he
                         will be biased.  On the contrary the question was
                         specifically put, as you very rightly reminded me,
                         right at the opening where I put an open-ended
                     G   question, and I specifically mentioned to the Jurors
                         that they should declare any circumstances which they
                         knew which might bias them and prevent them from
                         bringing in a verdict according to the evidence, and
                         the Jurors, as you know, as we all know, none of them
                         responded to that particular invitation, and perhaps I
                         should add at this stage that all the Jurors, in fact,
                     H   knew that we had a large surplus, if I can use that


                                                    -   3   -


J. L. H arpham Ltd
expression, of potential Jurors in the Jury Room to
cover that contingency, so it was not that the Jury or
tne Jurors were under any pressure to feel that "If I
drop out tnen the Coroner can't proceed or the
proceedings will not go ahead".

     I have already put to you, and you have very
kindly agreed, tnat the object, or the objective of
having the .-natch in Sheffield was to choose a neutral
ground, as far as one can within the fraternity of
football, and as you will remember I did realise that
because there were certain implications and various
matters nad been suggested at Lord Justice Taylor's
Inquiry, it would be wise not to have people who were
closely related to any of, what I would call main
actors at the football ground, but I think that mere
support of a football team and an indicator of that on
a hand does not constitute by itself such bias or
prejudice as to disqualify that parson from listening
to evidence and bringing in a verdict in accordance
with it, when the time comes for that to be done.

     So in all the circumstances I have to tall you
that I do not accept your submission and I do not
propose to disqualify this Juror from the proceedings
and I will proceed with the matter in hand with the
Jury as constituted.

        Is there anything else you want to say to me on
that?

        HR FRASER:     Wo, sir.   So be it.   Thank you for
that.

     HR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, before you call the Jury
back in would you just give me a few seconds to have a
quick word with Hr. Fraser?

        THE CORONER:     Of course.

     iiR. CATCHPOLE: It may well be he will want to
make some further submissions.  (Mr. Catchpole
conferred with Mr. Fraser.) Thank you tor that, sir.

     THE CORONER:        Is there anything you want to say
to me, fir. Fraser?

     Hit FRASER:   Yes, it is a matter of some delicacy,
sir.   We have aired the problem before you in the
absence of the Jury, but of course the press are free
to report these proceedings.   It may be that if the
Jury read a press report ....

        THE CORONER:   That is a very good point,     tnank
you.     I had not thought of that.
                              HR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, what I was concerned about
                         was not only that but in particular that it was a
                         member of the families, in case the Jury got the
                         impression tnat the families were objecting to a member
                         of the Jury.

                               THE COKOWEii:   Indeed, I think that that is a very
                         valid point.    I don't know whether any press are
                         actually in the Court at the moment?    Are there? Yes,
                     B   and there may, of course, be members of the press in
                         our Press Room/Portacabin, for those of you who know
                         where it is.    I think that this is a very important
                         point and I would be very grateful if you did not
                         report this interjection because of course it would
                         completely defeat tne objective, which is for the legal
                         submissions not to be dealt with in the presence of the
                     C   Jury?

                               I prefer not to give directions but merely to
                         request, but may I put it this way, that the request is
                         tantamount to saying it must not be reported.   You can
                         report it when the Inquests are all over but not at the
                         moment because it would be upsetting for the Jurors,
                         and it would not be helpful, I am quite certain of
                     D   that.

                              Are you satisfied with what I have said to the
                         press?

                              MR FRASER:    Yes, thank you, sir.

                              THE COROWER:   Right, shall we have the Jury back?
                     E   I will just tell them that the point has been resolved.


                                     (In the presence of the Ju r y )

                              THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, the point has
                         been resolved.  I don't think there is any need, or at
                         least I have taken the decision tnere is no need for me
                     F   to say any more   than that. Yes, Hr. Fraser.

                              MR FRASER:Sir, the       first case which you will
                         hear this morning relates to Colin Asncroft.      Colin's
                         mum and dad are in Court this morning, and they have
                         with them two social   workers who have been supporting
                         them since they   lost their son.
                     G        I appear, sir, as a member of the Steering
                         Committee, as agent for thair own solicitors who are
                         members of our group.

                              THE CORONER:   Mr. and Mrs. Ashcroft, good
                         morning.  Forgive the little interlude.   Let me explain
                         to you what is going to happen so that you know the
                     H   procedure and then you will be able to follow it more


                                               -   5   -


J. L. H arpham Ltd
easily.   First of all, I am going to read to you the
evidence which I took at the opening when I first
opened this, which was in fact on the 19th April, 1989,
and I will read it to you exactly as it is written
down.   There may be a few errors in it.  If there are
we will correct them.   we knew that mistakes raight
occur but I read all the mistakes as well and then I
correct it, okay, so don't be upset if you hear
anything which you think can't be right.

     Then I will tell you what the alcohol levels are
as Dr. Forrest has told me in the opening.  Then we are
going to listen to Dr. Siva.  Dr. Siva's name is a bit
longer than that but he has very kindly allowed us to
shorten it because it is easier to pronounce. You
don't mind, Dr. Siva, do you?

     DR. SIVA:    No, sir.

     THE CORONER:   And when Dr. Siva has given his
evidence we will hear the presenting Officer who v/ill
tell us what she has got in her summary and what it is
appropriate for me to hear.  Then. Inspector Layton will
take us through the visual evidence and when that is
all done we will stop taking any further evidence at
this stage.

     Now you will hear - I keep on forgetting this -
particularly when Inspector Layton gives evidence,
references to plans and numbers and rather complicated
things like that.   They are very confusing.  Ue need
them because we need to get then into the transcript.
Try when you listen to ignore those nurabers and just
concentrate on the sense rather than the
technicalities.   I like to warn you of that because
otherwise you think, "uhat's he talking about?*', but he
can't help it because I am making him do it that way.

      This, then, ladies and gentlemen, is trie resumed
Inquest which was opened on 19th April, 1989.    On that
occasion Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting Coroner's Officer,
said:

     "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has
     been identified to DC Liversidge of the South
     Yorkshire Police as that of Colin Mark Ashcroft by
     Janet P. Ashcroft, his mother.    tie w a s 19 years of
     age, having been born on 3th June 1969 at
     Colchester.    He was a single man and he lived at
                                       Warrington.     He
     w a s a gardener by occupation.

     He died at the Hillsborough Football Ground
     following an incident there on Saturday 1.5th
     ApriL, 19ti9. PS 2620 Cropley caused the body to
     be removed to the iiedico-Legal Centre and there he
     identified it to Detective Constable Simon Ueigold
                                                                                                            DR. S. SIVALOGAWATHAN


                                    who subsequently identified the same body to Dr.
                                    Sivaloganathan.  It is the family wish that the
                                    body should be cremated."

                                    Then you probably remember that I wrote to you and
                               asked you to have a look at the form and check it, that
                               we had got all the information right, and in fact it
                               was you who signed it, mum, wasn't it, and we nad got
                               it all right apart from the postal code, but there is
                               actually - and we have got a spelling mistake in it
                         B     which you did not notice, it is gardener isn't it, his
                               occupation and we have left an "e" out.    I have
                               corrected that now.   T he address is
                                      is tnat right,
                                      ■   *   »   •   »-»   »j
                                                                 in Warrington.
                                                                  j       |
                                                                                 There
                                                                          _____________________________ |          —r

                               is arperror on it to do with the identification, on the
                               opening, but we will deal with that when the Officer
                               comes.
                         C          The alcohol was estimated by i)r. Forrest and he
                               gave the evidence regarding everybody on the first day
                               and as far as Colin was concerned the result was
                               negative.

                                      Kow, Dr. Siva - Dr. Siva has already taken the
                               oath in respect of all the Inquests so he is just going
                         D     to introduce himself and then take us through the post
                               mo r tera.

                                      DR. SQi-iASUHDivU.li SIV A LO G A N AI iI A il Called:

                                                                 Sy   THE COROHER:

                                    THE UITWESS:   Dr. Sivaloganathan, I am a
                         E     registered medical practitioner, Lecturer in Forensic
                               uedicine at the University of Leeds and a Home Office
                               Pathologist for West Yorkshire.

                                    At your request, sir, I performed a post mortem
                               examination on the body of Colin Hark Ashcroft, aged
                               19, on 16th April 1939.  The body at that stage was
                               identified to me by Detective Inspector Timms, to whom
                         F     the body had apparently been identified by DC Weigold.
                               I also checked for the identity on the basis of the
                               photograph and the number and the name on the body
                               itself, sir.

                             0. So you definitely satisfied yourself .... - A. I did,
                                sir.
                         G   0. That this lad we are now talking about is Colin
                                Ashcroft and that he was identified as, I think, case
i
                                5? - A. That is right, sir.

                             0. Yes, Dr. Siva, please press on. - A. He had                                             a few minor
                                injuries which were of no real consequence,                                             sir, one on
                                the under surface of the cnin and the other                                             on the
                         H      legs.  He had died as a result of traumatic                                             asphyxia


                                                                      -       7     -


    J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                                    DR. S. SltfALOGAriATHAii
                                                                               J. APPLETOw


                              resulting from crushing in a crowd, sir.       There was no
                              other natural disease ....

                         Q. No natural disease at all. - A. That would cause or
                            contribute towards the death, sir.




                     B




                     D
                                   THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser.

                                   MR FRASER:     Sir, Colin's family have no questions
                              but   I wonder if Dr. Siva could perhaps agree to spend a
                              few minutes with the' family when ha has finished giving
                              his evidence? They would like to talk to him just for
                              some reassurance.
                     E
                         Q.        THE COROHER:   I am sure, Dr. Siva, you would be
                              willing to do that? - A. A pleasure, sir.

                         Q. Can you remind me, are you in the next Inquest? - A. I
                            am in the next one, yes.

                                   THE COROWER:    Will it be in order, Mr. and Mrs.
                              Ashcroft, if we start the next Inquest, listen to Dr.
                              Siva, and then he will come and join you and spend
                              time, otherwise we keep the other families waiting.
                              Thank you, Dr. Siva.

                                        PET. SGT. JULIE APPLETOM Called:

                                                  By THE CORPSER:
                     G
                                     THE WITNESS:   Sir, Julie Appleton, Detective
                              Sergeant in the Uest Midlands Police.    At about 0800
                              hours on Saturday 15th April, 1989, Mrs. Janet Patricia
                              Ashcroft saw her son Colin Mark Ashcroft leave tne
                              family home, with the intention of travelling to
                              Siief field.  Colin was known to have a ticket for the
                     H

J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                                       J. APPLETOU


                          Cup Semi Final football match and was to travel on a
                          coach organised by Liverpool Supporters Travel Club.

                               Mr. Stanley Rittenberg is a steward for the
                          Anfield Travel Club and he confirms that Colin
                          travelled on his coach, and they arrived in Sheffield
                          at about 1410 hours.

                               Following the severe crushing in the Leppings Lane
                          terracing Police Constable David Butler entered Gate 4,
                    B     and he picked up a man he now knows to be Colin fro«i
                          the terrace.  The Officer carried hits onto the pitch
                          and attempted resuscitation but without success.

                               A doctor, who has not been identified, checked
                          Colin and declared life extinct.  Police Constable
                          Butler left Colin at this stage and went to assist
                          other people.  He left Colin with a Policewoman who has
                    C
                          not been identified.

                               Police Constable Andrew McKay was assisted by
                          others to carry Colin across the pitch on a hoarding to
                          the rear of the ilorth Stand.

                               Police Sergeant Paul Cropley assisted by others,
                    D     including Police Constable Martin Uheatley, carried
                          Colin to the gymnasium where a temporary iaortuary had
                          been set up.

                               Police Sergeant Cropley was present at 1605 hours
                          when Dr. Alan Paul Redgrave examined Colin in   the
                          temporary uiortuary where he certified life extinct.

                    E           Police Sergeant Cropley later escorted the body of
                          Colin to the Medico-Legal Centre and identified the
                          body by reference number to Detective Constable Simon
                          iJeigold.

                               At 1900 hours on Sunday 16th April 1939 Mrs. Janet
                          Patricia Ashcroft identified the body of her son to
                          Detective Constable David Ian Liversidge.  This was at
                    F     the Uedico-Legal Centre.

                               On Sunday 16th April 1989, Dr. Siva carried out an
                          autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of death.

                                Found in the personal effects of Colin was a part
                           ticket for the raatch but in the circumstances it cannot
                           be established how or when Colin entered the stadiura.
                    G
                               That is the end of iay evidence, sir.

                        Q. I think I am right in saying that Colin was on this
                           coach but in fact he was on his own, he was not with a
                           group, that is right, isn't it? - A. That is correct,
                           yes.
                    H
                                                _   9   _

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                          J. APPLETON
                                                                            II. LAYTON


                         0. And perhaps we could just turn to page 3 for a minute?
                            This is Stanley Rittenberg, that is the steward who
                            organised, or at least who was the organiser on this
                            particular outing.   He, of course, was not with Colin
                            but ha does say, I think, he is the one who tails us
                            what tiiae the coach arrived, 2.10? - A. That is
                            correct, sir, yes.

                     B   0. Yes, and although it does not tall us what time Colin
                            got to the stadium, he says he got there about 2.40,
                            doesn't he? - A. Yes.

                         0. About four lines,   five lines up? - A. Yes, sir.

                         0. That does not mean that Colin got there either bafore
                            or after but it is just what tisae this man got there.

                                 THE COROHERs     Mr. Fraser?

                                 MR FRASER:     The family have no questions, sir,
                            thank you.

                                     PET. INSP. MICHAEL LA¥T0rt Called:

                     D                          By TH£ CORONER:

                                 THE WITNESS:     Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
                            Inspector, West Midlands Police.    Sir, an examination
                            has been iviade of video and photographic evidence, and
                            Colin has been identified being carried across the
                            pitch on a hoarding.    Police Constable Butler has
                            viewed visual evidence and he has confirmed that Colin
                     E      was the person that he carried frorsi enclosure number 4.

                                 Sir, on a video film, which in fact is a BBC tape,
                            which has been given the reference MAP 1, 15.25 and 17,
                            so that is timed, it is 15.25 hours, 17 seconds, sir,
                            together with a number of still photographs.  These
                            show a number of Officers carrying Colin across the
                            pitch on a hoarding.  Police Constable McKay has
                            confirmed this identification and in fact Police
                            Constables Adams, Goddard, Hodgkinson and a spectator,
                            Anthony Garrity, also refer to this identification.   In
                            fact, I think, sir, Hr. Garrity is a steward.

                         0. Yes. - A. Sir, Mr. Thomas Ashcroft, Colin's father, has
                            viewed visual evidence, in fact together with his wife,
                            and on a photograph which has been given the reference
                            number MWL10/36A, he has identified a person that he
                            believes may be his son.  Sir, if I can say, as in
                            keeping with many cases, that photograph does not show
                            a great deal of detail and whilst they believe it is
                            Colin they can't be absolutely sure.

                         Q. Yes, it is very, very difficult.  I have seen some of
                            the photographs, and it is exceedingly hard.  Is the
                 H
                                                   -   10   -

J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                                           21. LAYTOil


                            photograph timed? - A. It is, sic, yes.   It is timed,
                            sir, at 14.56.

                         Q. And that is a photograph outside the ground? - A. That
                            is right, sir, yes.   Sir, on a further photograph,
                            referenced Pi’2/21, which shows the ;.'est Stand
                            terracing, again the family have indicated a person
                            that they believe may be Colin, and at this stage Colin
                            is shown in enclosure number 3.   Again the sarae
                            situation occurs, sir, that there is very little detail
                     B      and it has been difficult for the family to be
                            absolutely sure.   With that in mind, sir, obviously
                            there appears to ba a difference in the sense of where
                            the Officer found Colin and where the photograpn shows
                            Colin.

                         0. Yes. - A. Sir, that photograph also will be timed and
                     C      that, sir, is timed at 1508.

                         0. 1508? - A. Yes.  IJhat I can say in respect of that,
                            sir, as you have heard already, it is true tnat people
                            were, in fact, passed from one enclosure to the other
                            on several occasions.

                                  Sir, can I refer you to a plan which has been
                     D      givesi the reference number I-i'JJL.149?

                         Q. Yes, C109. - A. This refers to the identification
                            outside the ground, sir.

                         0. Yes. - A. A second plan, Wi7JL127.

                         Q. CllO, isn't it? - A. Yes.   That refers, sir, to the
                     E      identification in enclosure number 3, and a further
                            plan, iH7JL7, which in fact refers to a plan of the
                            pitch and shows with particular reference to a
                            photograph PU5/3.   That photograph, sir, shows Colin
                            being taken across the pitch, and if you will just give
                            me a moment, sir ....

                         Q. That will be Clll. - A. Yes, sir, that photograph, sir,
                     F      is timed at 1526.

                         0. Before you demonstrate it, can I just ask you one
                            thing?  I think cay impression was that although the
                            Police Officers McKay and Cropley and wheatley did
                            identify themselves. - A. Yes.

                         0. There was a slight hesitation, would that be right, in
                     G      their identifications? - A. Yes, sir, again it has been
                            the case on a number of occasions.

                         0. That is not a criticism of them in any sense, but
                            sometimes the Officers can say, “Yes, I can see snyself
                            clearly, I know this is me"? - A. Yes.

                     H
                                                  -   11   -


J. L. H arpham Ltd
                                                                                 LAYTON


                        0. But in tnis particular case the/ nava done their best.
                           - A. That is right, yes.

                        Q. But if tney were challenged to say, “Can you say 100
                           per cent sure?", they would probably back off from
                           tnat, would that be right? - A. Possibly, sir, yes.

                        0. That is not to say that on balance we don't think in
                           fact the identifications are rigiht? - A. Oh, no, not at
                           all.
                    B
                              (The witness referred to the large scale plan)

                           Sir, if I can refer you to the plan MUJL149, that is
                           the plan indicating the identification outside the
                           ground, the position that we believe Colin is shown at
                           that time is in this location h e r e , very close, in
                           fact, to Gate C. Then, sir, referring to the plan
                           M17JL127, tnat is the identification in enclosure number
                           3 on the photograph.   The point at which Colin is
                           believed to be shov/n is approximately he re. Then sir,
                           dealing with the plan MUJL7, specifically in relation
                           to the photograph I have referred to, PR5/3, as I have
                           said in the smaraary, sir, there are a number of
                           photograpns and video and they virtually depict the
                    D      same scene.

                        0. Yes, you picked that one? - A. Yes, and that is this
                           location here.

                                THE CORONER:     Mr. Fraser?

                                MR FRASER:     No questions, sir.   Taank you,
                    E      Officer.

                                 .THE CORONER:   Mr. and Mrs. Ashcroft, that is tne
                           evidence we are going to take.    I just want to explain
                           to you, the reason why I asked the Officer about the
                           doubts is not because I want to upset you but because
                           it is very easy to over present the evidence, and I did
                           not want you to walk away and say, that is absolutely
                           firm.    It is exceedingly difficult, as you yourself
                           have discovered when you have looked, to make
                           identifications and to say yes, that is the person I
                           was with at a particular point in time, so it is to be
                           expected that people cannot always be 100 per cent
                           sure,.but as far as we can tell - if we had thought it
                           \</as hopelessly wrong we would not have mentioned it at
                           all, but I just wanted to indicate tnat there was, the
                           way I described it was some hesitation in the way he
                           says, “Yes, I think this must be Colin".

                                I don't want you to go away upset, that is the
                           last thing I want you to do, not upset by what you have
                           heard, because of course you are going to go away upset
                           because this will have brought back to you the tragedy
                    H      which has happened to your fauiily, and you will of


                                                   12
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                         course have seen that   we have been dealing with plans
                         and numbers and one thing and another, but as far as I
                         am able I try to remember that we are dealing with
                         somebody, a real person, an individual precious to you,
                         I am most grateful to   you for being here this morning,
                         and we will terminate   at this stage.

                              Ladies and gentlemen, we are going to rise for as
                         brief a time as possible so that we can do the next
                         Inquest, because we are obviously a few minutes late.
                     B
                              Thank you very much indeed.    If you hang on, as
                         soon as Dr. Siva finishes I am 2 oin:> to release him and
                         then he will talk to you.


                          (The Inquest into the death of C O L I i i rSARiC ASHCROFT
                                 was adjourned to a date to be fixed)




                     D




                     E




                     F




                     H
                                                 -   13   -


J. L. H arpham Ltd
