                                                                                                                      M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                                    Date and tim e raised 2 J 2 -^                                Number

         t3-<25S'                                • f* \
T itle                                                         C TX-   S fM 6 rt& T                     <TogX»AoS^.-------Q£Z--------- t > \ C X ^ O

(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Yes/No                                                                                                          Receiver




                                                                                                                                                          Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                                                   Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                                                           Indexer
 Indexed as indicated                                     ov

 IN U \b /   U l   a i A i u u a   i d i a c u


                                                                                                                                                       O/M          SIO
 Examined - further action to be taken
                                                                                                                                                   <Y
                                                                                                                                                       1 53 1

                                                                                                                                                             Indexer
 Further action No(s)

 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                        1st    May   1990

                        STATEMENT BY THE CORONER TO YORKSHIRE POST NEWSPAPER

                                   THE CORONER:   There is a matter which I want to raise.
                              I think Mr. Chappell is here.
                    B
                                     MR. CHAPPELL:       Yes,   sir.

                                     THE    CORONER: Mr. Chappell,     you represent   Mr. Cross?

                                     MR.    CHAPPELL:   Yes, that      is right.

                                   THE CORONER:   Thank you.  Would you please sit down?
                    C         Mr. Chappell, my attention has been drawn to an article in
                              connection with proceedings at these Inquests and, in fact,
                              it was published yesterday on 30th April.  Having read the
                              particular article, I am rather disturbed because I think it
                              is not the reporting of these proceedings but I think it is
                              a very direct comment on the very question which we may be
                              asked to deal with during the hearing which at some point
                    D         the Jury may be required to form an opinion on.   In the
                              circumstances I am not happy with the situation.  Before I
                              say any more, do you wish to address me with regard to this
                              matter?

                                   MR. CHAPPELL:     Sir, I just wish to say on behalf of
                              Yorkshire Post Newspapers Limited, there was no intention by
                              the writer of the article or the company to prejudice these
                    E         proceedings and I would hope no such prejudice has occurred
                              or can be inferred.

                                     THE CORONER:       I am sorry?

                                   MR. CHAPPELL:   It is hoped no such prejudice has
                              occurred or can be inferred from the article.
                    F              THE CORONER:     I think, bearing in mind the time-scale,
                              it is probable that no prejudice will have been incurred but
                              I don't think it would be right to say on a reading of that
                              article, if it was further down the line, undoubtedly
                              prejudice might well have been caused and I am quite certain
                              that if this was not a Coronal Court but a Crown Court the
                              Editors would not possibly have considered publishing
                              comments of this nature.   I don't want to ask you for an
                    G         undertaking but can I have your assurance that the paper
                              will exercise the greatest of restraint and bearing in mind
                              these are active proceedings in terms of the Contempt of
                              Court Act and that until we have completed the matter they
                              will refrain from publishing anything which could be
                              construed as prejudicing the proceedings of this Court?

                H                  MR. CHAPPELL:   Yes, certainly.  We are prepared to
                              give that assurance and the Editor of the newspaper will


J. L. Harpham Ltd
take your comments to heart.

     THE CORONER:    Thank you very much indeed.   Ladi es and
gentlemen, perhaps 1 had better explain to you.    What has
happened is that an article in this paper has been drawn to
my attention.   It cont ained comments on various matters
which I felt went beyond was proper bearing in mind that we
are in the middle of an Inquest-    I know we are not reaching
a conclusion at the end of this session and that I accept
puts the Press in some difficulty because these proceedings
are drawn out.   I don't deny that but nevertheless there are
proceedings, there are matters which are proceeding, which
are current, and it is very very important that the Press
should exercise proper restraint and apply the criteria
which one would apply to any Court proc eedings which is
current to these proceedings.

      Now as far as you are concerned, I remind you, and I
will remind you again when we get nearer to the time, that
the only evidence which is of any relevance when it comes to
reaching a verdict is the evidence which you hear in this
Court.   I have already asked you not to discuss the case.  I
cannot tell you to cease to read papers or not watch TV
because that is a totally impractical proposition but if you
were to see anything then it doesn't really matter what
people say or think.   The important thing is what you hear
and what you think in the light of the evidence that you
hear.   So I will remind you of this when we get to the point
but I am telling you now.

       Fir. Chappell, I am exceedingly reluctant to take
matters further and I am quite prepared to accept what you
have said and I am content as far as the paper is concerned.
I am obliged to you for being here.     I do want you to repeat
what was said.     Obviously you cannot give undertakings on
behalf of the Press in general but the Press in general can
hear what you have said and I expect the rest of the Media
(I had better not just say Press but Media) to comply
strictly with the provisions of the Contempt of Court Act.
I d o n ’t have to spell those out to you.  The Media know
those almost certainly better than I do.     I don't have to
warn you about this but the Media do because they are also
reporting throughout the country and throughout the Courts.
Please don't let it happen again.     We want these Inquests
conducted with dignity.

      I am not trying to stop the Press from doing their job
but until we have completed the Inquest the rules have to be
applied.   If - and I don't expect it will happen - a further
issue like this were brought to my attention then I really
think I would have no option but to go the next stage which,
of course, the Media will be familiar with and I don't want
to do that.   It is not my wish to do it and it is not my
intention to do it but I do need the Media's co-operation.
                               Gentlemen, have you any comments to make? (no r e s p o n s e )
                        Mr.   Chappell, is there anything else you wish to say?

                               MR. CHAPPELL:     No,   sir.

                             THE CORONER:     I am obliged to you for being here.
                    B   Thank you, Mr. Cross.




                    C




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
