HER MAJESTY'S COROWER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRC6P

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

           25th January, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




DAVID MALCOLM BOWNES Recalled

  Further by THE   CORbNER ?                1.
  Cross-Examined   by MR. PAYNE             5.
  Cross-Examined   by MR. ISAACS           33.
  Cross-Examined   by MR. MANNING          39.
  Cross-Examined   by MR. KING             45.
  Cross-Examined   by MR. CATCHPOLE        49.
  Cross-Examined   by MISS SINCLAIR        51.
  Cross-Examined   by MRS. McBRIEN         55.
  Further by THE   CORONER                 61.
  Cross-Examined   by MR. MAXWELL          63.
            THIRTY EIGHTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

               FRIDAY, 25th JANUARY 1991


             DAVID MALCOLM BOWNES Recalled

                Further By THE CORONER:

Good morning.  Mr. Bownes, we left yesterday evening with
a question and I will repeat it for you because I have
the benefit of having got the transcript because it may
assist you.

      The question was:  "How would you define the role
of the Council in relation to safety at Hillsborough,
in particular with relation to the terrace?" Then I said:
"Do you want to think about it"? - A. The responsibilities
of a Council as Licensing Authority are set out in the
legislation, the Safety of Sportsgrounds Act 1975 as amended
and also the Safety of Sportsgrounds Regulations I believe
of 1987.  I can briefly run through those responsibilities
for you which I believe will answer your question.

      First of all there is a duty to determine whether or
not an Applicant for a Certificate is a qualified person,
in other words fit to run a particular sportsground.

      There is a duty on the Council to enforce the Act
and Regulations and to do this it must carry out annual
inspections of sportsgrounds.

      The Council must also impose conditions which it
deems to be necessary and expedient to secure reasonable
safety at sportsgrounds.

      There are also various other administrative duties
if you like in connection with Safety Certificates which
are perhaps not specifically relevant to the question.

      The Council also has some general powers which it
may exercise, the most important of which relates to
prohibition notices.  If the Council feels there is a
serious risk to spectators then it may, if it chooses to
do so, prohibit the use of either the whole sportsground
or part of it until that risk is abated.

      There are also one or two other minor options that
it can exercise, for example authorising Officers.

For example what, I didn't hear the last? - A. Authorising
Officers to inspect.

I see, yes.  Presumably you have not mentioned it because
it will be administrative matters, but to receive various
certificates from the holder or his engineers as to their
opinion as to the standard .... A. Yes, under the
Certificate conditions, that is quite right.
                                                       2


                                   . P.M. BOWNES ' '



Q. And you have already explained to me that the Council were
   endeavouring to effect this by the use of its Advisory
   Group or Working Party? - A. Yes.

Q. It seemed reasonably clear to me from Mr. Butler's evidence
   that he did not see himself as "the Council".  Would that
   be correct? - A. In a way I think that is probably right.
   He saw himself as an adviser in that sense.

Q. To the Council though he is in fact an internal employee?
   - A. An employee, yes.

Q. Prom what you said to me earlier Health and Consumer
   Services whom you I thinkfintroduced on to the Advisory
   Group? - A. Yes.

Q. Were really it sounded like a peripheral role advising
   on matters generally but did not take a lead.  Would that
   be correct? - A. I don't think that is wholly correct sir,
   no.  The Health and Consumer Services Department is the
   Enforcing Authority for Health and Safety at Work legislation
   and therefore has a great deal of expertise in general health
   and safety matters.  That expertise is of use to the Council
   in carrying out its certificating function.

Q. What I am trying to find out is that the Department which
   one would describe as "the Council"? - A. No sir.

Q. So that then simply leaves your Department within the
   structure which you have outlined.  Would it be right to
   say then that the Council would work through your Department?
   - A. Yes.

Q. And in fact because it always delegated through you, in
   effect? - A. Yes, in effect.

Q. So would it then be right to say that you, if one wanted
   to say which is the lead Department in the Council, it
   would in the end finish up with Admin, and Legal? - A. I
   think that is a fair point, yes.

Q. And you have already told me that you of all the parties
   were the one who did not have professional expertise in
   safety matters.  That is right, isn't it? - A. That is
   correct, yes.

Q. Now that of course may not be uncommon but that is in
   fact how it is,  isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. You have also already explained to me that you were
   expecting input from various Departments if and when
   matters arose, that is right from building surveyors
   or the Fire Brigade or whatever? - A. Yes, and reports
   from inspections.
                                  ,D.M; ■BOWNES ' "
                                                      '   »




If I could just take the Building Surveyor.  I know we
have already spent a lot of time with Mr. Butler, but
could you tell me what you understood you would get
from him.  He told he was responsible, I think, for
structures, buildings and structures.  What did you
understand that meant? - A. Yes, all aspects of building
structures including crush barriers, walls, ceilings,
roofs, this sort of thing.

Yes, are you saying that his responsibility dealt with,
as you saw it, never mind-how he saw it, that he would
come to you and say:   "I have looked at the crush barrier,
for instance.  I am ..satisfied that the metal gauge is
thick enough; that the workmanship or the design is
adequate and if it is put up as designed it will meet
the strength requirements" for instance? - A. Yes, that
is exactly the kind of thing.

Would you have expected from him the next stage, which
is to say not only is the crush barrier strong enough,
but it is also in the right place? - A. From him and
from others on the Advisory Group sir, yes.

Which others would you have looked to? - A. Everyone
basically sir.

They would not necessarily have any expertise in that
field, would they? - A. No, that is right.

So how were you as the Enforcing Authority going to
satisfy yourself that the standard, if I can use that,
had been met before you could issue the licence,
assuming that there was a major variation and that you
had to make some major change? - A. Yes, that is really
a very general question and actually difficult to
answer.  I wonder if you could refine it for me?




                          Q. Supposing that
                                              D. M. BOWNES


Supposing that a proposal had been put to you to
remove all crush barriers from the terraces, would
you have felt that you could take that decision and
approve it on your own initiative? - A. No,
definitely not.

You would have looked to the Building Surveyors'
Department, right? - A. Primarily, yes.

They would have given you an opinion? - A. Yes.

What opinion would you have expected from the other
services, say Fire or Police or Health and Consumer
Services in relation to that issue? - A. For example,
if I might use the example of the Police they have
expertise in crowd control. They would no doubt have
views on barriers and what have you.  The Fire
Service might have some views on means of escape.

It was that type of information that you would expect
them to convey to you? - A. Yes.

You have already told us that apart from a few early
communications up the line to the Council, nothing
very much went up to the Council after that, that is
right, is it not? When I say the Council I mean in
this context the Councillors? - A. Yes, the elected
members.

The elected members, yes? - A. There were a number of
reports that went to the Panel which is a
Subcommittee of the Council with the delegated powers
to deal with this issue on various issues relating to
sports grounds.  I have mentioned the South Stand
roof at Sheffield Wednesday and the Spion Kop but in
terms of policy there were but three reports. The
first two we talked about yesterday and the one in
September 1987, I believe it was, which dealt with
the revised administrative structure.

So you actually did put that up to the Council and
said, "This is how we want to do that"? - A. Indeed,
yes.

Was one of the objectives of that revision (a) to
give things a different name and (b) to define more
tightly the functions of the various input
authorities? - A. The purposes of that report really
were to indicate the extent of the review that had
taken place in relation to this in consultation with
all the various Authorities, to put forward certain
proposals stemming from that review and to deal with
all sorts of miscellaneous issues associated with
                                                     D. M. BOWNES


       that, for example, the introduction of the Health and
       Consumer Services Department.
B
    Q. I want to just ask you one other question.   I have
       looked at a schedule where somebody had listed
       responsibilities.  In fact it may be the earlier
       schedule of the County Council.   Do you know what I
       am talking about, where the primary responsibilities
       were set out? - A. Yes,' it is quite long.  Two sides
       of A4 table, that is the old County table.
                         - f:   '   f   .


    Q. Did you have anything like that yourself or were you
       following the same pattern? - A. The September 1987
       reports set out a slightly different set of
       responsibilities which were drafted in broader terms.

    Q. That, in fact, provided for the County having the
       final say on capacities? - A. Yes, in fact, the
       Licensing Authority has the final say in all these
       issues really.

    Q. As I understand it, what you are really saying is
       that it would be your Department which would co­
       ordinate the information and then recommend whether
       matters should proceed? - A. Yes, effectively.

    Q. Would it be right to say that where changes were
       proposed which were deemed, rightly or wrongly, to be
       of a minor nature approval might be given by
       consensus of the working party? - A. That is correct,
       yes.

    Q. But you would have expected to go to your
       Subcommittee if anything you deemed to be of a major
       nature had been put up? - A. Yes, for example, the
       Spion Kop development as a major development.

                    Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYN E;

    Q. Mr. Bownes, one of the responsibilities of the
       Sheffield City Council was to impose conditions
       necessary and expedient to secure the reasonable
       safety of spectators at the ground, is that right? -
       A. Yes, that is right.

    Q. Does that include then an estimation of the safe
       ground capacity? - A. There were figures in the
       Certificate, sir, yes.

    Q. But is that one of the conditions which it is the
       responsibility of the City Council to impose in the
       interests of safety? - A. As they featured in the
       Certificate, yes, sir.  It must have been.



H
                                             D. M. BOWNES



If the conditions in the ground change from time to
time does it continue to be the responsibility of the
City Council to vary the conditions as necessary to
meet the new situation? - A. It must make a judgment
in each case.

With you I would like, to explore please or examine
the question of how the'donditions as to crowd
capacity in the Safety Certificate made a
contribution to the happening of this disaster.   You
have explained your position in the Administration
and Legal Department and if I ask you anything which
requires technical expertise outside your own
specialism then say so, do you follow? - A. I follow,
sir, yes.

I hope it will be found that most of the questions
which I ask you can be answered on the basis of
common sense.  First of all, during the period
between 1986 when the Sheffield City Council assumed
responsibility and the disaster in 1989 there was
effective, as you mentioned yesterday, an edition of
the Green Guide, was there not? - A. Yes.

You knew that actually yourself? - A. Yes.

I wonder if you would be kind enough just to refer to
a copy of the Green Guide just to remind us of the
people to whom its advice is directed?  Could you
turn to page five please? - A. I have it, sir.

Do you see Chapter 1 "Introduction", paragraph 1:

      "This booklet provides guidance to ground
      management, local authorities and
      technical specialists such as engineers
      on measures for improving spectator
      safety at existing sports grounds.  It is
      a voluntary code and has no legal force."

Did you understand that the guidance was particularly
directed, amongst others, to Authorities such as
Sheffield City Council? - A. Yes.

It is very, very important that the position of the
Council should be seen in proper context because that
is something that affects the whole of this Inquest
and not just the function of the City Council. The
position is that when in 1986 you, Sheffield, took
over responsibility it must have been obvious to you
that the Safety Certificate had, in fact, by then
been in force for seven years? - A. Yes.
                                             D. M. BOWNES



Unamended? - A. Yes.

So far as you knew? - A. Yes.

As far as you knew it had worked perfectly well
during that seven year period? - A. Yes.




                Q. And nobody brought
                                            D.   M.   &OWNES


And nobody brought to your attention when you took over
the Certificate that there was anything wrong with it?
- A. That is corrects

Or that there was any need for any amendment to it? -
A. That is correct.

And nobody suggested that there was anything unsafe
about the ground, is that right? - A. That is quite
right, yes.
                    T *

When Sheffield took over this particular responsibility
this was only one of a,considerable number, I assume,
of duties which were transferred from the retiring
authority? - A. I believe that is right.

So that one would not expect immediately that Sheffield
City Council could devote all its efforts to an
examination of this particular Certificate and this
particular ground?  It had other things to do? - A. As
it was not on notice of any problems with the sports
ground, I think that is quite right.

I am just saying this to put this in context, to show
you can't be expected immediately to devote a lot of
resources to checking up on something which seemed to
be working quite all right, and the questions which I
am going to ask you now relate to the three year period
between 1986 and 1989 when the disaster occurred, do
you follow? - A. Yes.

During that period the 1986 Green Guide which we have
just looked at was in force? - A. I believe actually it
was issued towards the end of 1986.

Yes, so it was in force from then until 1989? - A. Yes,
I believe so.

I wonder if you would just look, to remind the Jury, at
a particular paragraph in it and then a particular
chapter which they have not looked at unless they have
probably done so themselves already, starting off with
paragraph 12.  I don't want to take anything out of
context so I will start reading at the beginning.   Does
it say:

     "Although some of the safety standards are likely
     to apply to all sports grounds, however many
     spectators are present, it is nonetheless
     important to relate the Guide to the needs of the
     individual ground.  It should be borne in mind
     that in most circumstances, the required safety
     standard to be attained will often relate to the
     maximum number of spectators who are liable to be
                                           D.   M .'fiO W N E S



     admitted to the ground (or parts of it).   For
     example, a large football stadium with a maximum
     spectator capacity of tens of thousands is liable
     to pose significant crowd pressure risks.   To
     accommodate safely a maximum crowd at such a
     ground might entail substantial remedial workj
     alternatively, consideration might be given to
     accepting a much smaller number of spectators who,
     properly dispersed, could be accommodated safely
     without having to incur costly repairs or
     alterations.  The first step, therefore, is to
     assess, using the Guide's criteria, how many
     people can be safely accommodated in the different
     sections of the ground given the existing
     condition of the ground (ie determine a safe
     spectator capacity).  This should be done with a
     proper, detailed plan, preferably drawn to scale
     (1:200) of the ground (see Chapter 16)."

Now, the guidance which is being given there, Mr.
Bownes, that is not difficult to understand, is it? -
A. No, I think it is relatively straightforward.

So can you turn to Chapter 16, which is at page 64? -
A. I have it, sir.

I am not going to ask you to comment on the detailed
provisions of this chapter because it will be readily
seen that they do require some technical expertise, but
I would like you to just go through this chapter
please, for the benefit of the Jury, to see the kind of
factors which the Guide is recommending should be taken
into account in the estimation of safe ground capacity,
and I am asking you these questions to draw attention
to the significance of the ground capacity numbers
which you inherited in the Safety Certificate.   Could
you read the introduction to the chapter? - A. Yes:

     "To assess the number of spectators which can be
     safely accommodated account should be taken of the
     features of the individual ground, its
     configuration, general condition, use and any
     deviations from the Guide's provisions."

There then now follow a number of paragraphs which we
will go through as far as we need to. This, however,
should be said, the numbers in the Safety Certificate
were actually worked out under the previous edition of
the Green Guide, weren't they, because this one only
came in in 1986? - A. They must have been, sir, yes.

Yes, and if necessary we will look at them and we will
find that they are broadly along the same lines as the
provisions that we are looking at now, but I am not
                                           D.   M .'B O W N E S



going to refer to that because as far as Sheffield was
concerned that was not in force at the material time,
and I want to just stick to the scope of your own
responsibility.  That is why I am asking you to look at
this.  Now, do you see 217? Can you read 217, please?
- A. Yes:

     "217.  The previous sections of the Guide give
     guidelines and safety considerations for
     individual features of a ground.    This section
     suggests a method :o=f calculating the number of
     people that can be safely accommodated when taking
     into account interactions between these individual
     features and where ?there are deviations from the
     guidelines.  The following paragraphs contain as
     of necessity generalised guidelines in view of the
     wide variety of types, sizes, configurations of
     sports grounds, their use and general condition.

     218.  To facilitate the calculations a plan of the
     ground should be available with such details as
     exits, stands, terraces, stairways, passages
     kiosks, seats and barriers.   A scale of 1:200 is
     appropriate for this purpose.

     219.   The method assesses:

     a.  the holding capacity of a terrace or viewing
     slope (that of a seated area generally being
     determined by the number of seats when it conforms
     to guidelines); and

     b.  the capacity of a given exit route from a
     terrace or stand.

    220.  The number of people that can be safely
    accommodated on a terrace or in a stand (or other
    covered accommodation) is either its holding
    capacity, or the capacity of the exit system to be
    used in normal circumstances at the end of an
    event (assessed in accordance with paragraphs 229-
    232 below) or the emergency exit system whichever
    is the smallest."

So in working out, just looking at 220, how many people
it is safe to have on a terrace or in a stand, you have
to take into account various factors, which is not just
the holding capacity but also the capacity of the exit
system and the capacity of the emergency exit system? -
A. I think that is what it says, yes.
                                               D.   M.   BPOWNES



     "221.     Where crush barriers meet the strength and
     spacing guidelines of Chapter 9 the capacity of a
     terrace or viewing slope should be assessed from
     the area available for standing by allowing a
     packing density of between 54 and 27 persons per
     10 square metres depending upon the condition of
     the terrace or slope.        Only those parts of the
     terrace or viewing slope from which the whole of
      , e Pl a y i n 8 area can be seen, excluding gangways«
     should be included in this calculation.

     222.  The extreme allowances for packing density
     are as follows:  ,

     a.  54 persons per 10 square metres when the
     terrace of viewing slope is in good condition (as
     set out in Chapter 8); and

     b.  27 persons per 10 square metres when it
     materially deviates from the recommended
     guidelines, so as to constitute a possible hazard
     to individuals closely packed."

Just pausing there, now we are being told that in
addition to the holding capacity and the capacity of
the exit system and the emergency exit system, we have
got to build into the calculation also reference to the
crush barriers and to the condition of the viewing
slope.  Those are factors which have got to be taken
into account, that is what it is saying? - A. That is
what 221 says, yes.

We are not going to ask you to do this, I am just
drawing attention to the detail which is being
specified in the Guide.  Go on to 223, please? - A.

    I'u2 3 *   may be necessary to interpolate between
    these figures where conditions fall between the
    two extremes.   When the positioning and the width
    of gangways do not meet with the recommendations
        Chapter 8, paragraphs 96-100, an appropriate
    reduction should be made in the area available for
    standing. '




              /Q. We have got to build
                                             D,   N,   BOWNES



     risers 70 mm (Guide recommends 75mm-180mm, see
     Chapter 8, paragraph 93)

Then the asterisk says:

     "Correction not possible without major
     reconstruction so accepted in view of only minor
     deviation of 5 mm and good condition of the
     terrace."

Then somehow or other at the end that works out that the
capacity is 700...   Well, we can see what it says.

Now the question I would like to ask you about that,
Mr Bownes, is this:  it is apparent that very careful and
detailed thought has gone into the construction of these
formulae for the guidance of people who have to work out
safe ground capacity? - A. Yes.

This requires a good deal of skill and expertise to
interpret it to work out what the safe capacity of a
ground is? - A. Also experience, sir.

Experience as well.   Now paragraph 226:

     "When the strength of crush barriers conforms with
     the guidelines but the spacing of such barriers does
     not, the capacity is calculated from the provision
     of crush barriers in the area available for standing
     (as defined in paragraph 221) as follows:"

I will not read that.   It appears from paragraph 226
that if the spacing of the crush barriers departs from
the guidelines, then this is also a factor which has to
be taken into account in assessing capacity? - A. Yes.

All this is leading, ultimately, to working out a
particular number of people who can safely go into each
area of spectator accommodation on the ground, isn't it?
- A. Yes.

Do you accept that the correct application of these
formulae is clearly an important and significant matter?
- A. It is important, yes.

I am not going to read in detail, because I think the
point is quite apparent, but just follow this chapter
through to see how it goes on.   Page 66, at the bottom,
Example B gives another example, working through the
various provisions which have been said before.   Then on
page 67, half way down there is Example C, building in
different considerations and seeing how that works out.
At the bottom of page 67 is paragraph 227 saying:
                                             D,   N , ; BOWNES



     "Crush barriers which do not meet the guidelines...
     should be discounted for calculation purposes..."

That is another factor that has to be taken into account.
Over the page at page 68, paragraph 228 is a note about
small grounds.   On page 69 there are four paragraphs
dealing with exit systems, again which I don't think it
is necessary to read except to draw attention to the fact
that particular rules there or guidelines are being laid
down for consideration, of exit systems.

It is against that background that I would like you to
open up and look at the .application of these formulae to
the Safety Certificate in respect of the Hillsborough
Ground.   That is our C.381, starting at page 3. - A.
Schedule 2, sir?

Yes.   Paragraph 3 in Schedule 2 on page 3 is the
condition which says:

     "The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium
     and to the several areas of spectator accommodation
     within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
     specified in Part 1 of Schedule 3."

Now is this one of the conditions imposed by the
licensing authority which is necessary and expedient to
secure reasonable safety? - A. As it is in the Safety
Certificate, sir, yes I believe that is right.

So we can go on to Schedule 3, which is at page 10.   The
jury has seen and is familiar with the table so we need
not spend time on it, but the table itself headed "Crowd
Capacity", these figures, Mr. Bownes, can it be taken
that they have been worked out by someone with specialist
expertise based upon the formulae, the rules, which were
then set out in the previous edition of the Green Guide?
- A. As far as I can tell that is a reasonable
assumption.

It makes sense? - A. That is a reasonable assumption.

Does it appear to you, as a matter of commonsense, that
these particular provisions in the Safety Certificate are
very important parts of the Safety Certificate? - A.
Every condition in the Safety Certificate is important
and these are parts of those conditions.

In terms of significance, in terms of safety, is it fair
to say that the capacity of the particular ares of
spectator accommodation is a very important condition of
the Certificate? - A. I don't feel competent to say which
conditions are more important than others.   It is a very
difficult question to answer.
                                             D,   Nt   BOWNES



Do you feel able to express an opinion as a matter of
commonsense about that? - A. Yes.

What would your comment be on that basis? - A. I take the
view that all the Certificate conditions are equally
important, as far as I can tell.

Does it affect your mind that the calculation of this
capacity has got a chapter to itself in the 1986 Green
Guide and is a complex^ formula?   Does that affect your
mind as to the importance of this particular matter? - A.
Well, sir, I draw your attention to all the other various
chapters in the Green Gi^ide, which cover all sorts of
issues like egress, stairways and ramps and what have
you.   I don't feel competent to indicate to you which
conditions of the Safety Certificate are more important
than others.

Very well, that's your answer, thank you.  Are you able
to express an opinion on this point that when these
capacities have been worked out on the basis of the
guidelines such as we have looked at, in order to make
sure these capacities are not exceeded there has to be
some means of counting the people to make sure that no
more than those numbers go in? - A. Yes, the Safety
Certificate imposes a duty on the Holder to ensure that
those capacities are not exceeded.




       Q. Yes.    So there obviously
                                                     16



                                    ’ P.M. -BOWNES



Q. So there obviously has to be some means of counting?
   - a . Yes.

Q. And obviously when you took over the ground, Sheffield
   took over the ground, that was being done by turnstiles?
   - A. I presume so, yes.

Q. And the advantage of that, or the need for that is so
   that not only the numbers can be controlled but that
   the people in charge o4LT the ground can know when the
   safe number has been reached? - A. Yes, I think that
   is reasonable.

Q. Did you in fact know that each turnstile had a counter?
   - A. I did not know of my own knowledge but it would
   seem reasonable that they had.

Q. All right, I accept your answer.   Did you know yourself
   that the counters were all linked on to an adding up
   machine which produced a total in the Club's Control Room
   of how many people had come in through the turnstiles?
   - A. Again I did not know that of my own knowledge but
   it seems a reasonable proposition.

Q. That sort of thing would be necessary for the Club to
   know, or the people in charge to know how many had come
   in to make sure that these capacities were not being
   exceeded, wouldn't it? - A. It would certainly be
   helpful to them, yes.

Q. On the question of how important this part of this
   Certificate is, can you turn back, just to remind the
   jury please at page 8 of paragraph 28 in the Certificate,
   and is this one of the conditions imposed by the
   Licensing Authority, saying that:

         "The Holder shall make and keep the following
         records which shall be made available for
         inspection at all reasonable time to
         Authorised Persons:

         (1) A record of the numbers of spectators
         admitted to the Stadium during a Specified
         Activity and to each area of Spectator
         Accommodation therein mentioned in Part 1
         of Schedule 3."

   So Part 1 of Schedule 3 is that table we have just been
   looking at and one of the conditions imposed by the
   Licensing Authority is that the holder, that is the
   Club, has got to keep a record of the number of people
   going in? - A. Yes, that is correct.
                                                            17


                                          P.M. BOWNES   .



Q. What do you think the reason for that is? - A. I would
   have thought the reason is to monitor that the conditions
   are being observed.

Q. Well why do you think that this is item number (1) under
   the records which the holder has got to keep?

             THE CORONER:   I think he has answered the question,
     M r . Payne.

Q.         MR. PAYNE:  Do yoa think it is because it is regarded
     as important and the Certificate is regarding it as
     important to make sure that these numbers are not being
     exceeded so that an authorised person can easily check
     on that point? - A. Yes, the purpose of the condition
     is to allow authorised persons access to these records
     to check whether capacity has been exceeded or not.

Q. Now then, Mr. Bownes, as a matter of commonsense it is
   apparent isn't it, I invite you to agree, from the
   chapter of the Green Guide that we have looked at and
   these provisions of the Safety Certificate, that these
   documents d o n 't intend that the safe capacity of any
   area of spectator accommodation should be left to depend
   upon someone just having a look at      the crowd to see by
   visual impression how many people were in any particular
   area of spectator accommodation? - A. If you don't mind,
   Mr. Payne, would you simplify the question for me?

Q. Yes, these Rul-es have laid down particular numbers.
   I am using the expression "area of spectator accommodation"
   because that is what it says in the Certificate.  Do you
   follow? - A. Yes.

Q. These Rules have been laid down so that someone in
   advance and with plenty of time in hand can work out how
   many people it is safe to allow into each area? - A. Yes.

Q. And they have got some particular formulae to help them
   to do that? - A. Yes.

Q. Clearly the idea is not by these Rules that that exercise
   to work out how many people it is safe should just be
   left to somebody on the day, on the ground, having a look
   at the area to have a guess by visual impression to see
   how many people were in.  That is not what is behind these
   Rules, is it? - A. I can't tell what is behind the Rules.

Q. The reason I ask that question is because one of the
   things that Mr. Butler told the Inquest was that "It
   was up to the Police or Stewards on the day to see that
   the terrace was not overcrowded".  I am inviting you,
   please, to comment on that idea in the context of the
   Rules in the Green Guide and the specified numbers
   in the Safety Certificate? - A. I don't believe that I
   am competent to comment on that point sir.
                                                          18


                                           D.M. ■BOWNES



    Q. Well do you not agree, Mr. Bownes, as a matter of common-
       sense that these Rules certainly do not contemplate that
       it should be left up to the Police or Stewards on the
       day to see by looking at it that the terrace was not
3      overcrowded? - A. Mr. Payne, I will try to the best of
       my ability to be helpful to you but I really don't think
       I can comment on that point.

    Q. I wonder if you are able to assist as a matter of common-
       sense that the reason for these detailed provisions is
       to make sure that there is a system of counting and
       control to restrict the numbers to those which have been
       calculated by all those -different points to be safe.
       That is the reason for these rules? - A. Yes, I would have
       thought so, yes.

    Q. Now I wonder if you would be kind enough to turn to the
       plan of the ground which is C274? - A. I have that sir.

    Q.    Look at the Leppings Lane end layout, which we all   know
         about. Do you see that Mr. Bownes? - A. Yes.

D   Q.    Do you see it is divided up by the radial fences? ~ A.
         Yes.

    Q. And that was the condition in which it was when you made
       your visit in August 1986? - A. Yes, I believe that is
       right.

    Q. I appreciate it may be a little difficult for you but can
       you keep your hand in that place, 274, and go back to
       the Safety Certificate Schedule 3 which is at page 10?
       - A. Yes, I have that sir.

    Q. Now if someone from Sheffield City Council between 1986
       and 1989 had looked at these two documents together,
       when they ran their eye down the column of "Crowd
       Capacity" figures in the Safety Certificate, they would
       have come to "West Terrace 7,200" wouldn't they? - A. Yes.

    Q. Then when they looked at the layout of radial fences
       they would have seen that the terrace in fact was divided
       up into separate areas of spectator accommodation, wouldn't
       they? - A. They would certainly see some fences there, yes.

    Q. So if someone had done that as a matter of commonsense,
       Mr. Bownes, do you think that it would have been, someone
       would have thought:  "This figure of 7,200 did not apply
       now to the layout of fences as it was on the ground"?
       - A. If the someone involved was me, sir, then no.  I
       have no expertise in that area.

    Q. As a matter of commonsense are you not able to help about
       that? - A. Weil sir you use the phrase "separate areas".




H
                                                           19


                                     • -P.M. BOWNES ' '■



   I am aware that there has been quite a bit of evidence
   about that given to this Court which I am not really
   competent to comment oh.

Q. Is there someone within the Council who would have the
   competence to be able to look at that figure of 7,200
   and then look at the division of the terrace and pay
   attention, give some consideration to the fact that
   7,200 was allocated to an area which in fact was sub­
   divided into various sections? - A. Yes, that would be
   looked at by the various members of the Advisory Group,
   all of them.

Q. Can you just run through   who they were, not necessarily
   by name. Who were they?    - A. The Authorities represented
   on it, the Fire Service;   the Health and Consumer Services
   Department; the Building   Surveyor and of course the Police.

Q. The fact is isn't it, that as Mr. Butler said to the
   Inquest, there was no particular number in the Safety
   Certificate given to anyone of these particular pens,
   safe capacity number I mean? - A. I believe that is what
   Mr. Butler said, yes.

Q. So that it was up to the Police or Stewards on the day
   to see that that terrace wasn't overcrowded? - A. I
   believe that that was the evidence given by Mr. Butler,
   yes.

Q. If that was the system does that seem to you to comply
   with the guidance in Chapter 16 of the Green Guide? -
   A. I would respectfully submit to you again sir that
   I don't believe that I am competent to comment on that
   point.

Q. Would that ring a bell with you.   If someone had said
    that to you at any time between 1986 and 1989:  "Look
    here is the Green Guide and here are all these Rules
  . about how to work out the safe capacity and here are
    these terraces and apparently what is happening is that
    no one knows how many people should go into each of
    these pens and it is just being left to visual impression” .
    If someone had said that to you during that period would
    that have rung a bell with you? - A. I would ask you to
    simplify the question once again.

Q. Would you have thought that some attention ought to be
   given by the Licensing Authority to what ought to be fixed
   as the safe capacity of the individual pens? - A. That
   I cannot say. Again it is an area outside my expertise.

Q. Do you think anybody within the City Council would have
   given attention to that point? - A. I believe that the
   people on the Advisory Group would be able to give that
   attention, y e s .
                                                                 20


    A                                        . D.M- .BOWNES '


        Q. Mr. Bownes, are you able to express an opinion as a
           matter of commonsense on this point now. With hindsight
           - now that we all know that this dreadful disaster has
           occurred - with hindsight are you able to say that it
           is now clear that at some time between 1986 and 1989
           the separate capacity of each of these pens should have
B          been worked out and specified in the Safety Certificate?
           - A. I regret that I am not able to say that, no.

        Q. Why not? - A. Because it is not within my competence to
           do so sir, I believe.

        Q. Suppose now with all the hindsight that we have got and
           it is very easy I appreciate to talk about it now with
C          hindsight and it is quite'obvious that nobody thought
           about this during the material time, but with the
           knowledge that we have got now, if we go back to early
           1987 sometime during 1987 and we had before us the
           layout of the ground and the schedule giving the
           capacity of the West Terrace as 7,200, is it obvious
           that separate capacities and means of controlling them
           ought to have been introduced for these pens? - A.
           I hesitate to repeat myself and I am trying very hard
D          Mr. Payne to assist you.  I do not think that I am
           competent to answer that question.

        Q. Perhaps the jury will be able to answer it in due
           course.

                  Now I want you to answer this question.   During
           the period 1986 to 1989 do you know whether anybody -
           I am not just talking about within the Council - anybody
E          at   all, ever worked out any numbers for the safe capacity
           of   the particular pens? - A. I seem to recall some
           mention being made in the Inquiry of some numbers being
           ascribed.




F




                                  Q. Let me see




H
                                                   D. M. BOWNES


Q. Let me see if I can jog your memory by asking you to
   look at a drawing called "Ground Layout 1987 ".

       THE CORONER:    This is a different drawing, is it?

     MR. PAYNE:  This is a new drawing so far as the
Inquest is concerned.

       MR. BEECHEY:   This plan will be C.390.

Q.        MR. PAYNE:  Just examine this for a moment, Mr.
     Bownes.  Do you see in the bottom right hand c o m e r
     it has got the title of the plan which is  "Sheffield
     Wednesday Football Club pic, Hillsborough"? - A. Yes.

Q. "Ground Layout 1987"? - A. Yes.

Q. "By Eastwood and Partners, Consulting Engineers"? -
   A. Yes.

Q. This has obviously been reduced from a much bigger
   drawing so that it needs a little study to work out
   the numbers and also the print is not very good.   Can
   you work round the ground with me? Can you just have
   open in front of you, page 10 of the Safety
   Certificate? - A. Yes, I have that.

     Just working round the various points on the Safety
     Certificate it has got Spion Kop and do you see on
     the map there is "Spion Kop"? - A. Yes, I see that.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, can we go straight to the
terrace, the Leppings Lane terrace?

Q.        MR. PAYNE:  Run your eye down the Safety
     Certificate schedule, will you, and we come to the
     familiar 7,200 and the 2,900? - A. Yes.

Q. Look over to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, do
   you see that? - A. Yes.

Q. Just starting at the top of the plan as we look at it
   do you see, we can just make out, "North West Terrace
   uncovered standing, 3,700", right? - A. Yes.  It is a
   very poor copy, sir.

Q. I think we can work it out, can we not? - A. Just
   about, sir, yes.

Q. That 3,700 looks as if it applies to the upper and
   lower levels of the North West Terrace, does it not?
   It is the way it is printed.  It is not
   distinguishing between upper and lower levels? - A. I
                                                      D. M. BOWNES


    am not sure what the .figure refers to, sir.      It does
    not say.

    I am just saying that that is what it looks like? -
    A. Well, this is just 3,700 printed on the plan.

    Can you read the words "North West Terrace uncovered
    standing"? - A. Yes, just.

    3,700? - A. Yes.

    Then we come to the next? pen across "home fans
    1,600".  That is numbered Pen 2, do you see that? -
    A. Yes, you can just make that out.

    You can see the    double lines of the fence?   - A.   Yes.

    With the little 3 against it down by the perimeter
    fence? - A. Yes, I have that.

    That is called Pen 3.    The next one i s ...

      THE CORONER:   It is labelled 3 but it is the other
r    round, is it not?

     MR. PAYNE:   Yes, quite.    Sir, you are quite right.

The next area, do you see it says "sterile area 1,000
home/away"? - A. Yes.

Then there is a line down which is actually marked
"fence", do you see that? - A. Yes.

You have to turn the plan round to look at the words
across the central pen, the other central pen, which
corresponds in fact with Pen 3, and that says
something "terrace" and then something "covered".
Actually that is where the paper has been folded and
I think it should be "uncovered standing away fans
1,700", do you see that? - A. Yes.

Then finally we come to the last one "away fans" and
it looks like 2,600? - A. Yes.

It is apparent, is it not, from this that someone in
1987 has applied their mind to working out the safe
capacity of each of these pens? - A. I really don't
know from the information presented.

Is it not a matter of common sense from the
information presented on this plan that someone has
applied their mind to working out a number of safe
capacities for each of these pens?
                                                     D. M. BOWNES


     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, may I just say that I do not
think you can safe capacity?  I think you can infer that
these are people and you can say that somebody has applied
their mind to working out a capacity.

       MR. PAYNE:    A capacity.   I accept the question, sir.

Q. A capacity? - A. They look like capacity figures.

Q. Can you think of any reason why they should work out
   that capacity? - A. I think the question should
   perhaps be directed to ;E*astwood and Partners rather
   than me.

Q. As a matter of common sense are you able to help
   about that as to why they should work out the
   capacity? - A. I don't have an idea.  I recall that
   some mention was made at the Inquiry of this issue
   but I cannot really recall what happened to it.

Q. From that answer can I take it that, in fact, this
   exercise was never brought to the attention of
   Sheffield City Council before the disaster? - A. I
   don't believe it was, no.

Q. So far as you personally are concerned, did you ever
   see this drawing before the disaster? - A. I don't
   believe I did.

Q. Of course, if there were to be a safe capacity for
   each of these pens there would have to be some means
   of controlling the numbers who went into the pens,
   would there not? Once you have got a number you have
   got to have a means of controlling it as a matter of
   common sense, have you not? - A. Once again I find
   myself in difficulty with that question, sir.

Q.   Let us see.  Start at the top "North West Terrace
     uncovered standing 3,700", do you see that? - A. Yes.

Q. If that number is to be achieved without some means
   of controlling it, how are you going to make sure
   that no more than 3,700 go in? - A. It seems to me
   reasonable that there must be some method of
   counting.

Q.    Right.    I am going to ask you to look at another
     drawing in that context which is a new drawing to the
     Inquest to see whether you can help and what you say
     about t h i s .

      MR. BEECHEY:    This drawing will be C.391, sir.
                                             D. M. BOWNES


     MR. PAYNE:  Just spend a moment, Mr. Bownes, to
look at what this drawing i s . In the bottom right
corner it has got a number, "6705/4"? - A. Yes.

A date which is not easy to read but on the bigger
copy it can be seen to be "19.4.85", that last 5
certainly not clear on this reduced copy, the name of
the drawer is given which is not easier to read and
then the heading across the middle at the bottom
"Sheffield Wednesday Football Club pic, possible
modification to entrance routes and revised layout of
facilities at Leppings -Lane end" and on the left is
the name of the author, do you see? - A. I do, yes.

Just spend a moment to work round this.  First of
all, look at the broad layout of the turnstiles and
do you see that broadly they are laid out in two
banks, two semicircles? - A. Yes.

Start with the upper of the semicircles and do you
see that turnstiles numbered 1 to 12 give access to
home supporters, North Stand, with an arrow pointing
round the back? - A. Yes.

Then the next back, 13 to 18, give access to home
supporters, North West Terrace, with an arrow? - A.
Yes.

We then move on to the other bank of turnstiles and
we have got to do a little dogleg through and passing
what corresponds to what we now call Gate B, and then
you come down to turnstiles 19 to 21 for home
supporters, West Stand.  Do you see that? - A. I do,
yes.

Those people are going up the stairs, are they not,
into the West Stand? You can see an arrow pointing
up the stairs, home supporters? - A. Yes, I am sorry,
I am just looking at two gates below that.  They
appear to be gates.

Then the next trio of turnstiles is 22, 23 and 24.
Those are for visiting supporters, Centre Terrace,
with an arrow going down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Then the next lot are 27 to 25, visiting supporters,
West Stand? - A. Yes.

Then finally the last ones 28 to 30 for visiting
supporters, South West Terrace? - A. Yes.

The Inquest will hear in due course that this is one
of a number of schemes which were drawn up in 1985 as
possible modifications of the entrance routes to
                                                 D. M. BOWNES


   control the access to the Leppings Lane Terrace.  Mr.
   Bownes, did this drawing, or anything like this, so
   far as you know ever come into the possession of
   Sheffield City Council? - A. Without checking the
   records I cannot be absolutely certain but I suspect
   not.

Q. Would you just take that drawing that you are looking
   at, C.391, and at the: same time take in your hand the
   one we were looking at a moment ago, C.390, so that
   we are looking at the two together? - A. Yes, I have
   that.

Q* By this exercise we are able to look both outside the
   ground and inside the ground at the terrace, are we
   not? By looking at these two drawings together we
   can do that, can we not? - A. Yes, I am sorry, yes.
   You are quite right.

Q. We can see that inside the terrace there are the
   divisions of the Leppings Lane end with particular
   numbers given to particular areas, do you see that? -
   A. Yes, that featured on the main plan.

Q. Outside the ground there are separate turnstiles
   access giving entry to those particular areas, is
   that right? We can see that by looking at these two
   together? - A. Yes.

Q. So that if these schemes had been implemented then
   the effect would be, would it not, as a matter of
   common sense that the numbers on the inside of the
   ground could have been counted and controlled by the
   turnstiles at the back of the stand? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, I hesitate to interrupt you
but I did not object to you taking him through to check
whether these plans had been put to him.

     MR. PAYNE:   Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Once he had said that they were not,
you may be quite right, then these are questions are more
properly directed, if they are relevant, to Dr. Eastwood.

    MR. PAYNE:    Yes, sir.

Q. May I ask a question about the Safety Certificate?
   If these schemes had been presented to Sheffield City
   Council, do you follow? - A. Yes.

Q. If these schemes had been presented during the period
   1986 to 1989, do you understand that? - A. Yes.
                         •*•                                       26

                                                d   .   m   ." B ownes


Q. So that Sheffield City Council had been made aware of
   an exercise to count the numbers in each pen. right? -
   A. Yes.

Q. And the possibility of controlling the numbers by
   turnstiles like this? - A. Yes.

Q. Would this have led to any reconsideration of the 7,200
   number crowd capacity in the Safety Certificate?

        MR. CATCHPOLE:   ^S,ir, I hesitate to interrupt.   I
  wonder whether my learned friend might like to look at
  some documents because .it does appear these were put to
  the local authority, pla‘ns similar to this.    It is also
  plain from the letters what the purpose of those were
  and it is only fair to this witness, with respect, that
  he should have access to those documents so he can see
  what was before the authority and on the file.     There
  is an Officer Working Party minute and there is a
  letter from Eastwoods which quite plainly sets out the
  purpose of the plan.    I think my friend is aware of
  them.   Sir, I know it is rude to interrupt but he ought
  to, I think in fairness, put these before this witness.

        MR. PAYNE:   I certainly don't want to put
   anything unfairly, and I am not sure ....

       MR. CATCHPOLE:    It really arises outof Mr.
  Bownes saying, quite fairly, that he did not know, had
  not seen the record, and was not able to say, but it is
  quite plain that they were submitted but they were
  submitted for a particular purpose, and that purpose is
  plain from the Officer Working Party minute, where the
  Police representatives explained what their purpose is.
  I think ray friend ought to really have a look at that.

       THE CORONER:      What is the date of that minute?

       MR. CATCHPOLE:   The date of it, sir, is 18th
  April 1985, and it follows on from a letter from
  Eastwoods to the South Yorkshire County Council of 9th
  April, 1985.

       MR. PAYNE:     That is 1985?

        MR. CATCHPOLE:     That is right.

        MR. PAYNE:    Before 1987 then.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:     The plan you were putting related
   to ....

       MR. PAYNE:     That is the last plan.
                                            D.   M.   BOWNES


     HR. CATCHPOLE:   The last plan, the 1985 plan, is
dated 19th April, the follow on from the one that was
submitted to the South Yorkshire County Council.  I
don't know whether it is convenient to rise so I can
just show my friend ....

     MR. PAYNE:   Mr. Catchpole can examine Mr. Bownes
later on, but I don't think it affects the question
which I am asking at the moment.    I can certainly
accept that these drawings may have been given to the
licensing authority fo'r. some purpose in 1985, but it
does not affect the question which I am not asking, and
it is a hypothetical question and it goes to the
relevance of the numbers, unamended numbers in the
Safety Certificate, during the period 1986 to 1989.

I am asking as a matter of commonsense, Mr. Bownes, if
this information had been put to Sheffield City
Council, which I am not saying it was, I am asking you
if it had been put, so that Sheffield City Council was
doing the exercise which we are now doing, namely
looking at a layout of turnstiles outside and looking
at numbers inside, if that had been put to Sheffield
City Council during the period 1986 to 1989, in your
opinion as a matter of commonsense, would that have led
to any reconsideration of the 7,200 number in the
Safety Certificate? - A. I cannot say, I am sorry.

Is there anybody in Sheffield City Council who would be
able to answer that question? - A. It is a hypothetical
question as I understand it.

Well, who would have had the responsibility?   Suppose
this had been presented to the licensing authority, who
would have had the responsibility in the licensing
authority to consider the implications, bearing in mind
all that stuff that we looked at in the Green Guide and
the Safety Certificate and the importance of estimating
crowd capacity and all that, who would have had that
responsibility to take account of tiiis new information?
- A. Let me explain the procedure that would have been
used, I think, if this plan had been submitted to tne
City Council.  The plan would have been no doubt
submitted with a letter explaining why the plan had
been prepared and for what purpose.   That would then
have been passed to the Working Party who then would
have considered it and responded to the request, to the
letter that accompanied it presumably.   What that
consideration would have consisted of is difficult to
say.  One would need to know what the proposal was that
was being discussed.

Where did the buck stop about fixing the safe capacity
and keeping it under review? - A. With the Council.
                                             d   .   m   .   Bo w n e s



No, but where in the Council? - A. The members of the
Working Party and Advisory Group.

We seem to disappear into the sand every time. - A. I
will list them for you, sir, perhaps:  the Fire
Service, of course, the Police, the Building Surveyor
and subsequently the Health and Consumer Services
Department may have had some input.

All those people would have been responsible for
keeping crowd capacity7'-.under review, would they? - A.
Have had an input into the process, yes.

Had an input into the process? - A. And would have
raised issues had they felt it necessary to do so.

No one ever did? - A. Not to my knowledge, no.

Just go back to that C391, the 1985 drawing.  If a
scheme like this had, in fact, been in place at the day
of the disaster, then the count on the turnstiles would
have shown the people inside the ground how many people
had been admitted to each particular area, wouldn t it?

     THE CORONER:     I don't think that is a question
for this witness.    It would be a question for Dr.
Eastwood again.

     MR. PAYNE:     It is on the question of how.            I am
trying to ....

     THE CORONER:   I am not saying it is not on the
question of how.  What I am saying is that (a) it is
before his time, (b) it is asking him as a layman to
express an opinion.

     MR. PAYNE:   Very well.    I accept that, sir.             Let
me rephrase the question.

     MR, MAXWELL:   Sir, with respect it is a
misleading question • • • •

     MR. PAYNE:     I have withdrawn it.

     MR. MAXWELL:    The plan has not got Gate C on it.

     MR. PAYNE:     I have withdrawn the question.

     THE CORONER:     It has not got what?

     MR. MAXWELL:    There is no Gate C on the modified
proposals.
                                            D.   M. 'BtJWNES


     MR. PAYNE:   That would have made a difference
then, wouldn't it, at the time of the disaster?  Gate C
could not have been opened.

What I want to ask you is this, and this is certainly
not a like matter.  If the Safety Certificate had, in
fact, been amended, if it had been amended to take
account of the sub-divisions by the radial fences, then
the consequence of that would have been that the people
inside the ground would have known what the capacity of
each pen was, wouldn''t / they? Do you want me to put it
again?  If the Safety Certificate had been amended to
take account of the capacity of each pen, if that had
been done, then this would have given notice to the
people running the ground of what the safe number
capacity was? - A. Yes.

It would have done, so that at any time by the counting
on the turnstiles they would have known how many were
in each pen and how close that pen was to the certified
safe capacity? - A. I am sorry, I don't follow that.
Would you mind repeating it?

Never mind.  This is the relevance and importance of
the Safety Certificate:  once the Safety Certificate
fixes a number then it is a number that has got to be
paid attention to by the people who are running the
ground, isn't it? - A. Yes.

So that if the Certificate had fixed numbers for the
pens, then that is something which would have been
under the noses of those who were in charge of the
ground?- A. Yes, as it is for all the other capacities
set in the Certificate.

And that was not done, was it? - A. Individual
capacities were not set for the pens, that is right.

There is one last topic that I want to ask you about,
Mr. Bownes, please, and that relates to this idea of
visual impression, as Mr. Butler put it, up to the
Police or Stewards on the day to see by looking at it
that the terrace was not overcrowded, seemed to be his
idea, and I want to just ask you a question or two
about that.  Can you go back in the black bundle to
C274? - A. Yes, I have it, sir.

The ground layout. - A. Yes.

And I am sorry to have to ask you to just split the
bundle again, but have open at the same time the Safety
Certificate at the table, page 10? - A. Yes, I have
that, sir.
                                              D.   M.   BOWNES



On the Safety Certificate we have got crowd capacity,
list of numbers and we come to North West Terrace,
2.900, do you see that? - A. I do.

On C274, the ground plan, do you know what the North
West Terrace is? 7 A. I believe that it is the bit of
the terrace that is shown with a lighting tower in it.

Coloured white without the lining hatching in it? - A.
That is right, yes.

Certainly we agree that is what we think the North West
Terrace is as well.  It is the upper part of that
corner of the ground? -'A. Yes.  In fact, I think it is
physically separated by the rest of the terrace by a
rather large wall.

When you inherited the Safety Certificate the certified
capacity of that terrace was 2,900? - A. That is right.

And it had been, as we now know, ever since 1979? - A.
Yes .

And continued until the disaster? - A. Yes.

2,900? - A. Yes.

So if anybody had to look, had to guess, during that
period, 1979 up to 1989, whether that terrace was full
or not, the number which they would nave been looking
for was 2,900, wasn't it? - A. Yes, the capacity is
2.900.                                         y


Mr. Bownes, what is the certified capacity of that
terrace today, that particular area today? - A. I
regret I do not know off-hand.

Has it been changed? - A. I believe it may have been.
I don't know myself.

Well look at this Notice of Amendment of General Safety
Certificate dated 27th November 1989.

    THE CORONER:    Mr. Payne, I am sorry, what is it


     MR. PAYNE:   The relevance of this is that the
certified capacity of this particular area has now been
changed, and what it shows is that for nine years or
so, as a matter of visual impression, people were
supposed to be working on a figure of 2,900, and
apparently thought it was perfectly all right, whereas
it now appears that the safe capacity of that terrace
is, in fact, very much less than that, so it goes to
                                               D.   M.   BbWNES



the idea, expressed by Mr. Butler, that it was up to
the Police or stewards on the day to see that the
terrace was not overcrowded.  It shows the very great
difficult of assessing, just by looking at it, what is
the safe capacity of the terrace, now that we discover
that, in fact, the measured capacity of 2,900 has
turned out to be very significantly wrong.

     THE CORONER:      But how can he help us on that?

     MR. PAYNE:   Because     he is the certifying officer
and this is a certificate     issued by his authority.  If
there is another witness,     sir, to whom I ought to put
this question then I wi'll    gladly do so but it seemed to
me he ....

     THE CORONER:   You see I recollect that Mr.
Marshall, for instance, said precisely what you have
said, that it is exceedingly difficult to estimate
numbers visually, so we know that.

     MR. PAYNE:      Quite.

     THE CORONER:      Assuming we believe him, of course.

     MR. PAYNE:   I am sorry to interrupt you.   I would
like to establish what the present day certified
capacity of this 2,900 is and this is the right
witness, in my submission, to do it.

     THE CORONER:   Well, I suppose he is the right
witness to say what the present capacity is because ne
is the certifying - I will listen to you in a moment,
Mr. Maxwell and if necessary I will modify what I am
saying - because he is the representative of the
Council, whatever that might mean.  He has told us that
himself.  What I am not so sure about is whether it
actually advances the issue of how these people died.
Before you answer, let's hear Mr. Maxwell.




      MR. MAXWELL:      Sir, this is an area
                                              D. M.* BOWNES


     MR. MAXWELL:   Sir, this is an area which also might
be misleading if this relates to a revision after Lord
Justice Taylor's Inquiry, which required all grounds to
have their capacities revised and therefore the
comparison of mere figures is not going to help the jury.
The method of calculation will differ.

     THE CORONER:   This is the point that worries me
about the question.   I know that Lord Justice Taylor
made recommendations regarding the underlying figures
that should be used to estimate safe capacities and so I
think we have got to accept that the situation was as it
was on the day.   The f$ct it has now been halved,
quartered, doubled, I don't think matters to the issue.
That is my feeling on this matter.

     MR. PAYNE:   Well, I have made the point, sir, and I
don't want to labour it.   In our submission it is
material because a criticism of the Police made by
Mr. Butler, or a duty attributed to the Police by
Mr. Butler, was that it was up to the Police or stewards
on the day to see that the terrace wasn't overcrowded.

     Now if the certified capacity was 2,900 and exactly
the same area of terrace is now certified at 1,400, then
this means that it is an illustration of our point that
it is not fair or safe to impose on the Police or anybody
else the job of having to assess the capacity of the
terrace just by looking at it.   That is the importance,
of course, of having a system of counting and control and
the importance of the capacity rules in the Green Guide.

     THE CORONER:   I think I would be prepared for you
to put to the witness, is it correct that the capacity
has been altered downward, and if you wish you may put
the figure to him, and he may or may not accept it, that
is up to him.   You can then put to him that it therefore
follows that if you are trying to visually assess
capacity you have to know what you are working to.   That
is as far as we can go.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I will limit it to that:

Just look at the Certificate, Mr. Bownes, and see if I
have got it right.   This may not be the right
Certificate.   Does that appear to you to be an amendment
to the Safety Certificate? - A. It does, yes.

What is the corresponding figure to the 2,900? - A.
1,400.

What is the date of that amendment? - A. 27th November,
1989.
                                             D. M.5 BOWNES


Can you confirm that in fact the certified capacity of
that terrace has now been reduced to 1,400? - A. Yes, it
was reduced by means of this amendment.

     MR. PAYNE:    Thank you.

     MR. ISAACS:    A break, I think, sir?

     THE CORONER:   Indeed, you are quite right.    A
quarter of an hour an4 then we press on.    I want if at
all possible to conclude Mr. Bownes' evidence, so
although it would be nice to finish at our normal time,
if need be we might have* to go on for a little bit
longer.   It depends what is going to happen but I don't
want to carry him forward to Monday if I can possibly
avoid it.

                   (Short adjournment)

            Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

Hopefully you will be able to relax a little now,
Mr. Bownes, I haven't got many questions for you.   Again
it is really to assist me more than anything else and
perhaps to help the members of the jury see exactly what
the position in respect of a number of the matters you
have been asked questions about.   The position seems to
be that your Council was the licensing authority so far
as this sportsground was concerned? - A. Yes.

Your department was the department responsible for
granting and reviewing the conditions in the Licence? -
A. Effectively, yes.

Within that department as I understand it you were the
person responsible? - A. Yes.

You were assisted in your task, because you have no
expertise relating to matters affecting the ground at all
that is my understanding, you were assisted by this
Advisory Committee? - A. Yes.

It had originally been called the Officers' Working Party
but later became called an Advisory Committee? - A.
Advisory Group.

When you took over in 1986, in the spring of 1986, you
just took on what had been going on for some years so far
as the County Council was concerned? - A. Exactly.

Am I right in understanding this to be the case, and I
think you mentioned this, that this was a very
specialised area requiring professional knowledge of
various aspects relating to the ground? - A. Yes.
                                                                    34
                                                      d. m   :   bownes



    Q. You mentioned earlier that the Police had expertise, for
       example, in relation to crowd control? - A. Yes.

    Q. However, they certainly had no expertise in engineering?
B      - A . That's correct.

    Q. No expertise in relation to, for example, the formulae
       that were referred to by Mr. Payne out of the Green
       Guide? - A. That's right.

       Similarly, without wanting to trespass on anybody else's
       province, the Fire Brigade had expertise, for example, in
       relation to the egress•qf fans on the ground in certain
       circumstances, but again they had no expertise as far as
       engineering was concerned? - A. Yes, that is correct.

       You would need to have some expertise in relation to
       engineering in order to be able to work out the proper
       capacities for various parts of the ground? - A. Yes.

       Eventually there came a time when the Health and Consumer
       Department... - A. It is the Health and Consumer Services
       Department.

    Q. ...of the Council became involved? - A. Yes.

    Q. When was that? - A. That was in 1987.

    Q. Just leave them for a moment.    Apart from them, the only
       other member of the Group was effectively the Building
       Surveyors' Department?    That's right? - A. From within
       the Council that's right.

    Q. Well, from anywhere.   Who else was there? - A. The
       Police...

    Q. Well, apart from the Police, who I have dealt with, the
       Fire Service I have asked you about? - A. The Building
       Surveyors and Health and Consumer Services.

      Yes, leaving Health and Consumer Services, the Building
      Surveyors' Group, they were represented by Mr. Butler? -
      A. Yes.

      Had Mr. Butler made you aware that he had no expertise in
      design or the assessment of safe capacities of individual
      areas or, indeed, any engineering matter apart from, as
      he told us, matters relating to structure?   Had he made
      you aware of that? - A. No.

      Did you believe he had that expertise?   I don't mean in
      relation to structure, that is, to do with whether a
      building is going to fall down or not or whether a
      barrier is securely fixed into the ground, but as to the
                                             D. M.5 BOWNES


expertise necessary to work out safe capacities for
individual areas? - A. The Building Surveyors'
representative, as with any representative on the
Advisory Group, would obtain such advice as he needed
from his own resources to provide an input to the Group,
if necessary by bringing along another expert.

Now could you answer the question.   Did you believe he
had that expertise? -A. I didn't form a view on that
point.

Did you not think it was important to ensure that on your
Advisory Group there wa$ someone who had that expertise?
- A. The Building Surveyors' Division was represented by
Mr. Butler and I...

Did you not think - I am sorry, I must press you on this,
Mr. Bownes, did you not think as the person responsible
that it was important to have on your Group someone who
had that expertise? - A. Or had it available to them,
yes, sir.

You thought that was important? -A. Yes.

So who was the person to whom you believed Mr. Butler
could go to in order to get that information? - A. Other
professionals within his Division, sir.

Were you aware before Mr. Butler told us yesterday or the
day before, that in fact he never sought that expertise
from anyone within the Council? - A. No, I was not.

Does it surprise you then to have heard that? - A. I
can't recall in what context that was mentioned, sir.

I asked him whether in fact he had sought that advice
from anybody else.   Now are you surprised to hear that?
- A. Also whether any question was raised during the
Advisory...

Are you surprised to hear that? - A. Yes.

Why are you surprised to hear it?   Well? - A. Let me go
back to what I originally said.

No, please could you answer the question?   Why are you
surprised to hear that Mr. Butler did not seek that
advice from anybody?

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Isaacs, I take the view that you
are entitled, subject to anything I say, to ask the
questions and the witness is entitled to formulate his
answer, whether it is in the form in which you want it or
                                              d   .   m   :   bownes



not.   Let him answer and see whether he has responded.
You can then, if you wish, come back to him again.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, if I may say so, what you have
just said is a most astonishing proposition, that if I
asked a question the witness is then entitled to give any
answer he chooses to the question I have asked.   I have
noticed over the questions that have been asked by, for
example, my learned friend Mr. Payne, some of the answers
that have been received have clearly not been answers to
the questions.

     THE CORONER: ; Mr* ,Isaacs, what I am not happy with
is that you in fact stipulate or, indeed, that anybody
stipulates the answers which the witness is to. give.   If
you understood what I had said, that the witness can
answer anything he likes, then I am not saying that.    I
am saying that the witness is to answer your question,
because I haven't stopped you asking the question, but he
is to answer it in the form in which he chooses.




       MR. ISAACS:   Very well, sir
                                                     37



                                          •D.M. BOWNES '



           MR. ISAACS:   Very well sir.

Q. So could you now give your answer to the question that
   I ask and to repeat it for you: we know from what Mr. Butler
   said that he took no advice from anyone within the Depart­
   ment relating to this matter, it was outside his expertise
   but which appears to be of some importance.    I asked you
   whether that surprised you.    You said it did and I just
   wondered why it did surprise you? - A. I think my answer
   was in haste when I sai-ck "surprised".  Where questions of
   capacity arise or did ari's£ during the course of any
   discussions the Building Surveyor's representative present
   would deal with those.   IE he felt he was unable to do so
   he would seek appropriate advice from within his own
   division or wherever.

Q. Clearly Mr. Butler was unable to deal with those matters
   because he did not have the expertise.  May I suggest to
   you that you were surprised when you heard him say that
   because you would have thought in order to deal with this
   most important matter he would have had to have taken
   advice from somebody within the Department? - A. I accept
   that I failed to grasp the meaning of your question when
   I said "surprised".

Q. No, you did not say   "surprised" with respect, Mr. Bownes.
   I asked you whether   you were surprised and you said
   "Yes"? - A. Yes and   I had misread your question.  I
   apologise for doing   that.

Q. What did you think I meant? - A. I have said I got the
   answer to your question wrong.

Q. Are you now saying you weren't surprised? - A. No, I am
   trying to put it to you as to what actually happened
   during the Advisory Group sessions.  If questions were
   raised as to capacity then the Building Surveyor would
   no doubt have an input.  If the Building Surveyor present
   did not feel he had the appropriate information then he
   would go and find it effectively.

Q.   He could not make an input if he did not have the     expertise
     though, could he? - A. That is right.

Q. Neither could the Police, could they? - A. No.

Q. And neither could the Fire Service, could they? - A. No.

Q.   And the Health and Consumer Services Department could not
     either because they did not have the expertise? - A. They
     could find it, refer to other colleagues who did have
     that expertise.
                                  P.M. BOWNES



Now so far as these meetings are concerned could you tell
us when they took place, the meetings of the Group? - A.
There have been many of them.

I don't mean that, I do apologise that is my fault. What
I meant was this:  first of all the frequency of them?
- A. Perhaps six or seven times a year, it depended on
the business.

Six or seven times a year? - A. Yes.

Who would convene the meetings? - A. I would.

Where would the meetings take place? - A. A variety of
locations.

Were minutes taken? - A. Yes.

On each and every occasion? - A. Yes.

I understood there to be one occasion when a minute was
not taken? - A. Yes, I was referring to the Advisory Group
sir.  There was an occasion when, I believe you are
referring to August 1986?

That was the one I was talking about? - A. Yes, the notes
of that meeting which I did make, I can clearly recall
making, are not on the file.  I accept full responsibility
for that.  I appreciate that that is inconvenient both to
this Inquest and to the previous Inquiry, but notes were
done, I can recall doing them, but they do not appear
on the file.

Did you seek any advice from other Local Authorities as
to what they did so far as ensuring that they maintained
their responsibility for the licensing of a sportsground?
- A. I wrote to a number of Authorities asking for copies
of their Safety Certificates in 1986 I believe.

I appreciate that.  You told us that.  You said that you
were thinking that the conditions needed reviewing only
so far as the terminology was concerned and I can under­
stand the reason for it.  I wondered whether at the same
time you asked for information as to how they went about
carrying out their duties under the Statute? - A. As I
recall no,  not directly.

So far as the assessment of how the conditions in the
Certificate were operating is concerned, did you give any
thought to that from time to time? - A. Yes.

In what way? - A. I formed the view in 1986 I believe
that the Certificate conditions perhaps ought to be looked
at and reviewed and to that extent I started on that process
                                                          39



                                      ■ -P.M; BOWNES' •



Q. But that was in relation to the terminology.  I meant
   in terms of the conditions themselves? - A. I am not
   sure I follow you sir?

Q. You took over the Safety Certificate with conditions
   included that had been used by the County Council? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Apart from the terminology, which did not go to the
   substance, did you ever, consider the substance of those
   conditions? You personally as to whether they were
   appropriate or no longer appropriate, in other words
   carry out an analysis? - £. Only in terms of the drafting
   exercise.          ■      ?

Q. So apart from that you did   not carry   out any   such analysis?
   - A. No.

Q. And so you accepted that which had been done and about
   which there had been no complaint as being reasonable
   and sensible? - A. Yes.

          MR. ISAACS:   Thank you very much.


                 Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Q. Mr. Bownes, you were the Licensing Officer for the
   Authority and had an existing workload when you were
   asked to take over this matter as well as a number of
   others from the County Council? - A. No, just this matter
   from the County Council.

Q. Just this matter alone? - A. Yes.

Q. And for example does your licensing area cover hackney
   carriages, is that something with which you deal? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Do you deal with registered homes? - A. No.

Q.   What sort of other licensing areas in general terms do
     you deal with? - A. Cinemas, theatres, public entertainments.

Q. Each of them having a different bit of legislation for
   the most part to come? - A. Yes.

Q. You are not a legal man yourself, Mr. Bownes? - A. No.

Q. But you have got to as far as you can be at least au fait
   with the general amount of legislation that cover these
   areas? - A. Yes.

Q.   And if you have got any doubts you refer it to your       Legal
     Department for some assistance? - A. Yes.
                                  D.J4. .BOWNES



Were you a busy person when the licence of the Sheffield
Wednesday Ground was added to you, were you busy at that
time? - A. Yes.

Did you consider it to be something with which you would
be able to cope within the hours of the day that you had
available or was it something that you thought to yourself:
"Oh gosh, this is another one"? - A. I felt that I was
capable of looking after it as far as possible.

Did you have an opportunity to talk to your colleague at
the County Council about the particular file or the matter
generally as it was handed over to you? - A. Yes.

And he told you:    "Here is the Certificate. There have
not been any problems since it was issued".    In a nutshell?
- A . In a nutshell, yes.

Those are not the exact words, of course, but that was
the understanding? - A. That is right.

So your understanding was here was a situation, there was
a well tried and tested Certificate that had been no
problem and with any luck it should be able to be continued?
- A. Effectively, yes.

So in your own words, as you have said in evidence-in-chief
to the Coroner, you glanced at the Certificate and either
put it in a file or put it in the drawer? - A. No.

Other than glancing at it what did you do because I have
got the word "glance" most specifically written down as
to what you did when you got the Safety Certificate? - A.
After taking careful note of what the County Council had
said, which was not in any way as brief as you have
described, I over a period of time looked at the admini­
strative system.

I appreciate that, you began to look at it over a period
of time to consider the rewording of the Certificate
itself? - A. And a review of the administrative system
under which it operated.

That is a matter that interests me because as you very
fairly said to both the learned Counsel who asked you
questions, when it comes to defining where the buck stops
you are the Licensing Officer so really it stops with you
and if then something is unsatisfactory you have to refer
it for enforcement procedure into the Legal Department?

And if you had been aware, for example, that a condition
in that Certificate was not being met, you would have
done something about it, wouldn't you? - A. Yes, indeed.
                                                                  41


                                           . D .-Mi •BOWNES   '



Q. But what you are saying is:  "I was never made aware
   that there wasn't compliance with all of those conditions"?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. The problem is, as you highlighted, that there may have
   been falling between two stools, one person thinking
   that they were doing it; another person thinking no they
   weren't doing it and in fact nobody doing it? I have
   those words down as well, Mr. Bownes, if I can put them
   to you:  "There was a .risk of matters falling between
   two stools"? - A. I certainly don't recall that in those
   terms sir, no.

Q.            THE CORONER:    I did actually say that.  I put it
        to you and said was    there a risk of matters falling
        between two stools,   or words to that effect? - A. Though
        in my view there is   little risk of that actually happening.

q   .         MR. MANNING:  So what you told the Coroner and
        accepted from the Coroner, that is not now something you
        accqfc today? - A. I would modify my answer to you sir.

Q. Well now there were a number of conditions here, Mr. Bownes,
   that had to be on-going, they were specifically written
   into the Safety Certificate? - A. Yes, there are a number
   of conditions written in, yes.

Q. You convened the meeting.  Did you at your first meeting
   have the Safety Certificate with you? Can you recall
   that? - A. I don't recall sir.

Q. Had you done any more than glance at the Safety Certificate
   by the time of that first meeting? - A. I believe I had
   been through it.

Q. Did you not want, as the convening Officer of the meeting,
   to make sure that you knew who it was that was going to
   address all the various conditions in the Safety
   Certificate? - A. As I understood the system that was
   operated by the County Council that was well dealt with
   within the administrative structure, the Officer Working
   Party.

Q. So there was a structure as to who was going to deal
   with each of the points? - A. There was a schedule
   produced by the County Council in that respect.

Q. And did you have that schedule? - A. Yes.

Q. So it was quite easy for you to see that if for example
   there was a problem with the roof, who it was who was
   going to deal with that problem? - A. Put in simple terms,
   yes.
                                                                42


                                       P.M. BOWNES •



Q. If there was a question raised by you as the Licensing
   Authority:  "Are the capacities the same as they were
   before?" somebody would give you that answer? - A. Yes,
   the schedule identified to whom I could turn to get that
   advice.

Q.    And to whom could you have turned to get that advice? -
     A. The Building Surveyor at that stage, I believe.

Q.   So Mr. Butler was the person who would alert you to any
     change in capacity? - A.'Yes.

Q. And you now accept on behalf of the Licensing Authority
   that although there have'bfeen changes made, that they had
   not been notified or inserted into the Safety Certificate?
   - A. Are you referring specifically to capacity on pens
   sir?

Q. Yes? - A. Yes, there were no capacities on the pens at
   the date of the disaster.

Q.    And in fact there were, prior to your appointment I
     acknowledge, in 1981 and 1985, there had been alterations
     made to the ground itself? - A. The radial fences had been
     put in at that stage I understand.




                             Q. And neither
                                                            43

                                                  D. M. BOWNES


Q. Neither of those had been noted in the Safety
   Certificate? - A. There had been no changes in
   capacity in the Safety Certificate to reflect those
   as far as I am aware.

Q. So albeit before your appointment two fundamental
   points that should have been incorporated into the
   Safety Certificate, do you agree? - A. Whether they
   should or not is not a?, matter I regret I can answer.

Q. No, I cannot accept that answer and for this reason
   if I may put it to you;* ? you are the Licensing
   Officer.  It falls to you ultimately to issue this
   Certificate, yes? - A. Yes, the Certificate had been
   issued in 1979.

Q. It is not a Certificate that lasts forever, is it? -
   A. Yes, it does actually.

Q. You have to review it on an annual basis? - A. No,
   that is not right.

Q. So you do not have to anything with this Certificate
   at all except to make addenda to it upon specific
   terms? - A. As I understand it, the legislation
   indicates that the Certificate lasts for an
   indefinite period.

Q. It does not matter to   the question itself but you
   would accept that the   Certificate relates to the
   position as it is, as   its date, and if there are
   changes in it then it   has to be noted? - A. Yes.

Q. That is why, for example, as m y learned friend, Mr.
   Payne, put it to you that when there was a change in
   the capacity of the particular terrace an additional
   document was issued to reflect the change? - A. If
   there was a change in capacity then the Certificate
   should have been changed, yes.

Q. Do you accept that the alterations of 1981 and 1985
   should have been noted in the Certificate? - A. I
   really cannot confirm that one way or another.  It is
   a matter for professional expertise.

Q. Why did you issue another Certificate then in 1989 as
   to capacity? - A. It is referring to Mr. Payne's
   amendment?

Q. Yes? - A. That was amended I think pursuant to Lord
   Justice Taylor's Report.

Q. You issued the amendment because it had been drawn to
   your attention that the capacity for a particular
                                                D. M. BOWNES


   area had been changed? - A. Yes, I believe that the
   amendment was issued.

Q. The assessment of the capacity had been changed? - A.
   Yes, I believe that is why the amendment was done.

Q. If there was a change in the assessment of a capacity
   of a particular area of the terrace whenever, when
   the pens were put up,- should there not have been an
   amendment then? - A. If' there was a change in
   capacity, yes, there should have been an amendment in
   the Certificate.        •?      .

Q. From the time when the Council, through you,
   inherited the statutory responsibility for this
   Certificate from 1986 until this disaster, the Local
   Authority had done no more through than simply
   prepare drafts of the amendment in the wording of the
   Certificate itself? - A. Yes, there have been no
   substantive amendments to the capacity figures in the
   original 1979 Certificate.

Q. As at prior to the disaster the furthest that the
   Authority had got was to have submitted two drafts of
   proposed changes to the wording? - A. Yes, the second
   draft was submitted just prior I believe.

Q. In a period of three years? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, before you rise, there is one
reply he gave to Mr. Manning which, on the face of it, is
incorrect and I just want to be sure that he sticks by what
he says.

Q. You were asked, I think Mr. Manning asked you, who
   you would have looked to, who the Council would have
   looked to, and South Yorkshire would have looked to,
   if under their schedule which you were aware of if
   the question of capacities arose and I think your
   reply was the Building Authority, is that right? - A.
   Yes, not having the document in front of me.

Q. I have got a copy of this document in front of me and
   that is the reason why I want to check with you.
   Under the heading of "Estimation of safe ground
   capacity" it puts the primary Authority as County
   which I take it to be the same as Council, yes? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Then "To be consulted", that is the next column
   heading, it has got P, FB and BA and those are
   defined as Police, Fire Brigade and Building
   Authority? - A. I see, yes.
                                                    D. M. BOWNES


Q. Does that refresh your memory and do you want to
   modify that reply to Mr. Manning? - A. The schedule
   does, in fact, include all three Authorities as
   points of reference.

Q. So you would have looked to all of them? - A. Yes.

Q. When it came to the question of capacity? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:      Mr. Manning, it is just so that we get
it right.

     MR. MANNING:  I am helped by what you said but really
the principle of what the answer was and I believe the
question was directed to is that the principle
responsibility was with the Council whether it be the
County Council in the first instance or the City Council as
it is now.

     THE CORONER:   I just did not want it to be left.      It
seemed like a slip of memory rather than an error.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

Q. Mr. Bownes, was it your understanding that it was
   part of the function of the City Council in its
   capacity as the Safety Authority and the Safety
   Certificate Authority that the Council would have the
   responsibility on the day of a football match for the
   proper filling of the football terrace such as the
   West End, the Leppings Lane end of the Hillsborough
   Stadium? - A. No.

Q. Would you, on behalf of the City Council as the
   Safety Authority, none the less expect that somebody
   should take the responsibility on the day of a match
   for the proper filling of a football terrace? - A.
   Yes.

     MR. PAYNE:     Can Mr. King say what he means by "proper
filling"?

     MR. KING:   Sir, I will show my learned friend my
questions which I have spent some time thinking through.        I
have asked so far I think two questions.

     THE CORONER:     Carry on, Mr. King.

     MR. KING:   If only my learned friend would pause, I
would come on to those matters.

     THE CORONER:     Just carry on, Mr. King.
                                                           46

                                                D. M. BOWNES


     MR. KING:   Let me start again if I may, and I am
sure, sir, you will interrupt me if you think I am behaving
in any way improperly.

Q. Did the City Council, as the Safety Authority, expect
   that somebody on the day of a match would have the
   responsibility for what I will call the proper
   filling of a football terrace and you gave the answer
   yes? - A. Yes, that is t correct.

Q. One of the matters to which attention would have to
   be directed as regards the proper filling would be
   the danger of overcrowding, would it not? - A. Yes.

Q. The danger that too many people would get into any
   particular area of a terrace for their own safety.
   That is a matter to which somebody ought to take
   responsibility, yes? - A. Yes.

Q. You, as the Safety Authority, would not regard it as
   safe that that would just be left to the spectators
   to look after, to look after themselves? You would
   not expect that to happen, would you? - A. No.

Q. You would say, as the Safety Authority, that would be
   grossly unsafe to just leave it to the spectators to
   look after their own interests.  You would agree with
   that? - A. I believe that is right.

Q. One of the responsibilities for the proper filling of
   a terrace with regard to the danger of overcrowding
   would include, would it not, the monitoring of the
   terrace for overcrowding, yes? - A. Yes.

Q. Whoever did take that responsibility on, on the day,
   would you expect them to have the expertise for the
   responsibility which they had chosen to accept? - A.
   Yes.

Q. If they did not have the expertise for the
   responsibility which they had chosen to accept, would
   you have expected, as the Safety Authority, for them
   to say, "We will not take on this responsibility
   because we do not have that expertise"? - A. Yes.

Q. Whoever did that have that responsibility would have
   regard to matters within the expertise which they
   were accepting they had, yes? - A. Yes.

Q. And matters of common sense? - A. Yes.

Q. They would take into account those matters when they
   were going about that responsibility for what I have
    A
                                                                     47

                                                         D. M. BOWNES


           described as the proper filling of the terrace,
           yes? - A. Yes.

    B   Q. If, taking into account the factors of common sense
           and their expertise, the conclusion was reached by
           whoever had that responsibility that they could not
           carry it out, that it was impossible or
           impracticable, would you expect them none the less to
           continue with that responsibility without saying
           something? - A. No, I would not.

        Q. It was put to you by m y -learned friend, Mr. Payne, on
C          behalf of the Police what was obvious as a matter of
           common sense at a time after there had been changes
           in the ground at the terrace end and he was putting
           to you matters which were matters of common sense.
           Those were his questions, do you remember? - A. Yes,
           I do remember.

        Q. If they are matters of common sense then those
           matters, of course, would be within the knowledge of
D          those who took the responsibility on the day for the
           proper filling of the terrace, yes? - A. Yes.

        Q. The matters which were put to you as matters of
           common sense were these, and I want to take you
           through them individually;  as a matter of common
           sense it was suggested to you that if one looked at
           the plan of the ground after the changes on the
           terrace and the Safety Certificate, if you looked at
E          the two together, as a matter of common sense, it
           would be seen that the area which was once treated as
           a single spectator accommodation area had been
           divided into separate spectator accommodation.   That
           was put to you as a matter of common sense just
           looking at the plan and the Safety Certificate,
           yes? - A. Yes.

        Q. You said that you were not qualified yourself to
F          comment on that but you relief on the Working Party
           to advise you? - A. Yes.

        Q. Included in that Working Party were the Police, were
           they not? - A. Yes.

        Q. If it was a matter of common sense that matter of
           common sense would be shared, therefore, by the
           Police? - A. Yes.
G
        Q. It was also put to you as a matter of common sense
           that it would be seen when you compared the plan and
           the Safety Certificate that the 7,200 which had been
           allocated to the area of the Leppings Lane Terrace
           was now divided into various subdivisions.  That
                                             D. M. BOWNES


common sense I put to you and ask you would be shared
equally by whoever was on the Working Party including
the Police? - A. Yes.

It was put to you that as a matter of common sense,
and indeed referring back to Mr. Butler's evidence,
that no particular numbers had been given for
individual pens as regards the Safety Certificate and
you agreed with that?- - A. Yes.

Again that would be obvious either as a matter of
common sense or expertise to the Police on the
Working Party? - A. Yes.

It was then put to you as a matter of common sense,
and it was obvious that when one took these matters
and other matters of common sense together, that
there ought to have been separate entrances, separate
capacities and separate methods of controlling the
numbers going into individual pens.  You again said
that you did not feel that was a matter you could
comment on but if it was a matter of common sense
then again that would be shared by the Police on the
Working Party? - A. Yes.

Certainly you would expect it to be known by whoever
it was took the responsibility of the proper filling
of the terraces on the day? - A. Yes.

What I am saying would be known, would be that it
would be known to those who had that responsibility
that there was no method in existence on the day by
counting, by mechanical counting, of knowing whether
or not any given pen was full. That fact would be
known to those who chose to take responsibility for
the proper filling of the terrace, yes? - A. I
believe s o .




                    /Q. If that fact meant that.
                                                             49

                                                  D. M . ‘BOWNES


Q.    If that fact meant that the method which wasadopted by
     whoever was responsible and had chosen to take the
     responsibility for the filling of the terrace, if that
     fact meant that that system which was adopted was one
     which could not be relied on, then that would be known
     to those who had thatresponsibility? - A. Yes.

Q.   If the system adopted for the proper filling of the
     terrace could not be relied on then would it follow
     from that, that is in itself a matter of great concern?
     - A. It is a matter 6 f concern, yes.

Q.    Because it would mean that those who had the
     responsibility for the'filling of the terrace, taking
     into account the factors which as a matter of
     commonsense they would know, would know that the system
     which was being used was one which would not
     necessarily indicate at all whether there was
     overcrowding? - A. Yes.

Q. That is right, and can you think of a greater unsafe
   system than that? - A. No.

Q. Thank you.

                Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE

Q.   Mr. Bownes, I want to go back to the questions Mr.
     Payne was asking you.   I know that he was referring you
     to a plan, C391.  I appreciate he asked you a lot of
     questions which were hypothetical questions based on
     that plan.  I think it is only fair to you to show the
     context in which the plan came into existence.   I would
     like you to have a look at a letter and some minutes
     which would no doubt have been on your file when you
     took over from the South Yorkshire County Council.

          THE CORONER:   The letter is dated 9th April,
     1985, and that will be what?

          MR. BEECHEY:    C392, sir.

          MR. CATCHPOLE:   I should say to ignore the
     manuscript amendments, which are my own references.

          THE CORONER:   Yes, and the other one is a minute
     of 18th April 1985 of the Officers' Working Party and
     that will be C393, I take it?

          MR. BEECHEY:   C393.

Q*        MR. CATCHPOLE:   Mr. Bownes, we know that the plan
     that was put to you was actually dated 19th April 1989,
     so it post-dates almost immediately these two
                                           D.   M.   BOWNES


documents, but the number was 6705/4.  If you take the
letter from Dr. Eastwood dated 9th April, you will see
that in the second paragraph it encloses a drawing
6705/2.  Take it from me that they are very similar and
they are in a series about the same points, considering
the same matter. - A. Yes.

If we look at that letter we can see that it says:

     "The club is anxious to segregate the visiting
     team's supporters as they enter the ground, and
     also to enable the police to control their exit at
     the end of the game.."

You see that? - A. Yes.

The last paragraph says:

     "It would be appreciated if the Working Party
     could consider this proposal at an early date.
     Mr. Chester has already given a copy of the
     drawing to the police so that they have had some
     advance notice."

- A. Yes, I see that.

If we turn to the minute of the meeting of the Officer
Working Party held on 18th April 1985, we see that
paragraph 1, the "Purpose of the Meeting", really
recounts what is in the letter, and then in paragraph 2
it says:

     "Consideration of Proposals

    The Police representatives pointed out that the
    proposals had been prompted in the main by
    comments they had made to the Club.  At one time,
    both the West Stand and Terrace had been regarded
    as exclusively for the use of visiting supporters,
    but recent patterns of attendances at the Stadium
    made it necessary to allow for some element of use
    by home supporters as well."

When you were reading through this file when you got it
from the South Yorkshire County Council, would it have
been obvious to you, if you had come across that
particular plan, that the purpose for which that plan
had in fact been drawn up - leaving aside the
hypothetical questions Mr. Payne asked you - was
because there had been a change in spectator attendance
at that end of the ground which required segregation? -
A. Looking at the documents in front of me now, yes, I
would say that is right.
                                             D.   M.   BOWNES



There is no suggestion in any of those documents, or
indeed I would suspect in any other documents that you
have seen, that the system that was actually used on
those terraces was in any way unsafe for the use of
fans? - A. No, there are no suggestions there.

And it is correct to say that in all your time, drawing
on all the expert advice that you have been able to
have access to, which covers a very wide range, no one
has suggested that that system is in any way unsafe
prior to this tragedy?'•- A. That is correct, no one has
ever made any such suggestion.

Thank you very much.

          Cross-Examined by MISS SINCLAIR

Mr. Bownes, I would like to explore a little further if
I may the role of the Building Surveyors' Division in
the Working Party of the Advisory Group as it became,
as you saw it. You have given us, I think, you told
the learned Coroner, the broad procedure for the
working of the Advisory Group during your time.   Would
you agree that an idea would come from somewhere, a
proposal or a suggestion would be made? - A. Yes.

From the Club perhaps,   sometimes from the Police?     - A.
Yes, that is right.

And once a suggestion had been made it would be
elaborated, a scheme would be drawn up? - A. Yes.

We have heard reference to this drawing number C391,
that is an elaboration of proposal to modify the
entrance routes to the Leppings Lane end, it is one  of
a series.  These plans and no doubt an accompanying
letter would be put before the Working Party at one of
their meetings, that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

And it would be subjected to detailed consideration
with input as and where necessary from each of the
members of the Working Party? - A. Yes.

The Working Party would reach a conclusion on the
scheme that was being proposed.  It could either reject
it, approve it, or approve it subject to conditions,
that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, or require further
information, for example.

Yes, indeed, it could ask for further information from
the proposer of the scheme? - A. Yes.

And no doubt the different members of the Working Party
could require further information by means of
                                           D.   M . 'B O W N E S



correspondence perhaps, or other communication after
the meeting from each other? - A. Yes.

There was an interplay of ideas and different inputs,
is that right? - A. Yes.

A decision would be reached and that decision would be
notified? - A. Yes.

To the interested parties? - A. Yes.

Just looking quickly at the letter from South Yorkshire
County Council to Eastwoods, which is number C389 - do
you have that - this is the letter which sums up the
conclusion of the Working Party on the proposal to put
radial fences onto the West Terrace - do you have that?
- A. Yes, I have it now.

We can see in the paragraph in the middle of the page
beginning, "Accordingly ...", the Working Party did not
have any objections to that proposal, subject to three
considerations.   I won't read that out because it has
been read before.   Now, Mr. Butler we have heard was
the representative of the Building Authority, the
Building Surveyors' Division, on the Working Party.
Now, during your time as Chief Licensing Officer in
respect of this matter did you attend all the meetings
of the Working Party? - A. Yes.

Did you attend all the inspections, the annual
inspections made by the Working Party? - A. Yes.

And was Mr. Butler present, as Building Authority
representative, at all of those meetings? - A. I
believe so but without checking the records I cannot be
100 per cent certain.

Can you be 100 per cent certain that at all of tnose
meetings of the Working Party there would be a
representative of the Building Division? - A. Yes.

Can you tell us who that would have been, if not Mr.
Butler? - A. I cannot, I am afraid.  There would have
been a number of people potentially.

A number of people from the division? - A. Yes.

Before this came under your area of responsibility, in
the years since 1978 when consideration first was given
to the granting of the Certificate, until 1986, I am
right in saying, aren't I, that the Building Surveyors'
Division were the Building Authority from the very
earliest times? - A. Yes, that is right.
                                                D.   M .'B O W N E S



In respect of this matter.  There was no changeover as
far as the Building Authority were concerned in 1986? -
A. That is right.

From your perusal of these documents relating to the
earlier period, while I accept that this is outside
your personal experience, can you tell us whether there
was a representative from the Building Authority
present at all the annual inspections of the ground? -
A. I believe that there was from documentation, yes.

And at all the meetings held after inspections and at
other times? - A. Yes.

Can you tell us who that person was? - A. Yes, I
believe that Mr. Sheriff is named frequently as the
Building Surveyors representative.

That is right.     Is Mr. Sheriff a surveyor? - A. Yes.

Is he also an engineer? - A. I am afraid I d o n ’t know.

Are you familiar with the organisation inside the
Building Surveyors' Division? - A. Reasonably so, yes.

Can you give us some idea of the sort of people that
you would find working there? - A. I am sorry, I don't
quite follow.

We have heard that Mr. Butler was a surveyor and you
believe also Mr. Sheriff was, possibly amongst other
things, I^don't know, a surveyor.  Inside the Building
Surveyors' Division we have already heard from Mr.
Butler that there were various units.  Now, his unit,
if I remember the name of it - I don't remember the
name of it - his unit was to do with ordinary ....

.t ,   TfiE CORONER:   Site Inspections,   I think, wasn't


     MISS SINCLAIR:      I am grateful, sir, that is
right.

It was the Site Supervision Unit if I remember rightly.
He mentioned another which was the Structural
Assessment Unit? - A. Yes.

Do you know the qualifications of the people who would
typically be found working in those units? - A. I would
assume they would be qualified engineers.   I don't know
exactly what the qualifications are myself.
                                           D.   M.   BOWNES



You would expect there to be engineers, Structural
Engineers, Civil Engineers? - A. Suitably qualified
people, yes.

Yes, indeed.   Did you know that when you took over in
1986 and started finding out the extent of your
responsibilities? - A. Yes, I had had contact with the
Building Surveyors' Division prior to that time on
other matters.

You had.  So you were satisfied when you saw Mr.
Butler, or possibly other Building Authority
representatives at meetings of the Working Party, at
inspections, that there was a division of which they
were members, to which they had access, which had
qualified engineers working in it? - A. Yes.

As you said, you would expect Mr. Butler or whoever the
representative might have been at any given time, to
have had access to a body of expertise in engineering
matters? - A. Yes.

Did you ever have any reason to doubt that? You have
said Mr. Butler never gave you information on his own
qualifications.  Did anybody else give you any reason
to doubt that you had such a body of expertise in the
Building Authority? - A. No.




             /Q. Finally, Mr. Bownes
                                                 D. M. BOWNES


Q. Finally, Mr. Bownes, as far as you are aware in
   connection with the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground
   did the City Council ever engage external engineers to
   act for them? - A. No.

Q. Why was that? - A. Because theCouncil had its own
   internal resources to deal with safety issues.

Q. If you had been asked whether in connection with
   Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground external engineers
   should be involved, your answer would have been no, is
   that right? - A. Initially that would have been dealt
   with by a committee of-the Council I would have thought,
   and I rather suspect that they would have said no.

Q. Had they consulted you, asked you whether you saw a need
   to involve external engineers - I am talking in relation
   to the ground at the moment - what would your answer have
   been? - A. Probably not as long as those facilities were
   available within the Council.

Q. When you say "within the Council” you would mean... - A.
   The Building Surveyors' Division.

              Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Mr. Bownes, you are aware that it was agreed at the
   Working Party meeting on the 7th August 1986, that the
   crush barrier number 144 in pen 3 - or part of the
   barrier - was to be removed.  Do you know if the capacity
   was altered when that change was made in the layout? - A.
   No, the capacity was not altered.

Q. You know that at the 1988 semi-final fans came in through
   the normal entry of turnstiles and they dispersed over
   the terrace safely?   Do you know that? - A. I regret of
   my own knowledge, no, I am not familiar with the 1988
   semi-final.

Q. Yet you are concerned with the Safety Certificate at the
   ground?   Wouldn't you enquire whether the match had gone
   safely, that everything had been all right?   You were
   engaged in that matter, weren't you? -A. Yes.   The
   appropriate professionals were, of course, present at
   that football match and had problems arisen they no doubt
   would have brought them to the attention of the Council
   straight away.

Q. But you took no personal interest in it yourself, is that
   what you are saying? - A. It is not a question of no
   personal interest at all.

Q. You just have no knowledge of the 1988 semi-final? - A.
   No detailed knowledge, no.
                                             D. M. BOWNES


I want to turn to the Safety Certificate.   It   is   page 8,
paragraph 8, (1). - A. I have that.

Would you read out that paragraph please?   It   is   (1), "A
record..." it starts. - A. Yes:

     "A record of the numbers of spectators admitted to
     the Stadium during a Specified Activity and to each
     area of Spectator Accommodation therein mentioned in
     Part 1 of ScheduLe 3."

Now this is a condition of the Holder, isn't it? - A.
Yes.                   *,

It is written into the Safety Certificate? - A» Yes, the
Holder must comply with it.

Do you agree that no such record could be kept on the
15th of April, 1989 because turnstiles were not the only
means of admittance on that day and records can only be
kept by using the counting mechanism of the turnstiles? -
A. Yes.   If you are asking me a factual question as to
whether or not records were kept, that I can't tell you
of my own knowledge.

However, it says in the Safety Certificate that records
should be kept of these matters of the matches that take
place? - A. Yes.

One would expect that numbers would be kept of a large
match like that, a semi-final match? - A. Yes.

What I am asking you is do you agree with me that no such
record could be kept on that day?   It would be
impossible to keep a record? - A. If there was no count
of people going in, yes, that is right.

Now do you know that it was the Police who wanted radial
fences installed after 1981? - A. I have heard evidence I
think here to that effect, yes.

Do you think that they should have taken the
responsibility to supervise the separate pens as they
wanted those radial fences installed?

     THE CORONERs   I think is a rather unfair question.
In fact I think it is a very unfair question because you
have gone over this ground twice already as to whether or
not if a person makes a suggestion that instantly makes
him liable for all the consequences.   We talked about
this yesterday, do you remember?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes
                                              D. M. BOWNES


     THE CORONER:    The implications of the question are
very serious for any.future event.    I don't think I will
allow that question.    I don't think that is a fair
question.   If you can think of another way of putting it
then do so, but that in itself is not fair.    It is not a
proper question.

      MRS. McBRIEN:   Could I ask if Mr. Bownes knows if
anybody was going to take responsibility for those pens?
- A. As I understand ^It in relation to any football match
at Hillsborough or anywhere else, then people involved in
crowd supervision are both the Police and, of course, the
club.                  *.

In 1989 there were no separate self-contained units
there?   That is right, isn't it?   They were not self-
contained.   They were not divided off completely.
There was access from the back via the radial gates.
They can only be called self-contained when they are
completely divided off?   Do you agree with me? - A. From
the evidence I have heard, then the gates at the back of
the radial fence as I understand from the evidence I have
heard here, were open.

Yes, so they cannot be considered as separate self-
contained units, can they?   They could not be regarded
as such on that day? - A. Forgive me, I think the term
"self-contained units" has a special meaning within the
Green Guide which I can't really help you on.

If I can make it easier, the proposal - I think it was
1985 - by Eastwood and Partners, I think that proposal
was to make them self-contained units. - A. If that is
the plan we are referring to...?

     THE CORONER:    Is this the plan you are talking
about?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, that's right.

     THE WITNESS:   That seems to refer to a means of
access to the terraces.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, with separate turnstile entry
into those sections? - A. It looks that way.

With their own facilities, toilet facilities, cafe
facilities I suppose, that sort of thing I would imagine?
Is that right? - A. It is very difficult to tell from a
quick glance at the plan.   This is new to me.

The plan as it was in 1989 was not like that at all. was
it?   These proposals were not accepted? - A. I can t say
what the result of the proposals was at the end of the
                                               D. M. BOWNES


day.   I have only just had handed to me the letter and
the Minutes of the Working Party.   I need to do research
to find out what was at issue here.

      THE CORONER:  I think, Mr. Bownes, to save time,
they were not proceeded with for whatever reason.  - A.
Fine.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    The ground did not look as it does
on the plan here? - A* No.

In 1989, therefore,   fans could move easily from one pen
to another?   There   was .no means of saying when there was
a certain capacity in that certain area because they were
constantly moving.   They were allowed to do this. - A.
Again, from the evidence I have heard here, that is
right.

Therefore, the capacity, obviously, was worked out for
the whole terrace and people could go into the centre if
they wanted and if it became crowded they would move by
way of the radial gates, under normal circumstances? - A.
That goes beyond my personal knowledge of the situation.
I have not seen fans behave on that terrace.

Well, I am sure they would themselves be able to move
from the centre to the other areas if they so wished? -
A. I wouldn't dispute that.

It wouldn't be an impossibility? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   He is not arguing with you.    He is
just saying he wasn't there.   He doesn't know.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   He has no knowledge of it:

I suppose you would agree with me that if the 1985 scheme
had been adopted it would probably have made the ground
safer? - A. I regret that I can't possibly answer that
question.   I do not know what considerations went into
making that 1985 scheme.   I don't know why it wasn't
proceeded with at this stage.   There may be some safety
reason why it wasn't proceeded with.   I regret I can't
help you on that.

Do you think it was possible that it may have made it
safer? - A. In the sense that any development might make
a ground safer, yes, it is possible.

In any case it is quite irrelevant as far as these
Inquests are concerned, as that was not the ground layout
in 1989, was it? - A. It was not the ground layout in
1989.
                                              D. M. BOWNES


So all this discussion about the plans that were proposed
are really quite insignificant, aren't they? - A. I
regret I can't comment on the significance or otherwise
of evidence.

What I am saying is we should only be concerned with the
ground as it was in 1989?    It had been accepted that
that ground was a suitable ground.    It had a Safety
Certificate to prove that, didn't it? - A. The ground was
in the opinion of the ^Council in 1989 reasonably safe for
the admission of spectators.

So that is what we=,need ?to concern ourselves with, the
ground as it was then?     Not this plan?

     THE CORONER:   Well, I am not quite sure what you
are leading to but we know you are quite right that that
plan was not adopted and the ground was different.  You
have established that and he has agreed.   He has also
told you that in his opinion it was reasonably safe for
the admission of spectators.   Now what is the point you
are after?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I will go on to another point:

Mr. Payne drew your attention to the North West Terrace
where the recommended capacity was 2,900, according to
the Safety Certificate? - A. Yes.   If I could say, that
was the stipulated capacity.

     THE CORONER:   Certificated did you say? - A.
Stipulated.   It wasn't recommended as such, that was the
stipulated limit.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  You were asked what the required
capacity is now, weren't you, since the Taylor Inquiry? -
A. Yes. What Mr. Payne did was to present me with a copy
of the amendment to the Safety Certificate which was
dated, I think, November 1989, which showed the capacity
as being I think 1,400.

This too, unfortunately, is irrelevant as far as the
disaster goes.   As it didn't occur in the North West
Terrace we should only concern ourselves with the other
part.

     THE CORONERs    Mrs. McBrien, you are not criticising
the witness, you are not even criticising Mr. Payne, you
are criticising the fact that I have allowed the
question. Well, maybe you are right, but you mustn't
address m e on the facts*
                                                         60


                                         ■D..M. BOWNES



           MRS. McBRIEN: Well I didn't see what that had
     personally to do with it.

           THE CORONER:    Never mind, Mrs. McBrien.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN:  It was pointed out, of course, that
     the capacity has been greatly reduced from 2,900 to 1,400.
     That is a big reduction?

           THE CORONER:  Mrs. McBrien, you can't have it both
     ways.  You can't argue a h d s a y it is totally irrelevant
     and then ask questions on it.

           I am going to Sold you to your view and we will not
     explore matters which you consider to be totally irrelevant
     Whether they are or not is a matter for me to decide but
     you have taken a view and I am not going to let you have
     it both ways.  Can you see that?

           MRS. McBRIEN: Well really, sir, I have had to
     accept it because you let it go and so I feel now it is
     only fair if I reply to that?

           THE CORONER: No, you can't reply to anything,
     Mrs. McBrien.  I am sorry, you can ask the witness
     questions.  You cannot reply to anything.  You are not
     giving evidence.

           MRS. MCBRIEN:    Could I ask something about those
     facts then please?

           THE CORONER: Well it depends what you are going
     to ask.  I was very careful in limiting what Mr. Payne
     was allowed to ask on this point and I am going to be
     just as careful with you.  Perhaps Mr. Payne did not like
     it that I did not allow him to develop it in the way he
     wished but I didn't because, Mrs. McBrien, to a large
     extent you are right.  It is irrelevant.  It is outside
     the scope of the Inquest.

           MRS. McBRIEN:  I will start asking a question.       If
     it is not to be asked you will stop me.

Q. Do you know if any serious overcrowding has ever occurred
   in the North-West Terrace to your knowledge? - A. Not to
   my knowledge, no.

Q. In spite of the fact that there were 2,900 spectators
   allowed to go to that area? — A. Well the question you
   asked was whether or not I knew and I don't I am afraid.

Q. This is just a general question.  Do you think that before
   the Taylor Inquiry that fans were being packed in too
   much, not grossly overcrowded but they tiaye been given
   more comfort since the Taylor Inquiry?
                                       D.M. BOWNES



      THE CORONER:      Sorry, could you repeat the question?

      MRS. McBRIEN:      1 have forgotten ....

      MR. CATCHPOLE:  Does the witness think that since
the Taylor Inquiry fans have been given more comfort
than prior to the Taylor Inquiry.

      THE WITNESS:      The answer is yes.

      THE CORONER:  It is not relevant but it does not
do any harm either.

      MRS. McBRIEN:  There was no danger to them before,
not serious danger, it was just discomfort would you say?

      THE CORONER:  I don't think he has said that.          Can
I put the question slightly differently?

As far as the Licensing Authority were concerned were you
prior to the 15th April 1989 satisfied that the capacities
specified did not constitute a serious danger to the welfare
of the fans on those terraces? - A. Yes.

      THE CORONER:      That is what you are asking, isn't
it?

      MRS. McBRIEN:      Yes.

And this is the last question.  DO you agree that the system
could be relied on if the fans had come in by the proper
entry of turnstiles as that did provide for safe entry and
dispersal of fans and as the ground had a Safety Certificate
to prove that the system was safe in any case? - A. Yes.

        MRS. McBRIEN:    All right.   Thank you very much,
M r . Bownes.

      THE CORONER: Are you happy, Mrs. McBrien? You are
quite satisfied that I have not stopped you short?

      MRS. McBRIEN:      No, that is perfectly all right,
thank you sir.

      THE CORONER:       Mr. Foster, have you got anything?

      MR. FOSTER:       No questions, thank you.

      THE CORONER:  Before you rise, Mr. Maxwell, the
jury have sent me a few notes so I will just deal with
those.


                         By THE CORONER:
This question refers to matters which may have occurred
                                                          62



                                      DlM. BOWNES



  before you took over responsibility but you may be able
  to say on what you know*

        The question is: was the Council ever informed of
  any crushing that may have taken place prior to 1989 and
  they refer to paragraph 28(2) in the Safety Certificate
  which provides for notification of accidents or injuries.
  - A. I can't recall off hand.  I don't believe so.

Q. In particular do you know whether any report was made to
   the Authority from the records of the 1981 incident? -
   A. Yes, the one that gave rise to the radial fences, I
   seem to recall there is a'letter from the Chief Constable
   on file to the Football Association about an incident
   that occurred on those terraces.

Q. So there is some record - I don't mean Sheffield of
   course at that time, that would be South Yorkshire, had
   knowledge of that? - A. I believe that is right sir, yes.

Q. That was clearly long before your time? - A. Yes.

         MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, on that point I know you don't
   want to have too many documents, the actual report from
   Sheffield Wednesday is on the Council file.   I have a copy
   of it if they really want to see it.   It actually sets
   out what happened.   I had anticipated it would probably
   come at a later date through a different witness as to
   what happened but it was there.

         THE CORONER: Well it may be more appropriate for
   the Club Secretary or Dr. Eastwood to confirm that.
   We don't need to prove it from every angle.  It is a very
   good question, actually, nothing wrong with the question.

Q. I will ask a question of you, it is a somewhat technical
   one.  The question the jury are asking is when the
   Barrier 144 or part of it was removed in 1986, you
   remember? - A. Yes.

Q. Was, as far as you know, any thought given to the extra
   pressure which would be put on other crash barriers in
   Pen 3 and was that a factor taken into account as far as
   you know? - A. I am not aware of the details of that
   discussion that took place.

Q. I did ask you that.  In fact you have no recollection of
   what was said I think you told me? - A. N o f that is right.

         THE CORONER:  The second question this witness
   can't possibly answer.  It is a detailed question on forces,
   on barriers.  I am not going to ask it.
Now finally the jury have noticed that the Certificate
is headed:  "General Safety Certificate"? - A. Yes.

And what they want to know is whether that means that there
are also specific or special Safety Certificates issued
or applied by any or other of the constituent members of
the Working Party?   I think I have paraphrased that
correctly? Can you see what the question is? - A. I think
I do but if I can answer it in this way:   the 1975 Act
provides for two types pf Safety Certificate.   One is the
general Safety Certificate which most football grounds
have, but the other is a special Safety Certificate which
if you like you might regard as an occasional licence for
special events at sportsgrounds. The two are different
by quite a long way.   I am not sure if that answers it?

In other words what you are saying the word "general"
means continuing to all activities rather than overall.
I think what they are concerned about is, it did say
for instance the Fire Service had their own structures,
legislative provisions under which they would issue
Certificates,  as far as you know relating to safety
at sportsgrounds? - A. Not safety at sportsgrounds as
such, no.

On the other hand I presume that in assessing for instance,
using the Fire Service as an example, say an issue of
times of escape from a given area, the Fire Service would
have their own internal criteria for working out what
they think is safe? - A. Yes.

And that I   think is what you would be relying on that
they would   be doing in a professional sort ofway when
they would   advise you? - A. Yes, that is right.

And similarly with say the Building Surveyors' Department
they would look at their expertise to tell you whether
the barrier in their view meets the specifications of
the Green Guide? - A. Yes and Codes of Practice and BSI
publications and what have you.

      THE CORONER:  I used the Fire Service purely as
an example.  Are you happy with that?

      MR. FOSTER:    Perfectly happy, yes sir.

      THE CORONER:   Mr. Maxwell?


               Cross-Examined by MR. MAXWELL:

Mr. Bownes, before any Local Authority issues a Safety
Certificate is the first duty of the Authority to decide
whether the Applicant, is, as you put it, a "fit person"?
- A. Yes.
                                                                 64


                                     ■ P . M . ■ BO WNES   ' '




Q. Or as the Act of Parliament describes him a "qualified
   person"? - A. Yes.

Q. And is that a qualification or fitness that the Applicant
   has to have of a particular kind? - A. Yes, the Council
   has to be satisfied that the Applicant is likely to be
   in a position to ensure that the Safety Certificate
   conditions will be observed.

Q. Do you assume in favour of South Yorkshire County Council
   and the Club that that determination was made by the County
   Council, they concluded that the Club was likely to be
   able to achieve that obje.ctive? - A. Yes.

Q. And is that a view which during your relationship with the
   Club you came to share? - A. Yes.

Q. Is it also correct that before a Certificate is issued
   the Local Authority is under a duty by this Act of
   Parliament to consult with other Authorities? - A. Yes.

Q. Does the Local Authority have to consult with the Police,
   the Fire Service.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Anyone else, the Building Department? - A. Yes.

Q. And does the consultation have to concern the proposed
    terms and conditions to go into the Safety Certificate?
  n
    - A. It does indeed.

Q. Looking at it in general terms would the Police be able
   to provide an input with regard to matters within their
   expertise and the Fire Service those matters within
   theirs? - A. Yes.




                          Q. More specifically
    A
                                                                    65

                                                          D. M. BOWNES


        Q. More specifically the.Police would know about crowd
           control? - A. I would expect them to, yes.

    B   Q. Is it also correct that under the Act others have the
           power, not the duty but the power, to bring to the
           attention of a Court of law any defect that they feel
           may be in the Safety Certificate? - A. Yes.

           That power is given to--:interested parties, as they
           are called? - A. That is correct, yes.

        Q. Such being the Club? -   -A%   Yes.

        Q. The Police? - A. Yes.

        Q. And the Fire Service? - A. Yes.

        Q. They have got a right, have they not, to appeal to a
           Court in respect of the Safety Certificate if there
           is anything in it that they think should not be in
           it? - A. That is correct.

        Q. Or if there are things omitted from it which they
           think should be put into it? - A. That is correct.

        Q. Or if they think the Safety Certificate should be
           amended or replaced? - A. Yes, I believe that is
           rig ht .

        Q. Is it also a matter of record, a matter of fact, that
           no interested party has ever found it necessary to
           appeal to a Court in respect of the Safety
           Certificate? - A. That is right.

        Q. When you took over this function, tell the Jury what
           you had by way of information to assist.  There was
           the Certificate.  You had that? - A. Yes.

        Q. Access to your predecessor of the County Council? -
           A. Yes.

        Q. And the information that he gave you? - A. Yes.

        Q. Does the Home Office provide you with guidance? - A.
           It d o e s .

        Q. Inevitably by way of circulars and the like? - A.
           Yes.

        Q. Did you read them? - A. Yes.

        Q. Did you go on any course or go to a talk at all about
           safety at sports grounds? - A. Yes, there was a
           seminar I recall.



H
                                             D. M. BOWNES



Did you attend that? - A. I did.

Was that useful? - A. It was helpful, yes.

Did you acquaint yourself with the appropriate way,
as you saw it, of administering this system? - A.
Yes.

Over the years did you have all the professional
input which was made available to you by the other
Authorities? - A. Yes. * *

Were you, that is you as an individual, aware before
this tragedy of any defect that related to matters of
safety in the Safety Certificate? - A. No.

Had you been aware of any such, would you have done
something about it? - A. Yes.

The same question, if I may, that the learned Coroner
put to you when he asked you whether you were aware
of any risk of serious danger that might affect
anyone attending the ground and I open it up even
more broadly;  were you aware of any risk of harm
that might affect any person attending that ground? -
A. No, none whatsoever.

Had you been aware of any such risk would you have
done something about it? - A. I would.

What? - A. Depending on the nature of the risk I
would have possibly the Council to issue a
Prohibition Notice which it is entitled to do under
the legislation.

I want to turn now and finally to the question of
crowd capacity and crowd control and I begin, if I
may, by giving you a little more detail of the
question that Mr. Isaacs did indeed put to Mr. Butler
and where Mr. Butler did indeed say that he had not,
in fact, sought information from any other person
about the assessment of crowd capacity.  Do you
remember that exchange between you and Mr. Isaacs,
first of all? - A. Yes.

You were asked, "Were you surprised that that was the
answer?"? - A. Yes.

I have access to the transcript of what was said at
page 68 of the relevant date (Day 36-68A) and the
full question and answer is this:
                                                D. M. BOWNES


      "...the point I. wanted to ask you about.
      Did you every go to anybody outside your
      unit, in other words somebody, for
      example, in the structural engineer's
      unit, for advice about numbers? - A.
      About the numbers for that particular
      terrace?
                                           i



      Q . Y e s , for the. various pens in the
      terrace? - A. Hav^ done of recent times,
      where the numbers have been recalculated.
                   .r :   !   •


      Q. I meant really before the disaster? -
      A. No, sir.

      Q. So is this the position, after you
      took over in 1985, up to the time of the
      disaster, you did not seek any advice
      about the calculation of safe numbers for
      the individual pens from anybody within
      the Council who had the expertise to give
      you that advice? - A. Being that had I
      done that then I would have only gone to
      the same member of staff who had been
      there at the meetings at the time when
      those pens were arranged.

      Q. So the answer to the question is no,
      you did not? - A. That is right, sir."

That is the fuller context of the answer.  He did not
go:
      "Being that had I done that then I would
      only have gone to the same member of
      staff who had been there at the meetings
      at the time when those pens were
      arranged."

Does it surprise that he did not go again to that
same member of staff? - A. Can you repeat the
question please?

Yes, he said that he did not go to anybody, being
that he would only have gone to the same person who
had already been at the meetings where the pens were
considered.  That is his answer? - A. Yes.

Does that surprise you that he did not go to that
same person being that it was that same person who
had been there earlier? - A. No.

I want to ask you this question in a very specific
context now.  Suppose it was the 14th April of 1989,
the day before this tragedy, and suppose someone had
                                                  D. M. BOWNES


   said to you, "Mr. Bownes, who do you think is
   responsible for crowd control at Hillsborough?".
   What would you have said? - A. The Police and the
   Club.

Q. In the area of the Leppings Lane terraces? - A. The
   Police and the Club.

Q. Who do you think was responsible for crowd
   distribution on the Leppings Lane terraces? - A. The
   Police and the Club.

Q. Had anybody involved with crowd control, crowd
   distribution, crowd supervision, felt that there was
   any problem on the Leppings Lane terraces, would you
   have expected that problem to be made known to the
   Local Authority? - A. Yes.

Q. Do the minutes show that from time to time various
   problems were made known? - A. Various problems were
   made known at various times.

Q. Were the radial fences introduced because it was felt
   that those involved with crowd control required such
   a precaution to assist? - A. Yes.

Q. Had there been a problem with crowd distribution is
   that something you think would have been mentioned to
   the Local Authority? - A. Yes.

Q. Either to you or your predecessor? - A. Yes.

Q. Was it ever? - A. No.

     MR. MAXWELL:   I have no further questions, sir.

     THE CORONER:    Mr. Bownes, thank you very much indeed
for being here.   That concludes your evidence certainly for
the time being and I hope for the rest of this Inquest
anyway.  Thank you.   I am not going to call any other
witnesses.  We did have a reserve but I do not think we
will be able to finish him within the time left and so I am
not going to start.   Have a good afternoon and weekend and
see you Monday morning at 10.30.

                (The Jury retired from Court 1

     THE CORONER:   First of all, can I say that we have
listed for Monday Mr. McMahon, Mr. Singleton, R. E.
Sephton, J. L. Case, C. Sterritt, A. Booth, and J.
Fitzpatrick.  We have one or two reserves, so to speak, as
usual up our sleeves.

     MR. MANNING:   These are all supporters, are they, sir?
                                                   D. M. BOWNES



     THE CORONER:   These are all supporters, yes.    That is
the first thing.  The second thing I wanted to say was that
we have had three days over two witnesses who I think were
quite important witnesses and on the whole I think we did
the right thing.  It is very difficult.    I may well have
slipped up and stopped people perhaps a little bit earlier
than I should have done on occasions but be that as it may
one has to make an assessment as one goes along as well.
The one thing that does worry me is that we have got a few
more of what I would call technical witnesses, engineers
and such like coming alongi■ Mr. Butler is a surveyor but
if what happened with Mr. Butler is an example of what is
going to happen with the engineers then we are going to
drown in a welter of det ai l . I am very conscious that not
only is it exceedingly time consuming but I think it is
also very counter productive because we will succeed in
losing totally the Jury in the minutiae of what happens,
plans and goodness knows what else and we will have
defeated, perhaps involuntarily, the objective of the
Inquest which is to enable them to make an assessment of
the evidence and reach a verdict.

    I am mentioning it now because we have all got the
weekend to think about it and that includes me but I am
very much inclined that when we get to Dr. Eastwood, who is
a clear example of the sort of person I have in mind, I
think I am going to be considerably fiercer, if I can put
it like that,  as to how far we go into detail because I do
not think we need a great deal of detail.  We need to have
the broad outline and the general understanding of what
happened and what was done.  Basically in lay terms, why
something was done.




                           /We do not necessarily ne e d . ..
We do not necessarily need in engineering terms the
minutiae of various activities.  That is point number one.

       Secondly, it will have been obvious to all of you
  that the Green Guide contains - well, you all knew it
  anyway - the Green Guide contains innumerable
  provisions about safety in sports grounds and there may
  be dozens of them which were breached at the Stadium.
  I will give you two examples.   One, for instance, is
  the blue gate in the tunnel which appears to open the
  wrong way if one looks* at the Green Guide, and I know
  as you indeed know that there have been hours of
  argument as to the height and depth of the steps on the
  terraces.

        MRS. McBRIEN:   I am sorry to interrupt you but
   the gates of the tunnel, it is an entrance and an exit.
   I brought this point out yesterday ....

       THE CORONER:   You were quite right with how you
  dealt with it. What I am trying to say is this, that
  whichever way you look at those gates, they in the
  position in which they were on the day, did not play
  any part in the disaster, unless one were to argue that
  they should have been shut.  That is a possibility but
  the fact that they were open and that they might have
  opened the wrong way is an interesting observation, we
  know it already and we don't need to go over that
  ground again.

       Similarly, I think we have got to concentrate on
  the issues which are pertinent.  I am saying this, and
  I am really in a sense giving you warning that my
  attitude, if you like, with regard to stopping you may
  alter, certainly when we are dealing with those
  witnesses, and I don't want you to feel that I am being
  unfair, picking on somebody and saying no, we are not
  having this.  I am just giving you warning that I will
  be - it may not be necessary because you may well take
  heed of what I have said and restrict your cross-
  examination to the cardinal issue and the detail in lay
  terms that we need for this Jury to understand what the
  point is, insofar as these Inquests are concerned.
  What I did not want to do was to spring on you suddenly
  and stop you, when on the whole I have tended, except
  for Mrs. McBrien, not to do a great deal of that.

       Have I made myself clear?

       MRS. McBRIEN:   I think I have tried to establish
  the fact that it was extremely dangerous to close those
  gates.  I think I questioned Superintendent Marshall on
  that very point and he gave me the answer that it was
  dangerous, that they were to be left open.
     THE CORONER:    Exactly.  You have made my point
for me.  We have already dealt with that aspect of the
matter.  Now, whether the way the gates open or shut is
technically a breach of the Safety Certificate is not
really terribly relevant as far as this Inquest is
concerned.   Whether or not the capacities are a breach
of the Safety Certificate, that may well be very, very
relevant to this Inquest, but there are several matters
within the Green Guide which are peripheral and which I
do not want to spend time on when we have already dealt
with it.   You are quitT
                       e right, you have dealt with it,
at least Mr. Marshall dealt with it, and ....

     MRS. McBRIEN:     Yes, he dealt with it very
satisfactorily.

     THE CORONER:   I will in due course be dealing
with it when I speak to the Jury, a task I am not
looking forward to if I may say so.

     MR. FOSTER:   Are you in a position to indicate
whether you will wish to hear from a representative of
the Fire Service?

     THE CORONER:    The answer to that is no, I am not,
I am going to think about it a little bit further.   We
have had hundreds - well, we are going to have hundreds
of witnesses, and I want to restrict it to the absolute
minimum but if we do then we will let your instructing
solicitors know and we will also try and give you as
much notice as we can reasonably do.   The other thing
is that if we do then I would expect that we would be
calling a representative of the Fire Service to deal
with a narrow point.

     The one issue that I am interested in, which is
why I hesitate to give you a straight answer, is that
the positioning of the gates at the back of the radial
fences was not something that just happened, and the
Fire Service, I think, had a considerable input to that
issue and also have views as to the positioning of
gates within areas, and that may be a point which ought
to be put before the Jury.

     MR. FOSTER:     Thank you very much.

      THE CORONER:   It is that sort of field that I
ftave in mind if I were to ask them to come.

     MR. ISAACS:   I just wanted to apologise, sir, if
I appeared to be a little short with you during my
cross-examination.  I think it was rather that I became
frustrated with the witness's seeming reluctance to
answer a straight question.
      THE CORONER:    Mr. Isaacs, I did not even notice
it.

      MR. ISAACS:    I am obliged.

     MR. MAXWELL:   Sir, could I ask what the latest,
revised, amended timetable is?

      THE CORONER:   On Tuesday I think I said ....

     MR. MANNING:    SiV.,-* on the assumption that
Wednesday was going to see the end of the two witnesses
that   we have just finished, it was theend ofFebruary.

      THE CORONER:   That is right.

     MR. MAXWELL:   When you said just now, sir,    "We
are going to call hundreds of witnesses

     THE CORONER:   No, no.  I meant that we have, by
the time we have finished.  Bear in mind that we have
also had a couple of hundred or so in April/May time.
No, we are not calling hundreds more.  We are coming to
the end, if you like, of the bulk of the witnesses.
The big problem with predicting how much longer we are
going to take is because I am totally unable to judge
how long all of you are going to take with cross-
examinations with the witnesses who are still to be
called.

     The supporters I am beginning to gauge, but when
we get to some of the other witnesses like Dr.
Eastwood, or representatives of the Club, or the senior
Police Officers, it is difficult for me to gauge (a)
the length of your cross-examination and (b) of course,
we don t know to what extent if at all they will wish
to exercise their privilege against self-incrimination.
That may have a very big effect on the length of the
Inquest so it is difficult, but my best guess is still
end of February, beginning of March.  I wish I could
say it would be sooner because in many respects we are
taking too long over this Inquest, but I cannot see any
way of sensibly shortening it.  Does that help you in
any way, Mr. Maxwell?

      MR. MAXWELL:   Thank you, sir, yes it does.

     THE CORONER:   Is there anything else, apart from
saying have a good weekend, and if it is convenient can
we start at 10.30 on Monday? Thank you very much.

          (The Inquests were adjourned until
       10.3U a.m. on Monday, 28th January 1991)
