                                                                                            M I R . 15

                                                                                                                     SO
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised                  * tO                N umber



Title      \                          Cz1                             fi-w u x P    S g re e L J tr-
(hidude source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Yes/No
                                                                                                                       Receiver




                                                                                                                       Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                   Statement Reader
S tatem e n t reader's instructions


                                                                                                                            :er
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                              SIO
Examined - further action to be taken



                                                                                                                   631
                                                                                                                        Indexer
 F urther action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
   HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                       (WEST D I S T R I C T )



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HI LL S BOROUGH FOOTBALL

                  STADIUM DISASTER

              ON THE 15TH APRIL,       1989



             INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


                 PHILIP JOHN STEELE




                         Before

DR. S.L.   POPPER,   LL.B,    B.MED.Sci,   B M , B S , MRCGP

               (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                             At

             The Medico-Legal Centre,
                  Watery Street,
                    Sheffield.

                             On

             Friday,   27th April,     1990.




             TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          APPEARANCES:



MR.    D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors'   Group
                              Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH                  Medical and Dental Union of
                              Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                              Forrest)

MR.      CALLAGHAN            Trent Regional Health Authority and
                              South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                              Ambulance Service

MR.      GREGORY              Sheffield City Council

MISS      THORPE              Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN              Police Federation of England and
                              Wales

MR.    P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS.    B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire
MR.    P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                            INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER


   PROF.    J.C.E.   UNDERWOOD Called

           By The Coroner


   M.R.    SAWERS Called

           By The Coroner


   M. LAYTON Called

           By The Coroner


CLOSING REMARKS BY THE CORONER
27th April.    1990


            INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF PHILIP JOHN STEELE


     MR. FRASER:    Sir, you are now going to hear evidence about
Philip John Steele.   Philip's mum and dad and his brother are in
Court.  The family is represented by a practice which is a member
of my group, and I therefore appear on the usual terms for them,
sir.

     THE CORONER:   The young lad is Brian, is not it?     Hello,
Brian, and to you as well, Mr. and Mrs. Steele.

     Mr. and Mrs. Steele, I am going to describe to you what is
going to happen, how we are going to conduct this Inquest.
Before I do that I want to say one other thing.   Brian, of
course, was at the scene, was not he, at the time.   You are 14
now, are not you, Brian?

     MR.    BRIAN STEELE:    Yes.

      THE CORONER:    He is very welcome to be here, but if at any
point, mum or dad, you feel that Brian should go out then you
must take him.    I am not saying that will happen, but you must
feel entirely free to take him out if you wish to do so.    If you
want to go out, Brian, you tell your mum as well.    But you are
welcome to stay otherwise.

     Now, I will explain to you what is going to happen.     In a
minute or two I am going to read to you what occurred on 18th
April, 1989, in this very room, when I did the opening and when I
dealt with the release of the body of your son.   Then if there
are any corrections to be made, and I think there are one or two
that need minor corrections, we will deal with those.    I will
tell you what the blood alcohol levels were and then we are going
to listen to Prof. Underwood.  That is right, is not it?    Prof.
Underwood will tell us what the post mortem findings are.     Then
we conclude with the Officer who you know probably quite well,
the presenting officer - who is the presenting officer?    You have
met the Steeles before, or is it today?

     DET.     INSPECTOR SAWERS:     We met today.

     THE CORONER:    Anyway, you have met him.   He will tell me
some of the details, and and these ladies and gentlemen who are
the Jury.  When that is done Inspector Layton will take us
through some of the other evidence that is available, and will
demonstrate it on   these big plans, and then we will conclude the
hearing.  Is that   clear?   Iwant you to know what the sequence is
so that you know what to expect as we go along.

         This then is a resumed Inquest which was opened on 18th
April, 1989, and on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting
C o r o n e r ’s Officer said:



                                    1
                                                                                THE CORONER


                                      The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                                      identified to PC 159 Marsh of the South Yorkshire
                                      Police as that of Philip John Steele by Leslie Maurice
                                      Steele, his father.  He was 15 years of age, having
                                      been born on 24th May, 1973...."

                        and we have got "unknown",       but we will deal with that in a
                        moment:
                    B                 "He lived at                                      Merseyside.
                                      He was a schoolboy by occupation.         He was found to
                                      be dead at Hillsborough football ground following an
                                      incident there on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.         PC
                                      Marsh caused the body to be removed to the Medico-
                                      Legal Centre, and there he identified it to
                                      Detective Constable Simon W e i g o l d , who subsequently
                                      identified the same body to Prof. Underwood.         It is
                                      the family wish that the body should be buried".

                              There are one or two corrections and additions we have to
                        make.   The first one is where we said, "He was found to be dead
                        at Hillsborough football ground", that probably is wrong, but we
                        will be hearing evidence as to that in a moment.

                    D            You, Mr. Steele, signed a form which I sent to you on 28th
                        April, 1989.         I d o n ’t know if you can remember, but you did.    You
                        confirmed we had the name right, Philip John Steele, the address
                        we g o t |                                    [Merseyside, and the age 15,
                        and the place of birth Southport;            date of birth 24.5.73.   You
                        also confirmed that your name was Leslie Maurice Steele and that
                        mum's name is Dolores Steele and that your occupation is a
                        b u i l d e r ’s buyer.    You might wonder why I am saying all this, but
                    E   it is needed later on when the time comes for death
                        certification.          So I want to get it right now.     You agree with
                        all that, d o n ’t you?

                              MR.   STEELE;     Yes.

                             THE CORONER:   My knowledge of the geography of that part of
                        England is absolutely abysmal.  I just don't know.   Dr. Forrest,
                        as I said, did the blood alcohols, and in fact in the case of
                        Philip the result was negative.

                              Prof.    Underwood?

                                    PROF.   JAMES CRESSEY ELPHINSTONE UNDERWOOD Called

                                                       Bv THE C O R O N E R :

                        Q. Prof. Underwood, would you just introduce yourself and also
                           give the name of the case and identification, and deal with
                           your findings. - A. James Underwood, Professor of Pathology at
                           the University of Sheffield.  I am Honorary Consultant
                           Pathologist to the Sheffield Health Authority, Doctor of
                           Medicine and Fellow of the Royal College of Pathologists.
                H       Q. And this is in relation to Philip John Steele who I think was


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                              2
                                                                          P R O F . J .C .E . UNDERWOOD


                             identified to you and also recorded as No. 82 in the
                             sequential numbering? - A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q. And could you tell me in the usual way what your findings
                           were, please, in respect of this lad? - A. Yes, sir.  As a
                           result of my examination I concluded that the cause of death
                           was traumatic asphyxia.  Evidence for this is that the skin
                           around the face and neck had on it small areas of haemorrhage
                    B      or bleeding, and there were similar small areas of bleeding on
                           the membranes covering internal organs.  In addition, although
                           there were no fractured ribs, I did find a tear in the surface
                           of the right lung consistent with compression of the chest.   I
                           could find no evidence of any naturally occurring disease
                           process.

                        Q. And I think you say the cause of death was traumatic asphyxia?
                           - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. Prof. Underwood, please, I know you have told us in the others
                           but we must in this Inquest particularly deal with the
                           question of suffering and loss of consciousness and death.   if
                           you could just give me an explanation of your understanding of
                           what happens. - A. In relation to this case, sir, it seems
                           that as a result of compression to the chest the passage of
                    D      blood into the heart was slowed and eventually stopped.   This
                           caused the brain to be deprived of oxygen.  Within a matter of
                           seconds the individual would lose consciousness, and within a
                           matter of minutes, unless the process was reversed, death
                           would ensue.

                        Q. But once consciousness has been lost, as far as that person is
                           concerned he does not perceive anything any more, does he? -
                    E      A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q.   So one can say to the family, a lot of the things which you
                             have described and which have happened, of course, almost
                             certainly happened after he lost consciousness? - A. In my
                             opinion that is the case, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:       Have you followed that?       I wanted you to
                             understand that.

                                    MR.   STEELE:   Yes.

                                    MR.   FRASER:   The family have not questions,       thank you.

                                  THE CORONER:   Thank you, Prof. Underwood.  Is it likely
                             that the family would want to talk to Prof. Underwood?

                                    MR.   FRASER:   I think they might,     but it is not certain,
                             sir.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:       Prof.   Underwood,   do you mind? - A.      I would
                             be pleased to stay,     sir.

                    H             THE CORONER:   Prof. Underwood is quite prepared, if you
                             feel it would be helpful after the Inquest to have a little


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                              3
                                                  M.R.   SAMERS


chat with him and he will talk to you privately.

         PET.   INSPECTOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAMERS Called

                         Bv THE C O R O N E R :

     THE WITNESS:   Matthew Robert S a w e r s , sir,         Inspector,
West Midlands Police.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, whenever you are ready, take us
through this. - A . At about 1015 hours on Saturday, 15th
April, 1989, Mr. Leslie Maurice Steele travelled with his.
wife, Dolores Steele and his two sons, Brian Andrew Steele, 13
years, and Philip John Steele, by car to Sheffield.   The
family intended to watch the FA Cup Semi Final football match
at Hillsborough Stadium.   Mr. and Mrs. Steele had tickets for
the West Stand seating, and their sons had tickets for the
West Stand terracing.

     The family arrived in Sheffield at about 1400 hours, when
the two sons left their parents and walked to the stadium.
Brian entered the stadium with his brother, Philip, via the
Leppings Lane turnstiles and went into enclosure No. 3 shortly
after 1400 hours.  The brothers stood together near to the
front of the enclosure at the side of a barrier.

     Mr. Simon D o n e g a n , a friend of the      Steele family, was in
enclosure No. 3 at about 1445 hours and             spoke to both Brian
and Philip.  He describes both as being             well and in good
spirits.  He did not see either of them             again that afternoon.

     Brian was aware of the crowd in the enclosure building
up, and at about the time that the players came on to the
pitch, at about 1455 hours, there was a surge of pressure from
behind.  During the pressure the brothers were separated, and
Brian did not see his brother again.

     Following the severe crushing in the West Stand terracing
Mr. John Boyle, a spectator, who is a nurse, went onto the
pitch to assist the injured.  In the penalty area at the
Leppings Lane end he saw a youth he now knows to be Philip,
lying on the pitch being treated by a civilian and a St. Johns
Ambulanceman.  Mr. Boyle gave mouth to mouth resuscitation
whilst the St. Johns Ambulanceman carried out cardiac massage.
The treatment was continued for three or four minutes, but Mr.
Boyle realised that further efforts would'be in vain.  Mr.
Boyle left Philip to try and assist others.  The St. Johns
Ambulanceman has not been identified.

     Dr. John Calder was at the Northern General Hospital and
engaged in treatment patients from the Hillsborough Stadium.
He saw a youth he believes to be Philip who was lying on an
ambulance stretcher in an area known as the ’c l e a n ’ theatre.
Dr. Calder was joined by Dr. Duncan, Senior Registrar, who
certified the patient as being dead.  Dr. Duncan confirms that
he certified two deaths at the hospital but does not know the
identify of either patient.
                                                                M.R.   SAMERS



                               Dr. Janet Doore later confirmed life extinct on a number
                          of casualties, including Philip, in the plaster room which was
                          being used as a temporary mortuary at the hospital.

                               Later that evening Mr. Neville Udall escorted a number of
                          deceased, including Philip, by ambulance back to Hillsborough
                          Stadium where a temporary mortuary had been set up in the
                    g     gymnasium.

                               Upon arrival at the gymnasium Police Constable Marsh was
                          given responsibility for Philip.

                               At 2202 hours Mr. Leslie Maurice Steele identified the
                          body of his son to Police Constable Marsh at the temporary
                          mortuary in the gymnasium.

                               This officer later escorted Philip's body here to the
                          Medico-Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
                          Detective Inspector Timms, who later confirmed the
                          identification to Detective Cons ta bl e Weigold.

                               On Sunday, 16th April, following identification by
                          Detective Constable Weigold, Prof. James Underwood carried out
                    D     an autopsy and submitted a report giving the cause of death.

                               Found in Philip's personal effects was a ticket
                          counterfoil for the match which confirms his entry to the
                          stadium via a turnstile.

                                Despite extensive research it has not been possible to
                           identify the persons who carried Philip from the terraces.
                    E      Further, although it is virtually certain that Philip was
                           conveyed to hospital via ambulance, it has not been possible
                           to identify the ambulance crew.

                        Q. You say that because you found nobody suggested they took
                           anybody who died to hospital privately?  That is right, is not
                           it? - A. That is right, sir, and it is also right to say that
                           all the ambulance crews that we know about have been
                           interviewed and none can recollect conveying Philip
                           specifically.

                        Q. Of course, we have to remember that the ambulance crews did
                           not just take 30 people who died.  They took quite a few
                           others who subsequently survived, did not they? - A. That is
                           true, sir, yes.

                        Q. So they have more people to remember than we might give them
                           credit for, so to speak? - A. Certainly that is true, sir.

                        Q. On a very minor point, when we talk about Neville Udall,
                           paragraph 8, and you saw he took Philip to the temporary
                           mortuary, it does not actually mention Philip, but it is based
                           on a process of exclusion, because one can account for other
                H          people who we know were taken from the Northern General to the
                           temporary mortuary? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                      5
                                                                       M.R.   SAMERS



                                  THE CORONER:   I think what I will do is I will read you
                             a portion of the statement of John Sinclair Calder, Mr. -
                             Fraser, where he actually describes the hospital situation,
                             because I think that might just help you to know what happened
                             there.  It is page 23 for you, but nobody else can follow
                             these page numbers because they have not got the page n u m b e r s .
                             It is John Sinclair Calder, and he says:
                    B             "The next patient that I had specific dealings with was a
                                  young white male aged approximately 14/15 years of age.
                                  He was brought into the 'clean' theatre on an ambulance
                                  stretcher.          I cannot remember who carried the patient
                                  into the hospital.          Martin McShane, John Duncan and I
                                  approached the patient.          I immediately saw that he was
                                  not breathing and that he was cyanosed.          I started to put
                                  a cannula in his arm, but before I had finished John
                                  Duncan certified the patient dead and instructed me not
                                  to p r o c e e d ” .

                             John Duncan is quite a senior doctor, actually.  He is a
                             not a Senior Registrar, I think, but he is quite senior,         Then
                             he goes over on to the next page and he says:

                    D             "From the photographs shown I would say that the
                                  photograph bearing the print number   '82, Philip Steele'
                                  is the best resemblance to the patient that I am
                                  referring to.  Once the patient had been certified dead
                                  by John Duncan I had no further dealings with the
                                  patient".

                             And I think that is really all there is about the hospital or
                    E        in the hospital that is relevant:

                        Q.   That is right, is not it? I have not forgotten anything else?
                             Is there any other statement? - A. I am aware of a question
                             that may be put, sir, that is relevant to the hospital
                             procedure in relation to the time of certification, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:   Are you going to put that question in due
                             course?  Why don't you put it?

                                  MR. FRASER:   I will either put it or the officer can
                             answer it in anticipation of it, sir.  I don't mind either
                             way.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:    Go on then.    Anticipate the question and
                             answer. - A . My understanding of the question, sir, is that
                             the place he refers to death certification at 1600 hours,
                             that, sir, is based on a statement of Janet Rosemary Doore,
                             who is a Senior House Officer at the Northern General
                             Hospital, sir.   Following the D r s . Calder and Duncan dealing
                             with Philip, Janet Doore saw a number of deceased casualties,
                             apparently deceased casualties, I should say, in the
                             orthopaedic plaster room, and her recollection of the time is
                H            at 1600 hours.   She carried out a fresh certification of lying
                             being extinct in all those deceased casualties that she saw


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                           6
                                                                     M.R.   SAWERS


                           there.  Her recollection subsequently is that one of those
                           people was Philip Steele, and she refers to that specifically
                           on page 35, sir.

                        Q. She mentions that at that time she did not know the name, but
                           she knew all the Northern General reference numbers, did not
                           she? - A. She did, and she actually describes the process on
                           the top of page 32.
                    B
                        Q. And in fact what happened was that I think it was probably Mr.
                           Wardrobe, the A & E Consultant, who asked her to make sure
                           that anybody who was in there was (a) certified and (b) truly
                           dead.  That is right, is not it? - A. That is correct, sir.
                           My understanding was it needed a formal process of
                           certification as opposed to a cessation of resuscitation,
                           which is what Dr. Duncan and Dr. Calder had done.

                        Q. We have not actually put the time into the summary, but on the
                           introductory sheet which some people have seen we have s a i d ,
                           "About 1600” , and that is because Dr. Janet Doore says,
                           "Between 1545 and 1600 h o u r s ”? - A. She does, sir, and in
                           P h i l i p ’s particular case it is an approximated time.

                        Q. And Dr. Doore, like most people at that time, did not really
                    D      look at her watch, and so her timings are not absolutely
                           accurate? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

                                MR. FRASER:   There are no questions.        Thank you for
                           dealing with them.  I wonder, sir, in view       of our slightly
                           informal exchange whether perhaps the Jury       could understand
                           how the officer anticipated there may be a       question.  I
                           don't want them to be under any illusion.        Perhaps for the
                    E      sake of the Jury, sir.

                                THE CORONER:   Yes, I will explain this to you.        Thank
                           you.  What has happened in every case, actually, we sent out,
                           if you like, a draft summary of the evidence to the solicitors
                           in order to enable the families (a) to be made aware of the
                           sort of evidence which was likely to be presented, because
                           obviously it is much kinder if you know what is coming than if
                           you come to it totally cold, that is the first point, and the
                           second point was it enabled them to look at it and pick up
                           anything which they thought we had got wrong and give us a
                           chance or at least the West Midlands Police Officers on my
                           behalf, to research it so that they could come up with answers
                           if there were any, and (c) it enabled them to raise any
                           additional questions which they thought they might like dealt
                           with which we had not dealt with as such in the summaries.         In
                           fact, in many cases certainly, although it has not been
                           obvious, because what I have done is when I have known the
                           questions very often I have put them to the officer so they
                           were answered as part and parcel.  In this particular case I
                           did not do that, so the officer said, "Well, I know what the
                           question is and I can tell you the a n s w e r ” . So there is
                           nothing nasty or anything like that about it.        It was designed
                H          in order to make the Inquest as meaningful, if I can put it
                           like that, as we could within our limits, for the family.         You


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                           M.R.   SAWERS


                             did not have the preview, if you like, but you have seen these
                             draft summaries and all of you will know that the evidence
                             differs somewhat from what is typed, because it is amazing,
                             however hard you try, every time you look at it you can
                             think of some improvement or some alteration.   In the last
                             case, as you noticed, all of us slipped up with regard to a
                             time, and that is how it is.  You were not here, but it was
                             the family that picked something up in the Court.
                    B
                                  That is right, Mr.     Fraser?    I have got that correct?

                                  MR. FRASER:   Yes, sir.  I did not want the Jury to think
                             there was some telepathy between us.

                                  THE CORONER:   No, the intention is to get the facts
                             within the limits of the Inquiry at this stage as accurately
                             and fully as we can so that people know what there is to be
                             known, within reason, within these limits.   I have not read to
                             you what Dr. Duncan has said, because the officer's summary is
                             substantially that he can't identify anybody.   Any other
                             questions, Mr. Fraser?

                                  MR.   FRASER:     No thank you,   sir.

                    D             THE CORONER:    Perhaps I should just say that Mr.
                             Wardrobe, the A & E Consultant, he reviewed the paper work,
                             the notes, and in fact there was not anything in the hospital
                             notes relating to Philip.   That was not unique.   There were
                             quite a lot in that category.   That is no criticism.   I am
                             just stating a fact.   They were very busy with helping people.
                             His initial thought that Philip   had been triaged as dead, in
                             other words as soon as he came in somebody said, "No, he is
                    E        dead", and nothing was done, but it is clear somebody did make
                             some attempt;  Dr. Calder, as I read to you.    I notice that in
                             the opening remarks it referred to Dr. Davidson.    In fact, it
                             should be Dr. Duncan, who was present:

                        Q. One other thing.  In that extract I read I noticed there is
                           chap called McShane mentioned. - A. Yes, s i r .

                        Q.   I think you have researched him as well, because he is another
                             doctor, and I think   you told me that he was not involved in
                             any way with this young man? - A. Yes, sir. He has been
                             spoken to, and he had no involvement with any deceased, and
                             for that reason the statement would not serve any purpose for
                             these proceedings.

                                  THE CORONER:   But you might have come across his name
                             and wondered why he   had not been mentioned.

                                          PET.    INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                                                        Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q.   Yes, Inspector Layton. - A. Michael Layton, Petective
                H            Inspector, West Midlands Police.  Sir, can I say in the
                             summary you will see a reference to photographic


J. L, Harpham Ltd                                             8
                                                                      M.   LAYTON


                              identifications in respect of Philip, and with your approval
                              at the present time I would seek not to refer to those
                              identifications.  The situation is that the family as up to
                              today had not in fact seen visual evidence.  They would” like
                              that opportunity, and I think bearing in mind the time it
                              takes that perhaps we will certainly do that and it may be
                              that we can take the matter further then.

                    B   Q. But I think we have got quite a bit of evidence which locates
                           Philip? - A. Certainly, sir.

                        Q. Without relying on the photographic evidence which you want to
                           exclude at this stage? - A. That is right, sir, yes.  Sir,
                           with that in mind I can tell you in fact that Philip has been
                           identified by way of a plan as having been enclosure No. 3.

                        Q. This is Mr. D o n e g a n 's plan? - A. That is right, sir.  Mr.
                           Donegan has signed plans of the terracing indicating the^
                           position of Philip in enclosure No. 3 at the point at which he
                           last saw him.    He is the gentleman I have referred to in
                           relation to the photographs.         If you could bear with me a
                           second, sir, the plan we will be referring to is SMD/2.

                        Q. C.148. - A. It is true to say in fact originally Mr. Donegan
                    D      made an earlier plan which was given the reference number
                           S M D / 1 . It is a grid type plan, sir.

                        Q .   That is not the one we are going to use. - A. Sir, Mr. Boyle
                              has identified Philip from photographs as the person that he
                              treated on the pitch, and he signed a plan of the pitch
                              indicating the approximate location at which he saw Philip.
                              That plan, sir, is referenced J L B / 1 . As you have already
                    E         heard, sir, Dr. Calder has identified Philip from photographs
                              as being one of the patients that Dr. Duncan certified dead in
                              the hospital.

                        Q. JLB/1 will be C.149.      - A. Those are the only plans,    sir.

                        Q. So we do have two photographic recognitions of him, one by Dr.
                           Calder, on which his evidence is based and which I have read?
                           - A. That is right, sir.

                        Q. And the other one is....? - A. Mr. Boyle, sir.  Simon Donegan,
                           in fact, is a friend of the family, sir, and knows the family
                           personally.

                                       If I can refer you to the plan SMD/2, this is enclosure
                              No. 3, and the point at which he believes he last saw Philip
                              was in this position h e r e . In respect of plan J L B / 1 , John
                              B o y l e ’s plan, he refers to a location in that point there for
                              Philip, actually on the pitch at the Leppings Lane end.

                                   THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser,   is that reasonably clear?

                                   MR. FRASER:   No questions, sir.  Sir, again, before you
                H             conclude the evidence I have specific instructions from this
                              family to rise and offer their thanks through you to everybody


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                           9
                                                               THE CORONER


                        who helped Philip on the day.  Everybody who played a part in
                        an attempt to revive and resuscitate him is warmly thanked by
                        his parents, sir.

                             THE CORONER:   Thank you very much, indeed.  On behalf of
                        everybody I accept it with great pleasure, and I am always
                        moved when Mr. Fraser gets up, because I feel it is kind of
                        you at a time like this to think of thanking the people.   So
                    B   it is very much appreciated.  There are no more questions of
                        Mr. Layton?

                             Can I say   that is all the   evidence we      are going to take
                        at this stage.    Before I close   I wanted to say to you, Mr.' and
                        Mrs. Steele, how thankful I am that you have got that young
                        lad sitting next to you, because of course he was in the same
                        area, and unfortunately, as you know, there are a few cases
                    C   where more than one person was lost from the same family unit.
                        So that is a blessing for which we have got to be really
                        thankful.

                             Of course, that does not mean to say the son, Philip,
                        whom you lost,   was not just as   precious as he is. Different,
                        of course, because he was another boy, but just as precious,
                        and in that sense I am exceedingly sorry and would like you to
                    D   know that we feel for you in this terrible loss which you have
                        suffered.  I wish I could say more than that, but it is
                        difficult to think of suitable words.   Thank you very much for
                        coming.

                             Prof. Underwood, if you want him to speak to you,   will
                        speak to you after the Inquest.
                    E        Ladies and gentlemen, this is in fact the last Inquest we
                        are doing today,    and it is Friday again.   This has been the
                        hardest week.     I did not tell you that in the beginning, but
                        you will have noticed it anyway yourself.      The reason why it
                        is the hardest is not because we have had families who have
                        not been nice   or because the evidence has been particularly
                        difficult, it    is the hardest week because it is the middle
                    F   week and because we have done quite a lot.So you may have
                        felt a bit of strain.      I don't know. But you have the weekend
                        to recover.   Next week you will find it will be easier, not
                        because people are any nicer.      The evidence will be similar,
                        if you like.   I don't know who is coming, so I can't actually
                        talk about the people themselves, but that is not the point.
                        From your point of view you will know that by the end of next
                        week you will have heard the evidence on all 95 cases, and it
                    G   makes it easier, I am sure.

                             Now, you have been wonderfully good.  It is hard what you
                        are doing, and I very much appreciate it, and I am quite sure
                        the families do.  They only come in for a few minutes, but if
                        they stop and think about it they will appreciate that, too.
                        Keep it up.  Have a good weekend, and as I said to you last
                        Friday, forget Hillsborough.  Live your ordinary lives.  I
                H       don't you to talk about it with anybody anyway.  So it is easy
                        to forget it because it saves you.  Remember the directions I


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                    10
                                              THE CORONER


have given you regarding discussion,        and don't do it.

     Remember on Monday we are starting at q u a r t e r - p a s t - 9 . We
are going to have a long break for 10 of you, and for one of
you I am afraid it will be a break from here but it will be an
unhappy break, and I quite understand.   You must make sure
that I know what the latest time you have got to leave from
here in order to get to wherever you are going on time.               I
think we will be perfectly all right, judging by the time we
take, but if need be I will adjourn an Inquest and we will
just have to wait.  You will get away.   Then we start again at
2.  Please warn your partners or anybody that next Monday we
we will be considerably later because we will have to catch up
on the cases which were postponed from the morning.

        Thank you very much, ladies and gentleman.  Is that all
satisfactory and clear to you.     Mr. Limb, you were not here,
but one of the Jurors, unfortunately, has had a bereavement in
his family on Sunday, and the funeral is on Monday.     So we are
releasing him to go to the funeral, but it means we have to
readjust our timetable.     So quarter-past-9.  I hope that,
w o n ’t be too inconvenient for you.

      MR.   LIMB:   Not at all,    sir.

     THE CORONER:   Any other comments from any of you?
Anything that needs to be said?    In that case we will rise.
Goodbye, Mr. and Mrs. Steele.   It was nice to have met you.

      (The Inquest into the death of PHILIP JOHN STEELE
            was adjourned to a date to be f i x e d )
