    INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

 VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

           STADIUM DISASTER

        ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                Before

S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

        (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                 At

            The Town Hall,
              Sheffield.

                 On

         2ist February, 1991




      TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
     Official Shorthand Writers,
 55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                           Page



CHRISTOPHER EDGAR NICHOLSON Recalled

    By THE CORONER                          1.
    Cross-Examined   by MR. MAXWELL        23.
    Cross-Examined   by MR. HALE           32.
    Cross-Examined   by MR. PAYNE          34.
    Further by THE   CORONER               67.
    Cross-Examined   by MR. ISAACS         70.
    Cross-Examined   by MR. KING           72.
    Cross-Examined   by MR. CATCHPOLE      83.
             FIFTY FIFTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

             THURSDAY, 21st FEBRUARY, 1991


         CHRISTOPHER EDGAR NICHOLSON Recalled

                    By THE CORONER;

Good morning, Dr. Nicholson.   Before I leave the subject
which we dealt with yesterday, two or three little things
which I think we might as well just tidy up.   In
particular I want to exhibit, if that is the right word,
two or three more drawings because they illustrate what
you were saying and because I think it is easier to
understand.   If I can show you this one here, Figure 6.
That demonstrates the elevation of the barriers which you
were describing and also your horizontal segmental count
in one particular area? - A. Yes.

I know there are Figures for all of them but we don't
need them all because I am only using it as an
illustration.

     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, this is not
adding anything to the evidence.   It is just making it
easier to visualise it:

If in two or three sentences you can explain what it
shows. - A. This was purely a method of dividing up pen 3
into areas so we could determine the different densities
at different parts of them.    I described where the
barriers were.    On this Figure you can see where the
barriers are.   They are actually on this Figure. Above
each one you can see a dotted line and the dotted line
represents approximately where people's heads would be
and as each dot represents heads, it is a means of
separating these heads as the people between separate
rows of barriers.

This gives an illustration of the third   row from the
back, the one in fact where people were   leaning against
124A, the critical one.   It also shows   the small hatched
area to the right of the row, which was   our superimposed
density because we did not have part of   that photograph
to use for our analysis.

     MR. BEECHEY:   The number for this document is
C.497.

     THE CORONER:    If this one could be passed to
Dr. Nicholson.    Dr. Nicholson, I think that is pen 2
projection? - A. Yes.
                                  C. T.. NICHOLSON


The strip which you referred to.   Let's wait until it
goes up on the screen and then very briefly... - A. Yes,
very briefly this shows a strip parallel to the radial
fence between pens 2 and 3.    We counted the people
within that strip to get an estimate of the density
within that part of pen 2 and you can see the head count
is 150, and that works out a density of approximately 5
people per square metre.   You can see there is quite a
range in density over that strip as well.

     MR. BEECHEY:   The number for this document is
C.498.

     THE CORONER:   If I just pass you thisone, this is,
I think, your comparison between pens 3 and 4? - A.Yes.

You have explained this to us already but it visually
illustrates what you have told us. - A. Yes.   This was
taken from another photograph, the photograph that was
taken on the pitch itself so it was at a much lower
angle.   We compared densities in pen 3 on the left hand
side with pen 4 on the right hand side, by selecting
identical areas, identical shapes, within each pen.
Here there are four different measurements of the same
areas.   It moved to different positions within these two
pens.   You can see on the top one pen 3 had 44 people
within that hatched area; pen 4 had 56 within that
hatched area.   Similarly the same figures were produced
for the three other examples, such that the averaged
counts for pen 3 was 48.75 and pen 4 was 49.25, so they
were very, very similar.   That is what we based our
conclusion on, that the two densities in the pens were
very similar.

     MR. BEECHEY:   The number for this document is
C.499.

     THE CORONER:   You remember before we finished last
night the question was asked as to whether you knew how
many people had been in pen 4.   Have you had a chance
to... - A. Yes, we have looked at that overnight and
having compared the two areas of pen 3 and pen 4, and
assuming the average density that we measured in pen 3 of
8.38 persons per square metre, which gave us a capacity
for pen 3 of 1,576, using that density on the area of pen
4 we have come up with a figure of 1,607 persons.    That
is an estimate.

On the assumptions which you have postulated? - A. Yes.

I didn't ask you this, but I know you know the answer,
certainly for pen 3.   The number of people who would
have been in that pen, if you worked it out at 5.4, is it
                                    C. E • NICHOLSON


right that would have been 1,015?   Do you want to check
your table? - A. I think it was 1,015 based.

I will show you.   You have got it in front of you but...
- A. Thank you.   Yes, this is our calculation, purely
based on 5.4 over the whole of that area.

Yes, that is right, not making allowances for all the
other factors?   Purely on area? - A. Purely on area and
that density, yes.

I don't know whether you did that sum for pen 4 as well,
purely on area? - A. No, I don't think we did.

      MR. KING:  Sir, I   have a figure from somewhere
which sounds very close   to the other figure, 1036 for pen
4, which would probably   make sense in view of the slight
difference of the area.     I must have got it from
somewhere, sir, because   it wouldn't have come from my
head!

     THE CORONER:   In fact it is only a matter of
multiplying the square metreage by 5.4? - A. Yes, I think
that is in our report as well.

Now one final point while we are still on numbers, and
this is a different question: you computed, and I will
show you the drawing because that will bring it to mind,
you computed an estimate of the number of people who
might have been outside.   I think you took a density of
8? - A. Yes.

Just tell us... - A. Yes, this was to calculate the sort
of size of crowd that could have actually been within the
various areas outside the turnstiles at Leppings Lane and
you can see A to G and 1 to 16 of the two runs of
turnstiles.   We have there three separate areas - area
1, area 2 and area 3 - and we calculated the figures for
areas 1, 2 and 3, based on densities of people of 8 per
square metre and of 10 per square metre.   Now 10 was the
figure that we deduced was very tight, but nobody was
being distressed by that density in our laboratory tests.

Can you give us the figures?   Give us the figures for 8
first and then for 10. - A. Area 1?

Yes. - A. Area 1 was in fact 65 square metrea in area and
at a density of 8 gave 520 people, and a density of 10
gave 650 people.   Area 2 was an area of 160 square
metres which, for a density of 8, gave 1,280 people and a
density of 10 gave 1,600 people.   Area 3 was 260 square
metres with a density of 8 that gave 2,080 and the
density of 10 gave 2,600.
                                  C. T?..NICHOLSON


If we add all those areas together at a density of 8 it
would account for a crowd of 3,880. With a density of 10
it would account for a crowd of 4,850.

     MR. BEECHEY:   The number for that document is
C.500.

     THE CORONER:   This is simply computed numbers based
on densities which you have applied to measured space? -
A. Purely density times area, just to give an estimate of
the number of people who could be in that areas.

Yes, thank.   Would I would like now to do is to turn to
the barriers and in particular the one I am interested in
is, of course, the barrier which broke, which is the way
we tend to describe it.   I think what I would like you
to do is, in a sense, take it in two parts.   Well, maybe
the best way of doing it is to start with how you attack
the problem of working out why this barrier might have
broken. - A. Yes.
                                        G. E. NICHOLSON


Yes. - A. The initial part of our investigation was
concerned with what the components were, what they
measured, what condition they were in, how much they
were bent, and we measured the thicknesses of the
tubes, measured the amount of deformation, and also
looked at what materials had been used, actually cut
into them to look at what materials had been used.

Would it be helpful if we could have that schematic
figure?

Yes, is it Figure 1? - A. Yes. There is a slight error
on this, which is purely an artistic error, I am
afraid. Where it says Support No. 3", the actual two
legs of the support, the vertical support, are the
wrong way round. It is an "L" shaped section and it is
the wrong way round on our schematic figure. I
apologise for that error.

Basically you can see that the barrier consists of a
horizontal tube supported by four vertical supports,
and each one of those has been numbered, 1, 2, 3 and 4.
You can see that there are various brackets apparently
attached where the legs go into the terrace, and also a
couple of diagonal brackets on supports 1 and 2. This
was one of the things we found during our
investigation, that although it looks like a simple
barrier it is quite complicated. It is quite an old
barrier; we postulated that the material of the
horizontal tube, which we found to be wrought iron, was
at least 60 years old. We had this confirmed, rather
fortuitously, by the discovery of a newspaper inside
the tube which was dated 1931, so this gives a very
good dating that the tube was at least 60 years old.

We also found that parts of the tube had been repaired.
Not all of it, for instance, was wrought iron. A part
between supports 1 and 2 was found to be a low carbon
steel. So you end up with quite a complicated
structure that is more complex than it first looks.
We also found that under the supports, just where the
numbers are written, 1, 2, 3, and 4, there is a
retaining clip which fastens the horizontal tube to the
support, and under those clips we found severe
corrosion. In some places, certainly under vertical
support 4, there were actual holes in the horizontal
tube.

So the first thing we did was to measure the amount of
deformation on the two spans that had broken. You will
remember from photographs I am sure you have seen of
the collapsed state of the barriers as they were
discovered after the incident, that both span 2/3 and
                                        G. E. NICHOLSON

3/4 - we will call those spans 2/3 and 3/4 - were in
fact removed and were down on the terrace. One was
completely separate, span 2/3, and 3/4 was still
attached to the buckled part of support 3. Actually
when I was at the Ground on the Sunday morning the tube
2/3 was out on the pitch and 3/4 was still attached to
the support 3. Also I found a very small piece of tube
at the front of the terrace, that was a small bit that
had broken off from underneath the retaining clip,
where the figure "4" is.

So we measured the amount of corrosion and we measured
the amount of deformation of the two tubes 2/3 and 3/4,
because that would give us an indication of what force
had been placed on this barrier during the incident.
3/4 was deformed very evenly in an even curve, and the
total deformation was some 200 millimetres, whereas 2/3
was less than that, 133 I think it was.

We were asked then to look at this information to
deduce what forces were required to produce this
effect. Our initial approach was to measure this
deformation of 3/4 and try and deduce what sort of
forces had been placed on that tube to bend it in that
manner. It is a very complicated thing, I am afraid.
There are various ways you can consider it. You could
think, for instance, that the tube because it has got
this evidence of corrosion, that it is really like
three separate barriers, or you could think of it as a
continuous long tube, and whichever you assume alters
the figures that you get for the amount of force
required, the load required to bend the barrier into
the state that it as found. So we calculated, from the
amount of deformation on 3/4 that if we assume it is
simply supported at the end - and one end is open,
isn t it, so it is not supported - if we assume that at
point 3 it is getting some support from the next bit of
tube, 2/3, then that amount of deformation that we
found would be produced by a force of approximately 8
kilonewtons per metre, but if we assume that because of
corrosion perhaps, or if it is a different stressing
system, that 3 is simply supported, in other words it
is a separate tube, then that reduces the amount of
force required to produce that deformation, and it
reduces it down to something like 6 kilonewtons per
metre. So our figures, in very simplistic terms, we
would predict that the barrier would fail between 6
kilonewtons per metre and 8 kilonewtons per metre.

     MR. BEECHEY:   The "C" number for this document,
sir, is C501.
                                         G. E. NICHOLSON

     THE CORONER:   Just so that we know what you mean
by kilonewtons, this is the measure of the force, isn't
it? - A. Yes..

It doesn't actually matter what a kilonewton is? - A.
Not at all, no.

It is just the measure of the amount of force applied,
per metre of tubing, so to speak? - A. Yes.

So were you saying that the force required to deform
the tube, to put the bend in it, so to speak - were we
talking about 2/3 or 3/4, I am sorry, I have forgotten?
- A. 3/4.

Depending upon which model you use as to its support. -
A. Yes.

Will vary between 6 and 8 kilonewtons? - A. Yes.

Did you do the same sum for 2 and 3 or not, or was it
unnecessary? - A. We did do figures. It was similar
sorts of figures. It is a matter of whether we go into
very fine detail.

No, I don't think we want to go into very fine detail.
- A. Similar sorts of figures.




                    /Q. Could you just
                                           C. E. NICHOLSON


Could you just, before we move on to how these forces,
if any, might have been generated and how they fit in
with testing requirements and so on, could you just
tell me; we know, because we have seen the photographs
at least, that the legs were deformed as well and were
twisted in various ways. In your view what happened
the first? Was it the bending of the bar or the
deformation of the legs? - A. Really we think that the
horizontal beams bend first because in order to bend
the bar, to be in the condition that we found it, the
two supports, support 3 and support 4 have to be
vertical so that they are strong enough to take the
force that has been put on to the bar. So we think
that the bar starts to bend first.

    The mechanism that we have put forward for the
total failure, the complete collapse, is that end 4
would come out because we know end 3 is still attached.
Then support 3 will then collapse. Sorry, bar 2/3 is
also bending at this time and so bar 3/4 comes out at
the end 4 and twists and swings round. Then bar 2/3
also comes out at both ends. We found those to be
heavily corroded but despite the corrosion the supports
had been strong enough to support it whilst it was
being bent. So that gave us a marker for the fact that
the vertical supports must have been strong enough up
to a point.

That brings me to the second point on the supports
because there is, of course, a difference between the
bending of the bar, the yielding. Let us just take 6
kilonewtons or 8, it does not really matter which, but
that force has been applied in order to achieve the
curve? - A. Yes.

But not any force in excess of that, simply that? - A.
Yes.

As I have understood what you have said is that the
barrier at the end of the day would have had a curve in
it but would have still been standing, is that right?
It would not have collapsed at that force, would it, or
have I misunderstood you? - A. No, it collapses as the
force gradually increases. The first thing that would
occur is that the bar starts to bend until it reaches
the critical point when it pulled out at one end.

Are you in a position to say — because that is what I
thought you had said — that to achieve the bend and on
the assumption that the legs were holding it so that
you could do it, you need 6 kilonewtons? - A. Yes.

That is right, is it not? - A. Yes.
                                           C. E. NICHOLSON



Or 8 depending upon which mechanism you postulate? - A.
Which you prefer.
How many more kilonewtons did you need in order to get
collapse? Are you with me? Have you understood what I
am trying to say? - A. Yes. I think one of the
problems is understanding what happens during the
stressing of this device. As the load initially goes
up it first behaves in an elastic manner. In other
words, just like a piece of elastic it recovers
completely. When the load goes a little higher you
actually come to a point where you are never going to
get back to the same position. It will never quite
recover and that is the first point of yield. We think
that occurs at approximately a figure of around 5 or
5.5, something like that. That does not mean that the
barrier collapses at that. We have to go higher to a
higher stress to actually produce collapse and
depending on whether it is a simply supported model or
receiving some support from the next barrier it will
have collapsed at either, between 6 or 8. They are
collapsed figures.
I misunderstood you. Thank you very much. The next
question that I think you applied your mind to, not
necessarily in this order, was given that the forces
were obviously generated otherwise we would not have
had the collapse? - A. Quite.
You tried to sort out something about how? - A. How
they were generated, yes.

I think what you did was that you had to actually
design a completely new concept. I think you call it a
leaning crowd model, do you not? - A. Yes.

Perhaps you could just tell us a little bit about what
you did there and what you established? Do you need
for that the picture of... - A. The leaning crowd
model, yes.
I was going to suggest the other one? - A. The
distribution of the barriers?

Yes. This was the thing you had in mind? - A. Yes, if
we can use those two.
Put them both up. Put the leaning crowd one up first
or do you prefer the barriers? - A. I would prefer the
barriers first if I may.
                                           C. E. NICHOLSON


Put the barriers up first (drawing shown on screen). -

A. This shows the distribution of the barriers in 3 and
4 and you can see where barrier 124A is where it says
two sections collapsed. That is part of the barrier
that we are looking at in the previous figure. You can
see here on this diagram the distances between the
barriers and the distances between rows of barriers and
between separate barriers. You can see behind 124A
that there is a barrier 136. 136 goes along a certain
distance until there is a gap of 2.2 metres. That 2.2
metre gap is directly in line with the end part of
barrier 124A which was horizontal tube 3/4 that we saw
in the last figure. So we deduced from this that a
large crowd within that part of the pen all moving
forward or pushing forward would put an extra force on
that end part of the barrier. Do you want me to talk
at all about gaps in barriers with respect to the Green
Guide?

If you wish, yes, you might as well refer to that at
this stage. - A. The Green Guide has been referred to
many times I am sure and we looked at the distribution
of the barriers to calculate, to try and interpret the
Green Guide, as to what should be an acceptable
capacity for Pen 3 and we deduced that from these large
gaps between the barriers that, in fact, we ought to
reduce the acceptable figure for Pen 3. It should be
reduced from the 1,051 base purely on area down to a
figure of — I would have to check the actual figure.

     MR. KING:   822, sir.

     THE CORONER:   822. - A. 822, thank you. That is
just based on the barriers that are there. The Green
Guide states that it is preferable for barriers to be
continuous. Therefore, they would support a certain
depth of people with large gaps between barriers and we
think the Green Guide means that that number in the pen
should be reduced by a certain amount and that is what
our figures were based on.

    Going back to the gap between 136 and 136A we think
that that puts an extra stress on to the barrier 124A
that collapsed. We tried to consult and read in the
literature to see if there was anything available on
crowd dynamics but had no success. We could not find
any previous work that was very helpful in this matter.
So my colleagues in the laboratory put forward a model
to try and calculate what sort of force people could
generate within a crowd without pushing. This model,
the one that we put forward to aid our calculations we
have called a leaning crowd model. It basically means
                                           C. E. NICHOLSON


that if somebody is standing vertical, if they lean
towards the pitch by 10 degrees a certain amount of
their weight is being pushed on to the row in front and
we calculated that if they lean at 10 degrees and they
are of an average weight we calculated what that force
should be. If you then take a complete row of people
leaning all on to the row in front you can build up a
pattern and a summation, a sum of all the stresses
involved. You can build up then a number of rows going
down to a barrier and you can calculate, using this
model, estimates of forces that could be put on to a
barrier purely by people leaning 10 degrees.

    We do not think that 10 degrees is excessive. If
you will have noticed in crowds when a goal is scored
or when people want to stretch to see a slightly
different part of the ground or whatever then people do
stand on their toes and lean forward. So we thought
this was a reasonable method of assessing the sorts of
stresses that could be generated by a crowd of people.
We used those figures. We calculated that to get the
stress that we calculated for the bending of the beam
it required a crowd of a certain depth all leaning to
generate this force. That depth of people could be
generated within that gap behind 124A. Could I perhaps
show this next one?




                     /THE CORONER.
                                                     12


                                        C.E. NICHOLSON



           THE CORONER: Yes. Sergeant Griffiths, can we
     now have the next one up?

           MR. BEECHEY:  I give you the 'C1 number for the
     one that is up at the moment, sir. It is C502.

           THE WITNESS: Now ignore the maths., we don't
     want to go into the maths.

           THE CORONER: Yes, we are not doing the mathematics
     but I thought it would be nice for you to see a bit of
     the maths, just to see what we are not doing.

           THE WITNESS:  It illustrates the principle. You
     can see the steps of the terrace with the height 'H'
     and the width 'W1 and then the person is the long leaning
     line which is leaning at an angle theta which we propose
     to be 10 degrees, then the amount of that person's
     weight, their actual weight is represented by the arrow
     'MG', the amount of their weight that is being transmitted
     forward is Pn, the little horizontal line halfway up the
     left hand side. Now that is shown as an arrow leaning
     against the person because it is supporting them, but if
     you think about it that is the force that he is pushing
     on the next row down and similarly he is being pushed
     by the row behind him and that is shown by the Pn-1 at
     the top, ignore the symbols but that is the principle
     that is the push on the person behind. That is of course
     at a distance H away because that is the height of the
     step.
           Now you can do all the maths, and all the geometry
     and use this estimate, it is purely a model to calculate
     stresses that people could exert.

           Now on top of all that of course if people actually
     came in and pushed hard this would add to the stresses
     that we have calculated, but actually when people are
     standing very close together it is sometimes difficult
     to see how they can exert an extra force, so we thought
     it best to use something like this to give us a base
     figure.

Q.         THE CORONER: What you are saying this is a static
     model? - A. Purely static.

Q. Purely static, people are assumed to have    got into
   position, no movement apart from the lean?   - A. Yes, and
   if you have got sufficient depth of people   then it is,
   we think using our model, it is sufficient   to create
   the stresses that could have benttthe tube   in the manner
   that it was bent.
                                                         13


                                        C.E. NICHOLSON



Q. Did you take into account the density at which the
   people were? - A. Yes. We then added that to our model
   and assuming different densities of people will obviously
   put more people there and the more lean, the more force
   that they will put on to the barrier.

Q. What I want to know is this:if you had had no more
   than a density of 5.4, which is the maximum which the
   Green Guide recommends, that is right, isn't it? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Ignore all other, whether or not that was the appropriate
   density for that particular area, but let us just take
   it as the maximum.  If you had had no more than 5.4 and
   if your model is correct, namely static crowd of a
   density of 5.4 with the barriers in the location shown,
   would that crowd performing as described, have exerted
   the force required to break the barrier, in other words
   either 8 or 6 kilonewtons? - A. At 5.4 you would need a
   very large depth to produce that force and our calculations
   show in order to just produce 6 kilonewtons we would need
   some 6.5m. of depth of crowd to produce that sort of
   stress.

Q. That is in excess of the gap between the barriers as
   demonstrated on the previous .... Put the previous
   exhibit up, would you?

           MR. BEECHEY: The 'C' number for the one on at
     present, sir, is C503.

           THE WITNESS: We see there from 124A right up
     to 149 there is 3.5 metres plus 3.5 metres which gives
     a total depth of 7.

Q*         THE CORONER: How many metres would you have needed
     if you had had a density of 5.4? - A. To produce 6 kilo­
     newtons would be something in the region of 6.5 metres,
     so it could be met.

Q. It could be met? - A. Yes, using the model.

Q. In other words that barrier could have broken? - A. Yes.

Q. With that configuration even at a density of 5.4? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Obviously the higher the density then the more kilonewtons
   you are producing? - A. Yes.

Q. And the less gap you need? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. Were you looking at this graph of yours when you were
   working this out? - A. Yes.
                                   C .E « NICHOLSON



This is the most complex thing we are going to put up.
Have you got a copy of it in front of you? - A. Yes, I
have thank you, yes.
     MR. BEECHEY:   The 'C' number sir is C504.

      THE WITNESS: Now this looks rather complicated
but it is a graph of the force on the vertical axis
against the number of steps on the horizontal axis but
in fact it is also shown on the top, the crowd depth.
The crowd depth is on the very top axis, so really you
could have crowd depth or number of steps. They are
obviously the same thing, different figures.

      There are three different graphs, blue, green
and red. The red graph shows what the effect of the
density of 5.4, which is the figure in the Green Guide.
The green graph shows 8 people per square metre which
is the density we measured behind Barrier 124A and the
blue graph shows the density at 10.

      Now the test load for the barriers is shown as
6 kilonewtons and the other figures that are superimposed
on there show what we think the barriers would have
collapsed at.
      We did calculations both in original condition
assuming no corrosion and then calculations based on
taking account of the amount of corrosion under the
clips and you can see that these barriers would collapse
at a lower force when they are corroded.

      I must say that that figure for span 34 is
really our figure of 8 that we talked about.

      THE CORONER: That is right. That is what I
seem to remember. But are you saying that in fact if
you use a different postulate .... A. Then we could
bring that down to 6.
And this graph would have to be redrawn to take account
.... A. Yes of another system, another possible system
for considering it.

But may I ask you: from your experience and your
expertise of the two postulates which one do you prefer,
of the two models to calculate the loads? Presumably
when you drew this graph you preferred the supported
model, didn't you with the 8 kilonewton force? - A.
I don't know whether preference is the right word
really. We were trying to consider the maximum force
that was required to bend the tube so we thought assuming
one end is free or simply supporting the other one built
in would give the iaaxinium force figure so we could then
calculate what crowd was required to produce that.
                                                      15

                                   C.E. NICHOLSON



      The second figures that we produced after this is
trying to take account, trying to bring the figure down
to the lowest that we think it could be, so in other
words our figures of 6 and 8 bracket the range of forces
that we think are required to cause the barrier to
collapse and I think it really has to be left as in­
accurate as that really because there are so many
variables and so many unknowns.




                      Q. It is very interesting
                                            C. E. NICHOLSON


It is very interesting that when you look at what looks
like just a couple of bits of metal across a terrace,
that it represents enormous mathematical and physical
difficulties and engineering problems if you sit down and
try and do the sum? - A. That is correct.   It is far
more complicated and far more complex than was originally
thought.

That has answered my next question which is that when you
actually got down   to trying to do the sums, it proved to
be a very much more difficult operation than you had
initially anticipated? - A. Yes, it certainly did.

     THE CORONER:     Members of the Jury, we will put
copies of this into the file so you can see them more
easily, but have you understood in principle what
Dr. Nicholson has been saying about these lines?     Yes.

If I can put it in the most lay of lay terms, the nearer
you get to the left hand margin the higher the density of
people? - A. Yes.

Therefore the fewer numbers of rows of people you need in
order to produce the pressure effect? Would that be
right? - A. That's correct.

Dr. Nicholson, I am going to pause now for coffee.   I
know it seems as though we have hardly begun and I know
it is simple and straightforward for you but it is quite
difficult for everybody else. We will have a break and
recover!   I think you have done exceedingly well,
Dr. Nicholson.   You have managed to convey very complex
matters in an easily understandable and simple form.

                  (Short adjournment)

     THE CORONER:   Dr. Nicholson, I am notorious.   When
I say quarter of an hour it is never that length of time!
Anyway, be that as it may, I want to move on to the
barrier testing. - A. Yes.

Perhaps you could tell us very briefly whether or not
barriers need to be tested and what basically the Green
Guide said about that? - A. The current Green Guide at
the time?

At the time, yes, the 1986 Green Guide. - A. It says very
briefly that barriers do need testing and it gives
instructions as to how this testing is to be carried out
by applying a test load of 6 kilonewtons per metre evenly
distributed along the length of the barrier.   It gives
instruction as to how much recover from that stress
should occur in order for the barrier to pass the test.
It gives a figure of some 75%.
                                           C. E. NICHOLSON


In fact I think these barriers were tested.   In fact the
barrier that broke, if I put it to you that it was tested
in 1988 would you accept that? - A. Yes.

I think you also had a demonstration of what the rig
looked like which Dr. Eastwood... - A. Yes, I saw that on
the Sunday, the day after the incident.

Presumably being applied to some different barrier? - A.
It was being used on the terrace when I actually arrived.

If I show you this picture can you tell me whether that
is in fact the picture of that rig? - A. Yes, that's the
one.

We will just put it up.
     MR. BEECHEY:   The number for this photograph is
C.505.

     THE WITNESS:    Yes, the bottom picture shows a rig
that is used for distributing the load evenly along two
bays of the barrier.    I don t know which actual barrier
this one is, but it is two bays of it.

     THE CORONER:     In this particular picture you can
actually see a bow in the tube? - A. Yes, in two tubes,
actually.

Whether or not that bow is a permanent bow or not you
can't tell because you can't say whether the load is... -
A. Whether the load is on or not.
But that is what you are trying to do, you are trying to
produce a movement   and then see whether it springs back?
- A. Yes, see thatit recovers from the test load.

In 1986 provided it sprung back or recovered to 75% of
its original position, or the position from which it was
measured, it was deemed to have passed? - A. Yes, that is
right.

If it sprang back to 50% then it was what is known as a
re-test job and you had to do the whole thing again? - A.
Yes.

If it was below 50% if was a fail and you had to replace
it? - A. Yes.

In very simple terms? - A. In simplistic terms, yes.

From your assessment of that - let's talk about the rig
first of all.   You didn't design it, of course.   It was
designed by somebody else? - A. Yes.
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON


Having seen it were you satisfied that it was... Did you
have any major criticisms of it? - A. Certainly not.    It
looked to be a good, robust structure, just the sort of
structure that would provide a good even distributed
load.   In fact we did an analysis later on, which showed
that the load it produced was a very well evenly
distributed load on such a barrier.

So the rig itself as far as you were concerned, was
satisfactory? - A. Yes.

The Green Guide provides that in fact you have got to
apply the load three times successively? - A. Yes.

You have to measure the deflection and the recovery and
work out the percentages? - A. Yes.

Can you describe the method which was actually employed
by Dr. Eastwood as to how he did this? - A. Not really in
detail but I know from the picture...

No, you have misunderstood me.   What I meant was, was
did he re-zero? - A. All I can comment on is that a test
sheet I saw of the tests that were done the previous year
which gave a single figure for deflection - recovery -
for the load applications, which suggested that
Dr. Eastwood did re-zero for each load application.

If I show you this sheet, can you look and see whether
that is the sort of test sheet you are talking about? -
A. Yes, that was the sort of test sheet.   In fact this
must be one of the ones that we did see.

Well, it came out of your report, so it should have been!
- A. Yes - thank you!

In fact can we have that on the screen?   We will give it
a number.

     MR. BEECHEY:   The number for this is C.506.

     THE CORONER:   If you look right at the bottom of
this sheet, the last two, the number is just off the
edge, but that is the 124A, the bottom line? - A. Yes,
you can see the "A" and it should be 124A, it has just
not copied through.

So the last entry is the entry which relates to this
particular barrier? - A. Yes.   They have put an applied
load of 1.44 tons which is equivalent to the 6
kilonewtons per metre test load which is required.
That is in fact the load stipulated or recommended by the
Green Guide? - A. Yes.
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON


We don't need to go through all the arithmetic but on the
basis on which that is calculated - if you look at the
last test - it would appear from that there was 100%
recover? - A. Yes, for both span 1/2 and for span 2/3.

Which would mean that it would clearly have passed
because that was more than 75%? - A. Yes.

I know there is quite a lot of argument as to the
validity of this particular method of calculating? - A.
Yes.   It is a matter of whether one re-zeros foreach
test or whether one takes from the very first test the
full recovery of 75% over the complete three load
applications.

In other words whether it is a cumulative test or
individual test? - A. Yes.

May I ask you thiss you have studied the provisions of
the Green Guide, the 1986 provisions? - A. Yes.

Is it right or wrong that in fact it is possible to
understand the Green Guide as justifying this method of,
in effect, treating each test as if it were an individual
one? - A. Could I read the passage?   Would that help?

Yes, it would.   In Annex C of the Green Guide, page 74,
number 5 sayss

     "If on removal of the force for the third time the
     recovery ofdeformation is at least 75% the barrier
     or handrail may be deemed to have satisfied the
     loading requirements."

Now in our opinion, the way we would have applied it, and
checking with other firms who test barriers, and other
structural engineers, one opinion is that that is a total
figure. Seventy-five percent should be 75% over the full
three load applications, but it is not unambiguous. The
way in which Dr. Eastwood interpreted it is still valid.
I don't think the wording is tight enough for you to say
specifically it must be one way or the other.

What you are saying is that you may not have interpreted
it in that way, and, indeed, other engineers haven t
interpreted it that way, but it is an interpretation
which would fit with the wording of the Guide as it then
was? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Just as an aside and we don't want to go into a lot of
detail, but a new version has come out of the Guide? - A.
Yes, it has.

In fact you had something to do with that? - A. Yes.
                                           C. E. NICHOLSON


The wording has been tightened up to try and clarify the
position as to what is intended? - A. Yes, that is true.

If one assumes for a moment that that is a correct
interpretation of the Green Guide - a possible
interpretation of the Green Guide - those figures in both
those pens would indicate a pass, wouldn't they, in 1988?
- A. It is possible to interpret them as a pass.

Can I go back to the question of the Green Guide, there
were two limbs, if that is the right word, to the passing
of barriers.   One was the testing - I wasn't thinking so
much of the two spans, but in addition to force
application there was also visual inspection? - A. Yes.

Do you want to deal with the question of whether the
testing of the spans, jointly or separately? - A. I think
it is a point that could be made now.    The upper line
shows the test on spans 1 and 2, which is two spans of
barriers and then the line below is 2/3 which shows the
test on span 2 and span 3.   Yet there is only one figure
produced in each of the squares for e^ich test so it is
not apparent whether the deflection figure in the Table
refers to a measure taken on span 1 or span 2 for the top
line.   Similarly, whether it was in span 2 or span 3 for
the bottom line.

It is quite clear that whichever span has been measured
during the test, that span 2has been tested twice.     It
was tested once when 1 and 2 were pushed and it was
tested again when 2 and 3 were pushed.    It is not clear
from the data how that is taken into account or where the
deflections were taken for either test.

Have you been able to do anything about that, or have you
just had to accept that that is how it is and there is
nothing more you can do about it? - A. No,there is
nothing more we can...

Because, of course, the spans were broken and so you
couldn’t really re-test those, could you? -A. No.

     MR. TOULSONs   Sir, I don't know if I can assist on
this because this was an aspect which was gone into very
fully at the Taylor Inquiry.

     THE CORONERS   Yes, I know, I have found it.

     MR. TOULSONs   Well, in that event you have the
point in mind.
                                        C. E. NICHOLSON

     THE CORONER:   I wanted to find out whether Dr.
Nicholson would be able to deal with it but if he can't
then I am sure Dr. Eastwood will be able to explain it,
because as you very rightly say, it was ....

     MR. TOULSON:   There is no mystery about it.   I
can be dealt with at the appropriate time.

     THE CORONER:   Cam I deal with the second aspect,
namely the issue of the visual inspection of the
barrier, and you have, of course, already mentioned
that there was corrosion present? - A. Yes.

My understanding is that the corrosion was below the
bracket, is that right? - A. Yes. If you think of a
bracket over the top of a tube, and if it goes down
both sides of the tube, it leaves effectively two holes
into which water could gather, and those were the very
positions where corrosion had occurred, because I think
the water could not get away perhaps, painting could
not be applied into those holes either, and those were
the very positions where holes had developed on 124A
and on other barrier within the terrace.

These were not immediately obvious on visual inspection
but once you think about it you realise it is a weak
spot, is that what you are saying? - A. I think that
the holes in 124A would have been visible because the
holes were on the end, where there is an end to the
barrier, on support 4 if you remember, so you could see
into the end of the tube and would have been able to
    through. In fact, on the next barrier, which was
125 along, we took a photograph of that a day or two
afterwards, and you could see daylight through there,
so it was possible to see these corroded holes in
barriers.

But irrespective of that, have I understood your
evidence correctly, that on the basis of this graph
notwithstanding the corroded effect, the barrier would
still have passed .... - A. Could still have supported
the test load, yes.

And may, depending upon which model you used, have been
able to support a kilonewton load of about 8, isn't it?
  A. Yes, and of course the test was carried out the
year previously, and corrosion is a time dependent
process.

That is my next question: to what extent, do you
think, could the weather or what have you, contributed
in that year during which it was not tested? - A. It is
difficult to say with certainty but I think that the
                                        C. E. NICHOLSON


extent of corrosion was sufficient that it would still
have been visible the year previously.

Just to get this absolutely right, the Green Guide
specifically provides that a barrier having been tested
it should not or need not be retested by the engineer -
in '89 - in a four year cycle? - A. Yes, it is a four
year cycle.

It used to be a five year cycle but it was shortened?    -
A. Yes, that is correct.

So the fact that it was not retested in '89 is not a
fault in engineering terms? - A. No, it is not.

I wanted to just go back to one other question on the
leaning crowd model aspect. If we look at C502 again,
the question I want to ask you is this: you have
explained to me what I call the drop onto the barrier
that broke, and the number of people who could have
been behind it and who could have exerted the force. -
A. Yes.

I am really just asking you to help me on this. If you
look at that diagram, or drawing, and you look at
barrier 125 at the bottom? - A. Yes.

You then follow it up towards the tunnel, and there is,
in fact, nothing between that barrier and presumably
the outside world? - A. Yes.

But if you confine yourself simply to the terracing,
the drop - I don't know if that is the right word, but
you know what I mean? - A. Yes, the depth of crowd
behind the barrier.

That's right - would, in fact, be greater? - A. Yes.
Than the depth behind 124A? - A. Yes.

And if as you did you had calculated the densities for
that terracing in your segmental section, it didn't
seem to me to be any reason to assume that the density
in that area was any less, as compared with the rest of
the terrace at the point in time when you were doing
your computations? - A. Yes.

Can you give me any explanation or reasons or thoughts
as to why that barrier did not break? - A. We have not
looked at that barrier in detail but from this
schematic sketch it would appear that part of 125 is a
smaller span. I don't know whether this figure is
accurate, but it looks to be a smaller span. Also the
vertical support is close to the fence, which means
                                        C. E. NICHOLSON


that the load distribution on that bit of 125 would be
different. There might be some effect of the actual
fence itself, with people bearing against a fence might
mean that there is some friction between the crowd and
the fence. This is pure speculation, I might add.

Yes, I know that you can't give a full answer, but it
seems to be an obvious difference and I just wanted to
know whether one could think of reasons as to why,
apart from simply the leaning crowd, one went as
opposed to another. - A. Possible different actual
dimensions, and there may have been some effect of the
fence, but it is pure speculation.

           Cross-Examined by MR. MAXWELL

Dr. Nicholson, let me begin by stating the obvious:
you are clearly highly expert. I would like to
establish the extent or the limits of your expertise.
You are a Chartered Engineer? - A. Yes.

And a Metallurgist? - A. Yes.

And Deputy Director of, is it Research and Services
Division? - A. Research and Laboratory Services
Division.

Of the Health and Safety Executive here in Sheffield? -
A. Yes, that is correct.

How long have you been with that Division? - A. Since
1974.

Before that were you in industry or somewhere else? -
A. I worked at British Steel Corporation, doing
research into fatigue, and before that in the British
Iron and Steel Research Association doing other
metallurgical research.

And the Research and Laboratory Services Division, is
that a division of the Health and Safety Executive that
is available to provide expert information for those
experts in the Health and Safety Executive, is that its
purpose? - A. Yes, that is correct. It provides a
service both in research and in laboratory services
such as incident investigations, for all the different
divisions within the Health and Safety Executive, which
is the old Factory Inspectorate, Mines Inspectorate,
Nuclear Inspectorate etc.

The old Inspectorates were staffed by people themselves
who were experts, but you are the brains for the
brains, is that right? - A. That is one way of putting
it, yes.
                                                          24

                                           C. E. NICHOLSON

Q. Are you an expert in safety in general terms? - A. I
   should say so with respect to engineering
   investigations, yes.

Q. Are you an expert specifically in safety at sports
   grounds? - A. No. This is the first investigation that
   I have undertaken that has involved sports grounds.

Q. In that respect you are not like, for example, Dr.
   Eastwood, who is an expert in safety at sports grounds,
   amongst other matters? - A. That is correct, yes.
Q. You know of him of course? - A. Yes, I met him after
   the incident and have had contact with him since then.

Q. Did you know of him by his reputation before this? - A.
   I am afraid not, no.

Q. Perhaps you can confirm that he is a highly reputable
   and authoritative engineer? - A. Yes, certainly.

Q. Were you aware of the Green Guide before this incident?
   - A. No, not at all.

Q. Are you a football fan? - A. I go occasionally to
   football matches, very occasionally.

Q. With experience on the terraces? - A. Very little.

Q. Is it fair to say without detracting from those other
   enormous areas of expertise that you have got, that you
   have got no practical experience of investigating
   safety at a football ground? - A. That is correct, yes.
Q. Can I now look at some of the figures you gave? I
   recap them because the figures fall like snowflakes and
   sometimes one has to grab hold of what you can. I only
   recap on these few: your best estimate of the numbers
   entering through A-G and Gate C was 9,734? - A. Can I
   just ...?

Q. Please do, yes. I will give you another figure at the
   same time. That was the best estimate; your maximum
   figure for entry, A-G and through Gate C as well,
   10,124? - A. Yes, thank you. Yes, I have got the table
   now.

Q. So that is a number that went into the Ground which was
   very close to the Safety Certificate maximum figure? -
   A. That is true.

Q. But the Jury know as you know that those persons who
   went in were not evenly distributed at the Leppings
                                                              25

                                              C. E. NICHOLSON

     Lane end? You know that, don't you? - A. When you say
     not evenly distributed ....

Q. Those persons were not evenly distributed in the area
   available either for sitting or for standing on the
   terraces? - A. Within the terraces, no, I see.

Q.    And knowing that you went on to consider specifically
     the situation in pen 3, didn't you? - A. Yes.

Q.    Two other things if I may: the first is for pen 3 you
     said you did your head count, and you concluded that
     there were 1,408 persons whose heads could be counted?
     - A. Yes, that is on one of our figures.

Q. Then you went through an exercise of assessing density?
   - A. Yes.

Q. So many persons per square metre. Part of that
   exercise you were able to do, is this right, by making
   an assessment of the density from the photographic
   material available? - A. Yes. We actually counted
   heads from actual photographs.

Q. As I understand it you had divided this terrace up, pen
   3, so that looking at the barriers you said there are
   effectively three rows of barriers, therefore four rows
   of people? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. And the back three rows of people you made an
   assessment of the density? - A. That was an actual
   measurement of the density.

Q. A measurement of the density, and for the front row of
   people you made an assessment of the density based upon
   an experiment? - A. Yes, an assumed density of ten
   people per square metre.

Q. That gave you a total of 1,576? - A. Yes, that is the
   figure.

Q. The experiment you told us about was one done in some
   ante room at Sheffield, in a building at Sheffield, and
   it was one where you, tested various densities up to
   ten persons per square metre? - A. Yes.

Q. I have the advantage of having yesterday's transcript
   here, at page 96, where you explained that Lord Justice
   Taylor participated in this experiment? - A. Yes, he
   did.
    A
                                                                       26

                                                         C. E. NICHOLSON


          Q. And Professor Maunder as well? - A. Yes.

    ]gj   Q. They wanted to understand what sort of pressures and
      '      what sort of densities actually felt like? - A. Yes,
             that is correct.

          Q. I read now this (Day 54-96D):
                 "We did a test up to ten per square metre,
                 which is greater than the three figures I have
                 read out already."
             That is the density for the other rows of people? - A.
             Yes.
          Q. It continues:
                 "At ten, in our laboratory test, everybody was
                 very tight but nobody was in any difficulty at
                 this pressure. We obviously could not take
                 higher pressures than this because we obviously
                 could not risk injuring staff."

             A. That is correct.

          Q. Or Lord Justice Taylor or his Assessor? - A. Most
             certainly.

          Q. That experiment showed, did it not, at that figure,
             that density though it was very tight nobody was in
             distress. Nobody felt in any danger, did they? - A. I
             think the only observation that was made by one member
             of staff was that one arm felt rather cramped. We only
             had the test for a maximum of two minutes and in that
             time one arm felt cramped. That was the only measure
             of discomfort felt.

          Q. This was a monitored experiment then, was it? - A. Very
             carefully monitored both in terms of the measurement of
             the area involved, the measurement of the number of
             people and also it was witnessed by first aid staff
             with all the necessary equipment.

          Q. Did the persons involved stand in a particular way with
             their hands by their sides or up in front of them or as
             they wished? - A. As they wished. There was no real
             control on that matter.

          Q. The inference from that is this, is it not, that nobody
             would be put in danger merely because the danger had
             reached 10 persons per square metre on average? - A.
             Yes, that is correct.




H
    A
                                                                        27'

                                                           C. E. NICHOLSON


        Q. For danger to arise you need an additional factor, do
           you not? - A. Yes.
B       Q. Some additional force? - A. Additional force or
           additional density I would suggest.

        Q. Something that can produce between 6 and 8 kilonewtons
           per metre width on barrier 124A? - A. I am sorry could
           you repeat that?

        Q. Yes. You need more than mere density to produce a
           force described as between 6 and 8 kilonewtons per
           metre width on barrier 124A for example? - A. From
           estimates from our leaning models it suggests that even
           with lower densities as long as you have a greater
           depth of people that is sufficient to create the stress
           on the barrier.

        Q. It is the leaning though in that model which produces
           the additional force? - A. That produces all the force
           actually.

        Q. All the force? - A. Because if you could consider that
           people can stand vertically and apply no force
           horizontally. It is only when they actually move
           forward or are moved forward that a stress is then
           projected on to the barrier.

        Q. When the acetate was put up, I think No. C.503, I am
           not sure whether the Jury can see the typescript at the
           top but it says:
               "APPENDIX 3
                A 'LEANING CROWD' MODEL TO ESTIMATE THE LOADS
               GENERATED BY A BARRIER

               Consider a person on the nth step behind a
               barrier. The whole crowd is assumed to be up
               on its toes, inclined forward at an angle theta
               in a fashion which would be adopted to obtain a
               view of an incident in front of the crowd."

           That is the assumption that is made, is it? -     A. Yes.
        Q. To all go up on their toes? - A. Yes.

        Q. Then may lean forward where, at their hips? - A. From
           the toes so that they are in a straight line.
        Q. From their toes? - A. Yes.

        Q. Did you find that to be a natural posture to take up? -
           A. No. It is purely a possible movement. It was an



H
                                                                 28'

                                                  C. E. NICHOLSON


     attempt to calculate the sort of forces that a person
     leaning could generate. There are many different
     shapes that people could take up. This is a very
     simplistic model to try and attempt to calculate a
     figure.
Q.    You have mentioned another possibility already which is
     not that the crowd leans but something makes them adopt
     that posture? - A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. That is the application of another force on to the
   crowd? - A. Yes, or another row behind the crowd.

Q. Are you aware of the evidence which has been given in
   this Inquest so far before you gave evidence? - A. I
   have not been in the Inquest before.
Q. I wonder if, for example, you had been supplied with      a
   daily transcript? - A. No.
Q. Or specifically the evidence of say Inspector Bullas
   who was in the stands looking down and saw a flow of
   people coming from the tunnel and out towards the
   front? - A. I have heard of that during both the
   Inquiry and parts of the Inquest but I was not here for
   when Inspector Bullas gave his evidence.

Q. That is the sort of event which could have occurred to
   create the force that you are talking about? - A. Yes.

Q. Please could you help me at least, and perhaps the
   Jury, 6 kilonewtons per metre width, for those of us
   who still have pints, feet and inches, is how many lbs
   per foot? - A. I would have to refer to a crib.

Q. Would you accept an estimate or do you have a precise
   way of calculating it? - A. 400 lbs per foot width is
   the equivalent given in the Green Guide and I will
   accept that figure.

Q. 400 lbs per foot width. That is a considerable force,
   is it not? - A. Yes, it certainly is.

Q. It compares with the testing force? - A. That is,    in
   fact, the same.
Q. That is the lower of your 6 to 8 kilonewtons per metre
   width there must have been a force of at least 400 lbs
   per foot of barrier, is that right? - A. Yes, 400 lbs
   is the equivalent figure for 6 kilonewtons and so you
   could work out the pro rata basis what 8 would be.
                                              C. E. NICHOLSON


Is there any way of making this any more graphic in
terms of explaining what body of people is necessary to
produce it? How many? As I lean against this bench I
am exerting a fairly minimal force, am I not? - A. Yes,
that is true.

A few lbs at most? - A. Yes.

400 lbs for each foot of this would involve a very
large concentration of force behind me, would it not? -
A. Yes, our model would predict how many rows of people
behind you that it would take to press against the
bench with 400 lbs on one foot of it, yes.

Did you work out how many rows of people? I may have
missed that? - A. It is within the graphs, yes.

Could you demonstrate it again please? I would have
failed the Coroner's question to the Jury which was
whether they understood your evidence. I am afraid I
may have missed that? - A. It is the leaning crowd
graph.

     THE CORONER: It is the graph which you have just
produced. It is No. C.504.

    THE WITNESS:    Would it help if I actually pointed
to the graph.

     THE CORONER:    Yes.

    THE WITNESS: This access is the force that you are
looking for and this figure here of 6 kilonewtons per
metre is the one that is equivalent to the 400 lbs that
you are asking about. So this load can be produced by
a crowd of various densities. These three graphs
represent different densities, 5.4 which is the Green
Guide density, 8 which is the density we measured
behind 124A and 10 the density we assumed for the front
portion of the crowd and that is why we used those
three figures. This is at a density of 5.4 and there
it would produce a force of that figure by either that
a crowd depth behind the barrier of — going up there -
- about 6.5, which is equivalent to a number of steps
of about 16. So that is how the graph and how the data
works. If the density of the crowd increased to 10
persons per square metre then it only needs a crowd
depth of 4 metres behind the barrier to produce the
same force.

     MR. MAXWELL: So in my situation leaning as I am
here, the crowd depth behind me would be between 4
                                             C. E. NICHOLSON


metres worth of crowd to 6.5 metres in order to produce
these variations? - A. On a slope.

On a slope. - A. We also have to assume that everybody
— I accept that everybody leaning at 10 degrees is
perhaps a difficult picture to come to terms with that
this was an attempt to show how people, as we have no
other data on dynamic forces and dynamic movement of
crowds; it was an attempt to show how just the effect
of leaning could produce this force.

As the Coroner obtained from you, what you had was a
static model? - A. Purely static, yes.

You appreciate that the evidence before the Jury
indicates a dynamic state? - A. Yes, of course.

Therefore, the leaning crowd gives way to some hard to
conceive or describe but nevertheless properly to be
assumed dynamic force? - A. Yes, certainly.

The Green Guide suggests 54 per square metre? - A. Per
10 square metres.

I am sorry, per 10 square metres. 5.4 per square
metre. Have you any idea where that figure comes from?
- A . I know it was the original figure put in the Green
Guide but I do not know its original basis.

Or what would justify it? - A. I understand that some
testing was carried out. I think there is some early
data within the Home Office but that has not been
readily available — readily obtainable, sorry.

Certainly in the anteroom you used you could get to a
higher density without anyone being in any distress? -
A. That is correct, yes.

The only other matter I want to ask you about is this,
and I am asking you this now as though you are a
spokesman on behalf of the Health and Safety Executive
and there is not any personal criticism involved in
this at all; in 1986 Sheffield City Council took over
the function of providing the Certificates in respect
of sports grounds such as this sports ground. It is
M r . Bownes' evidence that he wrote round to people to
see who would be willing to help Sheffield City Council
carry out this function. One of the persons he wrote
to and sought to involve was the Health and Safety
Executive. Were you aware that they were approached to
assist Sheffield City Council? - A. No, that would not
be part of the Research Division's responsibility or
any reason for why we should be told.
                                           C. E. NICHOLSON



His evidence was that assistance was declined. I will
not put it any more brutally by saying it was refused
but he said it was not made available. Can you think
of why that would be? - A. No, I have no explanation
for that at all but the approach I think would be to
the local area office and I cannot speak for them.




                         /Cross-Examined bv MR. HALE.
                                                    32

                                        C.E. NICHOLSON



                   Cross-Examined by MR. HALE:

Q.   Dr. Nicholson, I am not concerned at all with the terraces
     I am concerned only with outside the ground.

           You made an estimate of some 4,000 people who
     could have been outside the turnstile area. Was that
     at a particular time or was that at any time the maximum?
     - A. No, that was purely based on area and density so
     it could have been at any time.

O.   Have you seen any of the videos of the actual crowd.
     I think you have, you have made calculations? - A. Well
     I have seen a lot of videos in looking for general
     observations of what was happening at the time.

Q. So do you accept at times - I won't specify particularly
   when - but at certain times there were very large crowds
   outside the ground, outside the turnstiles? - A. Yes, I
   would accept that.

Q. And that possibly running into many thousands? - A. I
   can't comment on figures.  I am not an expert in
   estimating crowds from video pictures.

Q. But there were a lot of people there.    Do you accept that?
   - A. I will accept that, yes.

Q. All I want to ask you is this: having seen the sort
   of crowds that were there, there has been a suggestion
   that some step should have been taken to prevent that
   crowd from getting as far as it got, preventing that
   crowd from getting into the turnstile area and all I
   want to ask you is this, I know you are not an expert
   in sport but I am sure you have either seen or parti­
   cipated in a game of tug-of-war in the past. Do you
   know of that particular game?

           THE CORONER: Mr. Hale, I don't want to be unkind
     to you. I don't think he can answer this because what
     is he going to say? He is not an expert.  He has just
     told us.

Q.         MR. HALE: Well all I was going to ask you is this:
     on weight and mass of one man against another, would
     there have to be equivalence for one body of men to be
     able to hold up another body of men either pulling
     or pushing in the opposite direction? - A. Yes, that
     would seem reasonable.

Q. I wondered if you had had a particular experience but
   it seems commonsense .... A. I have no experience of
   tug-of-wars at all.
                                   C.E. NICHOLSON


No, all right, but would it be right then if you took a
crowd of people and you are used to, as we have seen
from your expert evidence, you are used to averaging,
aggregating and what have you. If you took a section
of men, if you took a large enough section you would
more or less come out with an average, wouldn't you?
If you took two sections from a large body of men it
would be unlikely that you would finish up randomly
with one section being all very small men, the other
section being very large men? - A. I find it hard to
comment on that.
      THE CORONER:   I don't think it is going to help
us, Mr. Hale.
      MR. HALE: All right. What I want to ask you
is this: on weight and mass on the average if you
have got 100 men holding up a crowd of several thousand,
what would the prospects be, on weight and mass, of
the hundred holding up the thousands and stopping them
from proceeding? — A. I would have thought that it was
unlikely but that is just pure speculation.

      THE CORONER: Mr. Hale, I will ask the question
in a slightly different form. I don't think it will
help us.
I think what Mr. Hale is asking you is if you have a
force in one direction do you have to have an equivalent
force in the opposite direction if the forces are not
to move? - A. That is exactly correct, yes.

It is one of Newton's laws but I can't remember which
one. That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

      MR. HALE: Yes, but I was merely wanting to
transfer that, rather than it be abstruse mathematics,
into a particular situation of crowds of men.

      THE CORONER:   I don't think you can do it with
Dr. Nicholson.

      MR. HALE:   Very well.

The other question I do want to ask you is have you
seen the temporary barriers that were in use in various
places about the ground. They are called crowd control
barriers, portable.  I can show you a photograph of one
but I wondered if you had seen one? - A. Are these the
portable galvanised devices?

Yes? - A. Yes, I have seen them.

We heard evidence yesterday from Mr. Lock that one person
could pick one up and move it? - A. Yes.
                                                         34

                                        C.E. NICHOLSON



Q. So comparing that with the sort of barriers that were
   on the terraces what prospect would there be, in your
   opinion, of such a barrier holding up a crowd of even
   several hundred persons let alone several thousand?
   - A. I am sorry I cannot comment.  It would need either
   tests or careful calculations on such a barrier and I
   have no information on that sort of a barrier at all.

Q. These barriers have no support behind them. They are
   entirely portable.   One person can pick them up and
   move   them without any   assistance. Are you quite unable
   to say as an Engineer     whether several hundredpeople
   marching forward would be held up by such a barrier or
   whether they would just knock it over? - A. I am quite
   unable to say, I am sorry.

         MR.   HALE: Well thank you.

         THE CORONER: I think we will pause for five
   minutes and then we will press on with you, Mr. Payne.

                        (Short adjournment)


         THE CORONER:    Mr. Payne.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q. Dr. Nicholson, when you were asked questions by Mr. Maxwell
   at the end here about your expertise one of the things
   in which you said you were an expert, if I have got it
   correctly, was that you were an expert in the investi­
   gation of safety in respect of engineering matters.
   Have I got that right? - A. Yes, I think that is a
   reasonable overall description.

Q. Is this one of the jobs of the Health and Safety Executive
   to investigate Questions of safety in matters of
   engineering? - A. Yes it is. If I can make a few
   references?

Q. Yes, what do you do? - A. The Inspectors in the field
   will be the first on the scene of an incident, a broken
   crane, a failed pressure vessel.

Q. A collapsed building? - A. Yes, a collapsed building.
   If they can't deal with the technical aspects of that
   incident themselves then they will call for either
   specialist inspectors, a specialist in a pressure vessel
   or some other specialism, or if they want actual
   laboratory work doing then they will call on the Research
   Division, so we are the central body for all engineering
   investigations for the whole of the Health and Safety
   Executive.
                                                        35

                                      C.E. NICHOLSON



Q. The Deputy Director sounds a very senior and important
   position? - A. Well relatively senior.

Q. Who is there above you in this structure? - A. There is
   one director above me and he is the director of the
   Sheffield Laboratories. Then there is a Research
   Director ahead of him because there are basically
   three laboratories. We have one in Buxton which looks
   at explosion and flame. They for instance investigated
   the Kings Cross tragedy. The third laboratory is
   in, at the moment in Cricklewood, which is occupational
   medicine and hygiene. They are interested in such things
   as asbestos and then the third is ourselves in Sheffield,
   safety engineering laboratory.

Q. In order to arrive at your position as Deputy Director
   of the Safety Engineering Laboratory, have you personally
   had to investigate a number of accidents involving
   questions of engineering? - A. Yes, many.

Q. Over what period of time? - A. Well I joined the laboratory
   in 1974 and my first real large investigation at the
   time was Flixborough.  I was involved in the Flixborough
   investigation.

Q. Was that an explosion at a chemical factory? - A. Yes,
   Nypro Works at Flixborough near Scunthorpe. We looked
   at the engineering aspects of that failure, the pipe
   dimensions, the sort of fractures that had occurred
   in the pipe structure.

Q. Does that involve looking at designs? - A. Yes, it goes
   through a great range of aspects and if it goes outside
   engineering then we are in a very fortunate position,
   we can call on other expertise within the three
   laboratories.

Q. Let's just stick to engineering matters.  It involves
   looking at designs. Does it involve looking at the
   various functions of the people responsible for the
   operation of the plant? - A. That is a side normally
   undertaken by the Inspectors themselves because they
   have more experience of direct dealings with companies.

Q. And would they report to you? - A. No, we would provide
   a technical assessment of the investigation to them.

Q. So that was a big investigation. What else have you
   done? - A. Well it ranges. There are probably 30-40
   different investigations per year that come into my
   laboratory. They range from a small broken bolt to a
   very large pressure vessel failure and to some accidents
   involving multiple fatalities. A great range over the
   past what nearly 18 years, 17 years.
                                                            36


                                           C.E. NICHOLSON



Q. When your Health and Safety Executive was brought into
   the case to assist the Taylor Inquiry you carried out
   some aspect of the investigation yourself personally,
   did you? - A. Yes, I was in overall charge of the HSE
   team looking at the various aspects that Lord Justice
   Taylor asked us to investigate.

Q. Can you just give the jury a summary of what the various
   aspects were? - A. Yes, we were initially asked to look
   at the barriers and I have described some of the work
   we have done on the barriers. We were also asked to
   look at the turnstiles, how they operated and the numbers
   who came throuqh them. We were also asked to investigate
   the number of people who came through Gate C. We were
   then asked to make estimates of the crowd within Pens 3
   and Pens 4. We vere also asked to assess the PA system
   at Sheffield Wednesday.  I think that is about it.

Q. Did you find out in the course of these works that
   there was in existence at the ground something called
   a "Safety Certificate"? - A. Yes, I knew there was a
   Safety Certificate after a week or two of the investigation.

Q. Are you qualified then to help the jury to look at and
   understand some of the engineering aspects which are
   dealt with in the Safety Certificate? - A. I have not
   studied the Safety Certificate at all. We were purely
   asked to consider certain technical aspects for
   Lord Justice Taylor, not to consider .... I have not
   looked at the Safety Certificate at all.

Q.   So you have not actually looked at it?    - A. No.

Q.    So v/hat is the answer to the question. If I ask you to
     look at the Safety Certificate and to look at engineering
     matters which are dealt with in the Safety Certificate,
     will you be able to say whether you are able to help the
     jury to understand those matters? - A. Well I would have
     to see the Safety Certificate first.

Q. Well shall we have a go and if anything falls outside
   your expertise, Dr. Nicholson, then you stop me, will
   you? - A. Yes, certainly.

            MR. BEECHEY:     It is C381 sir.

Q.          MR. PAYNE:     Have you got it open at C381? - A.
     Yes.

Q. Have you actually seen the Certificate itself which is
   shown on that page dated the 21st December  1979before?
   - A. No, I have not seen it before.
                                                             37


                                           C.E. NICHOLSON



Q. You had better just look at it then. Do you see the
   heading of it, what it is called? - A. Yes.

Q.   And       the address for which it is issued?-A. Yes.

Q.   And       the occupier and holder? - A. Yes.

Q. And the use of the premises for which the Certificate is
   issued? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you see that the Certificate is issued by South
   Yorkshire County Council in respect of those premises?
   - A. Yes.

Q.   And     that the terms and conditions set outinthe Schcdui^s
     are imposed? - A. Yes, number 2, yes.

Q.   And       number 3:

           "The terms and conditions hereby imposed
           are those which the South Yorkshire County
           Council consider necessary or expedient
           to secure reasonable safety at the
           Stadium ...."

     A- Yes.

Q. Can you look in the Certificate at part of Schedule 2
   which begins on page 3: "General Terms and Conditions"
   and the particular general term and condition which
   we may, I don't know whether it will or not, may fall
   within your expertise is number 24 at page 7 in the
   Certificate. - A. Yes, I have it now.

Q. Do you see that 24 says:

           "The Holder        which as we know is the
           Club        shall arrange for the Stadium
           to be inspected by a suitably qualified
           Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil)
           in the presence of a representative of
           the County Council within 7 months of
           the date of the Certificate and at least
           once in each period of 12 months
           thereafter and the Holder shall as soon
           as possible after each inspection supply
           to the County Council a Certificate by the
           said Chartered Engineer as to the current
           compliance or non-compliance with good
           engineering and building practices and
           with the relevant British Standard
           Specifications and Codes of Practice and
           with the appropriate provisions and
           recommendations of the Guide of all structural
           parts of the Stadium excluding the crush
           barriers and handrails."
                                                       38
                                      C.E. NICHOLSON



  Then do you see that 25 goes on, I am not going to
  read it out, but it makes separate provision for the
  crush barriers and handrails and requires that they
  should be tested according to a system which.is set
  out in 25. That is why it is excluded from 24? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you see that in 24 in the last but one line it refers
   to something called the "Guide"? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you go back in the Certificate to Schedule 1 which
   is the second page where there is an interpretation
   schedule, and if one looks down one can find the Guide,
   about halfway down the page, which"means that the
   Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds'as from time to time
   amended, issued by the Home Office, or such other code
   of practice as may be so issued"? - A. Yes.

Q. Now are you able to help.  I appreciate this may be a
   rather obvious question, Dr. Nicholson, but does it
   appear to you that the Safety Certificate at paragraph 24
   is imposing some duties to be carried out by a Chartered
   Engineer? - A. Yes.




                          Q. One of the duties
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON


One of the duties is to see that, the stadium complies
with the appropriate provisions and recommendations of
the Guide to Safety at Sportsgrounds?    I am summarising
it. - A. Yes.

I am going to ask you to look at the Guide andI am going
to ask you to see whether you can help the jury to
understand some engineering matters which arise in the
Guide.   If any of them fall outside your expertise then
please say so.   We are looking at the 1986 edition of
the Guide, although we are all aware there is an earlier
edition which was in force at the time the Safety
Certificate was originally issued? - A. Yes, I have got a
copy here.

Can you turn to paragraph 1?   The jury know this
paragraph but I would like youto see it so youhave it
in mind.   Do you see what it says:

     "This booklet provides guidance to ground
     management, local authorities and technical
     specialists such as engineers on measures for
     improving spectator safety at existing sports
     grounds.   It is a voluntary code and has no legal
     force."

- A. Yes.

Are you aware that in subsequent paragraphs the Guide
sets out, broadly speaking, that it is intended to
provide guidance and it is not to be interpreted
literally word for word? - A. Yes, I understand that.

Can you help the jury to understand the meaning and
effect of some of the provisions beginning at paragraph
12?   This is entirely from the engineering point of
view.   The jury is familiar with paragraph 12 and so I
am going to go straight to a place about half way through
the paragraph, unless anybody wants me to read it all.
Go over to page 8, please.   Do you see that this
paragraph is dealing with the assessment of the safety
standard of the maximum number of spectators, and about
half way down the paragraph on page 8, that is paragraph
12, it starts off:

     "To accommodate safely a maximum crowd at such a
     ground..."

That is, a large football stadium:

     "...might entail substantial remedial work;
     alternatively, consideration might be given to
     accepting a much smaller number of spectators who,
     properly dispersed, could be accommodated safely
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON

     without having to incur costly repairs or
     alterations.   The first step, therefore, is to
     assess, using the Guide's criteria, how many people
     can be safely accommodated in the different sections
     of the ground given the existing condition of the
     ground (ie determine a safe spectator capacity).
     This should be done with a proper, detailed plan,
     preferably drawn to scale..."

Do you see that? - A. Yes.

Are you able to help the jury on this question:   does it
appear to you, Dr. Nicholson, that this function here
under paragraph 12 is one of the matters to which the
engineer is being required in paragraph 24 of the Safety
Certificate to have regard? - A. Yes, I understand.
Now look at 101, please.     This says:

     "A ground should be divided into sections to prevent
     potentially hazardous migrations by spectators.
     Each section of a ground has its own limit of safe
     capacity (see Chapter 16) and a major migration can
     cause dangerous overcrowding.   Each section of the
     ground, for example, each end or side, should be
     self-contained with its own entrances, exits and
     toilet/refreshment facilities."

Do you think this is also a paragraph which falls within
the ambit of the engineer's considerations under
paragraph 24 in the Safety Certificate? - A. Yes, I would
think it would be something that the engineer would
consider.

Now both those paragraphs have referred to Chapter 16.
Can you go to Chapter 16, and I think you are familiar
with this because you have referred to it already, page
64, "Estimation of Safe Ground Capacity."   Now we tried
to struggle with this earlier on in the Inquests and if
anybody wants me to I will go through it inch by inch,
but broadly speaking, Dr. Nicholson, can one say that
this Chapter 16, which runs on for several pages,
contains detailed and comprehensive methods and formulae
for calculating what is the safe ground capacity of
various parts of the ground? - A. Yes.

I am not going to depart from my promise not to go
through it inch by inch but does it identify various
factors which have to be taken into account in working
out what is the safe ground capacity, depending on the
circumstances? - A. Yes.

At 222 on page 65, does it give our familiar figures of a
maximum of 54 persons per 10 square metres ground
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON


capacity when the viewing slope is in good condition and
27 per 10 when it doesn't comply with the guidelines?
Do you see that? - A. Yes - "...when it materially
deviates from the recommended guidelines..."

Yes, forgive me but I am paraphrasing it.    I don'twant
to go into too much detail.    Are these matters in
Chapter 16, are you able to help the jury, that they are
things to which  the engineer should have regard in
carrying out his duties under paragraph 24 in the Safety
Certificate? - A. Yes, I would think it would be a topic
he would have to consider.

I want you now to look in the bundle of documents at two
particular documents, 274 and 268.   I hope it will be
possible to have them both open at the same time. - A.
Yes, I have both of those.

Now 274 first - they both show the same thing for our
purposes but I would like you to concentrate on the
aspect that the jury may be interested in - at 274 there
is a plan which includes the layout of the Leppings Lane
terraces, showing the division by the radial fences? - A.
Yes.

And show that at the back of each fence, immediately
under the stand, there is that gate which can either be
locked open or closed, as we know? - A. Yes.

Look at 268, just as a visual aid, which shows the same
thing, where one can see the way in which the terrace is
divided up by the radial fences, or part of it? - A. Yes.
Dr. Nicholson, from the engineering point of view,
bearing in mind the paragraphs we have just been looking
at in the Green Guide and Chapter 16, does it appear to
you that those provisions with regard to the assessment
of the safe capacity for parts of the ground, apply to
each of these enclosures? - A. Yes.

Just reminding oneself - and I don't ask you to look at
it - just reminding oneself of paragraph 12, is it
something which in your view would fall within the scope
of responsibility of the engineer to assess how many
people could be safely accommodated in each of these pens
which we can see illustrated in these documents? - A.
Yes, I would think it would be something he had to
consider.

Is it something he would be required to consider and work
out using the formulae set out in Chapter 16? - A. Yes,
the estimation paragraph.
                                             C. E. NICHOLSON

From the point of view of   your expertise as an
investigator in safety inengineering matters,is it fair
to say that the purpose of these paragraphs that we have
just been looking at, and Chapter 16, is to make sure
that the safe capacity of   each pen such as these in the
photographs, is worked out   and made known? -A.Yes.

Turn from the bundle of photographs and look at another
paragraph in the Green Guide, which is paragraph 44, page
20? -A. Yes.

This is a paragraph about turnstiles which says:

     "Where admissions to a ground or parts of     it is
     controlled by turnstiles, these, by their     number and
     location, control not only the rate of admission
     but, to a large extent, the dispersal of spectators
     within a ground to their particular sections.
     Turnstiles should be of such numbers as to admit
     spectators at a rate whereby no unduly large crowds
     are kept waiting for admission and yet at no faster
     rate than the arrangements for distributing
     spectators within the ground permit."

I am just going to ask one more question before the
adjournment.    In the bundle of photographs at 268, if
that   is still available. - A. Yes, it is.

Are you able to help the jury on this question    whichI am
going to ask you: if the provisions of the Green Guide
are applied to these pens so that a safe crowd capacity
is worked out using the guidelines in Chapter 16, once
that capacity has been made known so that a number has
been arrived at, does it follow from that that it will
then be necessary in the interests of safety for there to
be some means of controlling the number of people going
into the pens to make sure that the safe capacity is not
exceeded? - A. That would seem reasonable, yes.

     MR. PAYNE:     Is that a convenient moment, sir?

     THE CORONER:     Yes.   We will pause until two
o'clock.

     Mr. Toulson, I intend to go on until 4.30 today.
Mr. Toulson, it is impossible for me to predict how long
Dr. Nicholson is going to be, but I think you ought to be
prepared for the assumption that we will not finish with
Dr. Eastwood tomorrow.   If we do, we do, but it is my
normal practice on Friday to start at 9.30 and to finish
at half past one to quarter to two.   I don't want to
depart from that because the jury needs a break, I need a
break, your colleagues need that break.
                                            C. E. NICHOLSON


     I think you ought to alert your client to the
possibility he will go into next week.

     MR. TOULSON:   It may be necessary to make different
arrangements so far as representation is concerned.

     THE CORONER:   Obviously I will be sorry about that,
but I am sure you will appreciate...   I was going to say
I had no control.   That isn't quite true.   I could stop
all the questioning but I don't think that would be
appropriate.

     MR. TOULSON:     I understand, sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     Very briefly, sir.   I spoke to
Mr. Mackrell last night and arranged for a visit at 10.30
and hopefully we are going to get hold of Mr. Holdsworth,
if he is available, to show how the TV cameras work.

     THE CORONER:     That is Tuesday you are talking
about?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     Yes, Tuesday.

     THE CORONER:   We will talk about Mr. Holdsworth
later, but I am most grateful to you about the
arrangement, so that will be Tuesday morning at 10.30.

                (Luncheon adjournment)
    A                                                              44

                                                    C. E. NICHOLSON

        Q. Dr. Nicholson, before the adjournment the point I think
            we had reached is that you had given your opinion that
            when the engineer had complied with the guidelines in
    g      the various paragraphs and chapters in the Green Guide,
    0      to assess how many people could be safely accommodated
            in the different pens, it would then be necessary to
            have a means of controlling the numbers who actually
            went in to make sure that the capacity was not
            exceeded? - A. Yes.

        Q. I wonder if just to illustrate that point you would
            look in the black folder at one or two documents,
           beginning at 387? I don't know whether you have seen
            this drawing before? - A. I have a vague recollection
           of seeing something like this. I don t know whether I
           have actually seen this one.

        Q. I ought to tell you then that this is a sketch which
           was made in 1981 in the drawing office of Eastwood and
           Partners, and it was not implemented, do you follow? -
           A. Yes.

        Q. That is so that you know what it is, but I am asking
           you to look at it to illustrate your point that
           capacity needs to be controlled. Do you see that what
           this sketch is envisaging is that the terrace is
           divided up into various sections? - A. Yes.

        Q. On the right hand side of the drawing? - A. Yes.

        Q. And that each one is noted with a capacity which in
           some cases has either been crossed out or highlighted,
           we don't know, but somebody has given their mind to the
           idea of working out a capacity. - A. Yes.

        Q. And also   providing a particularnumber of turnstiles
           for that   capacity? - A. Yes.

        Q. Do you see at the back of the stand on the concourse
           someone has applied their mind to the way in which that
           capacity should be controlled by particular turnstiles?
           - A. Yes, I see.

        Q. Can you just look at one or two other drawings? The
           next one is 388. This is a slightly different layout
           to the previous one but the author of this has got the
           same kind of provisions in mind, i.e., controlling
           numbers by turnstiles? - A. Yes.
        Q. Can you look at 391? - A. Yes.

        Q. This is a drawing made in 1985 by Eastwood and it says
           what it is, "Possible modification to entrance routes




H
                                                           45

                                            C. E. NICHOLSON

   and revised layout of facilities at Leppings Lane end".
   - A. Yes.

Q. But do you see that here again the author of his
   drawing has given his attention to the means by which
   the capacity of particular sections of the terrace
   should be controlled by turnstiles? - A. Yes, I see.
Q. Just look at another one, 474. Again, I am not asking
   you to study it in detail but merely to look at it as
   an illustration of the point you made before the
   adjournment. Here we can see the terrace divided up
   into sections, each being controlled by its own
   turnstile access? - A. Yes, I see.

Q. The question I would like to ask based on those
   drawings is this: in your view as an engineer, Dr.
   Nicholson, is each of these designs, if put into
   effect, consistent with a proper application of the
   guidelines in the Green Guide that you were looking at
   earlier? - A. They would all appear to give control of
   the number of people going into various parts of the
   terrace, yes.

Q. That is consistent with the guidelines in the Green
   Guide that we were looking at? - A. Yes, I should think
   so.

Q. I would like to ask you a broad question against the
   background of the evidence you have been giving to the
   Jury so far, in answer to questions by me. Bearing in
   mind the quite detailed provisions in the Green Guide,
   in particular Chapter 16 with the various formulae that
   we looked at, does   the Green Guide anywhere, as far as
   you know, say anything to the effect that as an
   alternative to these particular provisions of
   assessment of capacity following the rules or
   guidelines, as an alternative to that it would be
   acceptable to rely on a system of visual impression by
   someone just having a look at these various sections of
   the Ground and thinking to himself whether or not it
   was full? Does the Green Guide say that such an
   alternative systemwould be acceptable? - A. I can't
   recall seeing that   but I would have to study it in
   detail to know that it actually was not there.

Q. Quite, but would you be surprised if the Green Guide
   said, having given all these detailed ideas, that that
   alternative was available? - A. I would not have
   thought that purely visual observations were as good as
   positive counting or even perhaps acceptable.

Q. On the question of this system of visual impression,
   which I don't know how much you know about, but it is
                                                         46

                                            C. E. NICHOLSON

   something that has been touched on at intervals during
   this Inquest, I want to just examine with your
   assistance please. Dr. Nicholson, the reliability of
   the system. I think a convenient point of reference to
   do this is to look in the black bundle at document 276.

        THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne you had better ascertain
   first of all whether Dr. Nicholson has got any
   expertise in this field, on which he can actually make
   a meaningful contribution.

        MR. PAYNE:    Yes, thank you very much.   I am very
   grateful for that:

Q. Dr. Nicholson, you understand what the Coroner is
   saying. Is your expertise as an investigator of safety
   in engineering matters wide enough to enable you to
   assist the Jury in evaluating the reliability of a
   system of visual impression, as compared with a system
   of calculation and control? - A. My experience in this
   matter is very limited. The only experience I have of
   looking at dense crowds is really confined to the
   observations that we have made on counting the numbers
   of people from photographs.

Q. Would you say as an engineer that when one knows that
   there does exist an authoritative guide which we have
   been looking at, which includes careful provisions
   dealing with how capacity is to be assessed, and
   formulae by which it is to be assessed, when one knows
   that that exists, as an engineer are you able to assist
   the Jury to compare the reliability of that system with
   the reliability of a system of just looking at the
   crowd and working out by looking at it how many people
   there are there? - A. I could not compare the two
   quantitatively but one would feel instinctively that a
   prepared guide with guidance would be the preferred
   method of assessment.




       /Q. Yes.   I think I c#n
                                                               47'

                                                   C. E. NICHOLSON


Q. Yes, I think I can take it a little further with your
   particular expertise, Dr. Nicholson, by looking at
   C.276 as an illustration? - A. Yes, I have that.

Q. Have you got C.276? - A. Yes.

Q. It shows the layout of Pens 3 and 4. I want to just
   draw attention and I would be grateful for your help,
   the assessment or the difficulty of it, on the
   assessment of the capacity in particular of Pen 3. Do
   you see that as it is shown on this diagram, barrier
   144 has already been removed from Pen 3? - A. There is
   no sign of 144. There are no numbers of barriers on
   here.

Q. No, but we know what we are   talking about. Look at
   C.502. There is no mystery    about it. It is not
   difficult to understand and   I thought we knew where 144
   was but look at 502. - A. I   only go up to 496 there.

Q. There it is on the screen (handed). - A. Yes.

Q. That is your drawing and it is probably easier for you
   to follow? - A. Yes, I see.

Q. Do you see the remains of 144 which is in Pen 4? - A.
   Yes.

Q. We know, do we not, that originally 144 went over into
   Pen 3? - A. Yes.

Q. I put in at an earlier stage in the Inquest the drawing
   from the back of the Taylor Report which perhaps we
   ought to just look at. It is C.383. That is in the
   bundle. - A. Yes, fine. I have that.

Q. We can now see where 144 is, can we not? - A. Yes,
   thank you.

Q. Having identified the position can we now go back to
   276? - A. Yes.

Q. We know at some point between 1975 and the date of the
   disaster that barrier 144 was removed from Pen 3? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Did you know that? - A. I have seen the drawing within
   the Taylor Report that gives the time of various
   barriers being put in but I do not know it in detail.

Q. I think you told the Inquest that at some stage you
   have done a calculation of the capacity, the safe
   capacity that is, of Pen 3 in the configuration as we
                                                               48

                                                  C. E. NICHOLSON


     can see it at C.276? - A. Yes, I think that is the same
     configuration we considered.
Q. That is with the barrier missing? - A. Yes.

Q. Is the significance of that that whether or not barrier
   144 is in position does of itself have an effect upon
   what is the safe capacity of this pen? - A. Yes, in
   Chapter 16, there is a portion of 16 that does say that
   the capacity is partially proportional to the lengths
   of barrier within it. Therefore, removing barriers
   would affect the allowable capacity.

Q. Having taken that factor into account just remind the
   Court, will you, what the result of your calculation
   was as to the safe capacity, using Chapter 16, of Pen
   3? - A. It was 800 and something. I will get you the
   actual figure. Pen 3 was 822 and Pen 4 871. That was
   purely taking account of the barriers and no other
   factors were taken into account for that capacity.

Q. Do you happen to have, a figure for the capacity of Pen
   3 as it was before 144 was taken away? - A. No, no. We
   did not do that calculation.
Q. You make it 822 without the barrier? - A. Yes.

Q. I would like you to look, keeping your hand in C.276,
   at 390? - A. Right.

          MR. PAYNE: It might be helpful to the Jury if we
     put 390 up on the screen. I am told we have not got an
     acetate. Have the Jury got sight of it?

          THE CORONER:   Yes.

Q.         MR. PAYNE: This is C.390. Do you see the title
     of this drawing, Dr. Nicholson, "Ground layout 1987"? -
     A. I am sorry, that is not apparent on the copy I have
     here.

Q. The label is stuck over it? - A. Yes.    Yes, it was just
   the C.390 was obscuring it. Right.

Q. Ground layout 1987? - A. Yes.

Q. It is a drawing by Eastwood and Partners? - A. Yes.

Q. You can take it from me that this was after barrier 144
   had been removed? - A. I take your word for it, yes.
                                                                49'

                                                    C. E. NICHOLSON

Q. Somebody has calculated the capacity of the various
   pens on the Leppings Lane terrace? - A. Yes, the
   figures are very difficult to see on this.

Q.   They are not easy to see, are they? - A. No.

Q.    It is also not helped by the way in which thesheet,
     which is much bigger than this, has been folded. It
     obscures some of the writing in Pen 3. If we look at
     Pen 3 I think we can just read that it has got "West
     Terrace". Do you see that? - A. Yes.

Q. Then it has got "covered standing"? - A. Right.

Q. I think what has happened there is that the "un" has
   been obscured by the folding of the sheet we will find
   if we look at the main copy because obviously this is
   an uncovered standing bit, you see? - A. Yes, right.
Q.   "Away fans", do you see that? - A. Yes.

Q.    "1,200"? - A. I see. "away fans" is the wording at the
     very front, is it?

Q. At the front of Pen 3. All those words appear to be
   written in Pen 3 except where the... - A. It is very
   difficult to determine on this. It is "away fans
   1,000" something. 200 perhaps.

Q. While we are looking at it, can we just look at Pen
   4? - A. Yes.

Q. Which is written "sterile area"? - A. Yes.

Q. "1,000 home/away"? - A. Right.

Q. I wonder if you are able to help the Jury about this;
   your calculation made the figure in Pen 3 822? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Whoever did this drawing made it 1,200? - A. Right.

Q. Can you assist the Jury to understand the difference,
   the discrepancy? - A. Yes, I think, this is my opinion,
   the 1,200 was based purely on the area of the pen
   whereas our figure reduced from not 1,200 but 1,051 or
   something, we reduced it to 822 taking into account the
   length of the barriers actually present in the pen. So
   I think that accounts for the discrepancy.

Q. Thank you very much. So your comparable calculation
   then to be compared with the 1,200 is the one which
                                             C. E. NICHOLSON


arrived at the 1,050? - A. I think that is the figure
if I can just check.

I think that is the figure you gave us earlier on, Dr.
Nicholson.

     THE CORONER:   1,015 it is actually.

     MR. PAYNE: The 1,015 is to be compared with the
1,200? - A. Yes.

Can you help the Jury to understand that discrepancy
between 1,015 and 1,200 in the calculation? - A. No, I
can only say our figures were based on a separate
surveyor's report of the size of the pen and we used
those figures, which we believed to be true, to
calculate the capacity. Assuming the barriers and
everything else were in accordance with the Green
Guide.




                       /Q. Are you aware of this fact.
                                                   51


                                       C.E. NICHOLSON



Q. Are you aware of this fact, Dr. Nicholson, that from
   1979 onwards the numbers recorded in the Safety Certificate
   for the safe capacity of the Leppings Lane terrace were
   not ever changed? - A. No, I did not know that.

Q. Did you know that there was one capacity given for the
   width of the Leppings Lane end where it faced the Kop
   and then a separate capacity given for the top right-hand
   corner, the North West Terrace. Did you know that? - A.
   No.

Q. Did you know that no capacity had ever been worked out
   and recorded in the Safety Certificate of what the
   individual capacity of these various pens was? - A. No,
   I did not knov/. As I said before I had not seen the
   Safety Certificate.

Q. I wonder if you can help about this from an enginecriny
   point of view.  If the person who is supposed to be
   making the visual impression judgment, if that person
   does not know what the capacity is because the Engineer
   has not worked it out, can you suggest any means fron
   an engineering point of view how the observer can judge:
   what is the right number of people to let into the pen?
   - A. Without a figure to go on I would think that is
   almost impossible.

Q. In that connection I would be grateful, Dr. Nicholson,
   if you would join in a little hypothetical exercise which
   was started yesterday and I am going to hand to you
   part of a transcript of the evidence which was yive;.
   yesterday. This is page 9, letter B, when a former
   Policeman called Mr. Lock was giving evidence? - A. Yes,
   I have o-t here.

Q. Nov; I would be grateful, Dr.Nicholson, if you can just
   play yourself in to the question I am going to ask you
   in this way: I want you for this exercise to join the
   discussion which is being put in this bit of the transcript
   and then I am going to read through the transcript anc.
   then I am going to ask you a question and Iwant you to
   join this discussion in your capacity as an expert in
   the investigation of safety in engineering matters
   employed by the Health and Safety Executive. Do you
   follow? - A. Yes.

Q. This is what happened.   The question was:

         "Now may I ask you a hypothetical question?
         Suppose when the question of the introduction
         of radial fences was under discussion, either
         that the City Council's engineer or the
         club's engineer had said something of this
                                                       52

                                      C.E. NICHOLSOK



         kind, without wishing to cause offence,
         'I don't think the Police have the means
         or the skill to be relied on to close any
         pen before it becomes dangerously
         overcrowded.' Am I right in supposing you
         would expect the answer to have been,
         'That's ridiculous'? - A. Yes sir.

         Q. As far as you are concerned would it
         indeed have been ridiculous? - A. Well
         we ...." meaning the Police ".... performed
         the function before so it would be, sir.

         Q. You speak as the man who was effectively
         in charge of the policing during the three
         seasons between the introduction of the
         first radials in 1981 and the further
         radials in 1985? - A. I was not in charge
         at the time when the first radials were
         in - they were in situ when I arrived.

         Q. But during the three seasons that
         intervened between the introduction of the
         first radials and further radials, you were
         the Superintendent? - A. I was not there
         when the second lot of radials were in.

         Q. That is right, you spanned the period
         between the two? - A. I do, sir.

         Q. The first went in in '81 and the second
         in '85? - A. Yes, sir.

        Q. In any such discussion as to the ability
        to close off a pen, is it right you would
        have regarded yourself as indeed in a better
        position to speak than a structural engineer
        because although an engineer might know
        more about the strength of barriers, when
        it came to the operational control of the ground
        you were the person with day to day experience?
        - A. Yes sir."

   Wow, Dr. Nicholson, I would like you to imagine that
   you were there when this little hypothetical discussion
   was taking place in your capacity as an Engineer employed
   by the Health and Safety Executive. Do you follow?
   - A. Yes.

Q. I would like you to bear in mind that the Engineer
   had not worked out any capacity for the particular
   sections and that there was no certified capacity for
   those sections and there was no structural or mechanical
   means of controlling access? - A. Yes.
                                                         53

                                       C.E. NICHOLSON



Q. If you were present as an engineer, bearing in mind the
   safety implications of what is being said, would you
   keep silent? - A. I obviously am doing at the moment.

Q. Have you been able to absorb the idea that is being
   expressed here? - A. Yes.

Q. The implication of the hypothetical question which is
   being put is that the Engineer is saying he is leaving
   it up to the Police to assess the safe capacity.
   "They can do it. They have done it before.   It is
   entirely up to them. There is no capacity. There is
   no means of counting and control but it is up to
   the Police". Nov; here you are, you are joining the
   discussion. Would you say anything? - A. I would have
   thought that the Structural Engineer did have an input
   to make and would be able to advise on such a thing.

Q. In the light of paragraph 24 in the Safety Certificate
   and his duty to make an annual report about the safety
   of the ground, would he have a duty to make such an
   input? - A. Yes, I forget the actual wording in that
   but yes, I would have thought that he would have a duty,
   yes.

Q. Now I would like you to look at another document please,
   Dr. Nicholson, at C433. - A. Fine.

Q. Now just to put this in context I would like you to
   look first at the document which is headed at the top
   of the page in big letters "MEMORANDUM". There are two
   C483s unfortunately, one of them is headed "MEMORANDUM"
   under the heading "EASTWOOD & PARTNERS, CONSULTING
   ENGINEERS"? - A. Yes.

Q. "FROM: Sharon    TO: EWS WE". Do you see that? The
   word "File" in manuscript in the top right-hand corner.
   - A. Right, yes I have it.

           THE CORONER: Can I stop you. Shall we r.iake this
     easier and make the first memorandum 483A and the second
     page of it 4833.

Q.         MR. PAYNE: "A" is the one with the big word
     "MEMORANDUM"at the top? - A. Yes, I have it.

Q. Just to put you in the picture, Dr. Nicholson,   this is
   a record, internal record kept by the Engineer   of a
   telephone inquiry made to him on behalf of the   Football
   Club and his reply. The inquiry is being made    in 1987.
   Do you see the date? - A. Yes.

Q. Which is afterboth sets of radial fences have    been put
   in? - A. Yes.
                                                     54

                                      C.E. NICHOLSON



Q. And the relevant part of the inquiry is at number 3.

         "Has any account been taken for alterations
         done on Leppings Lane over last few seasons?
         Is the 10,200 or so figure still correct?"

   For your information, Dr. Nicholson, that is the figure
   which applied to the whole width of the terrace including
   the North West corner? - A. Right.

Q. It continues:
         "I said that in my opinion it needs to be
         adjusted, better do it now than later.
         It could also affect ticket sales for
         Coventry game.  She will speak to Graham.

   Then the reply number 3, this is a reply given by EAS,
   Ithink that is his correct initials, that is Hr. Strange,
   who is an Engineer employed in the Eastwood firm.
   Number 3:
         "Dr. Eastwood says leave the capacity at
         Leppings Lane end as it is providing
         police have gates under West Stand open
         so that people can distribute throughout
         the terrace evenly."

   Do you see that? - A. Yes.




                           Q. Does it appear
                                           C. E. NICHOLSON


Does it appear to you as an engineer that what is being
said there is that provided the radial gates are left
open there is no need to do anything about the capacity
of the individual pens? - A. That is what I think it
says, yes.

From the safety aspect if, as the Deputy Director in the
Health and Safety Executive Research Laboratory, as you
are, if that had been drawn to your attention at the time
would you have made any comment about it? - A. I think I
would have wanted to know the sort of rate of flow that
could occur through such a fence and I would have wanted
to have observed crowds on a terrace that were limited by
radial fences, to see how easy it was for such a crowd to
disperse.

What is being contemplated here is that the crowd can
disperse itself by making use of the radial gates. - A.
Yes, I understand.

As an engineer you would want to investigate that more? -
A. Yes, I would have done.

I am turning to a different topic.   Are you able to
assist on this general question, Dr. Nicholson, it may be
outside our expertise, bearing in mind there was a Safety
Certificate issued in 1979 which remained in effect over
the whole period, if any significant alterations took
place they were required to be put into the Certificate?
- A. Right.

Now so far as the introduction of these radial fences are
concerned, are you able to say who would have the
responsibility to take the initiative to see that the
Safety Certificate should be amended? - A. Not really.
I don t think I can say who should take the initiative,
but I would thought the engineer would have had to have
an input into changing the Certificate if new changes had
occurred within the ground.

Would you have regarded the introduction of these radial
fences as new changes? - A. I would, yes.

Certainly? - A. Yes.

Now a new topic.   This is one that has cropped up from
time to time during these Inquests and the jury may find
your comment helpful.    It is about the blue doors.    Can
you look at C.265?    When you have managed to get that
open can you look at the Green Guide, number 62, page 25?
Do you see that this provides:
                                                             56

                                               C. E. NICHOLSON


          "All doors on an exit route, should always be capable
          of opening outwards so that crowds can escape in an
          emergency."
     - A. Yes.

Q. That is not difficult to understand in enginaering terms,
   is it? - A. Or in any terms.

Q. Quite.   Now look at 265.     Do you recognise whereabout
   this is? - A. Yes.

Q. You know that these doors in fact open inwards? - A. Yes.

Q. Now the court has been told by various witnesses that
   there was a practice that these doors, when the pens were
   populated, were in fact closed, sometimes for as long as
   half the match.   What is your comment about that from a
   safety point of view and an engineer? - A. Well, as a
   general comment I would think if they did close doors
   where people were inside a pen then they should be manned
   throughout.

Q. Bearing in mind that an emergency might arise at any time
   on the terrace, would you regard it as safe practice to
   have these doors closed when the terraces were populated?
   - A. It would be safer to have them open, certainly, from
   the point of view of egress of the people within the pen.

Q. Dr. Nicholson, I wonder if you would now go on to deal
   with another topic which relates to means of escape?    Is
   this something which falls within the remit of an expert
   in safety and engineering matters? - A. Not really, no.

Q. It does not? - A. It is not a topic that we have studied
   with respect to the investigation at all.

Q. That seems to be as far as I can go then.   You can't
   comment at all about the adequacy of the means of escape
   from the sections of the terrace? - A. No.   Other than
   to say that we noted the terrace didn't meet the Green
   Guide specification on the distance that people had to
   travel to get to a means of egress.   I think that is
   all.   That was purely a measurement of looking at the
   Guide and trying to interpret it sensibly and then making
   measurements of the pens.

Q. That is96 in the Green Guide? - A. Yes, the 12 metre.

Q.   That isthe 12 metre rule or guideline? - A. Yes.

Q.   You canillustrate the point you have just made     by
     looking back in the book at 276? - A. Yes.
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON


From which the value of this one. is that it has got the
scale in the top left hand corner? - A. Yes, it has, a 5
metre scale.   We didn't make any firm calculations about
the amount of the area of the pen that didn't comply
other than to make a note there were certainly areas that
were further than 12 metres from a gangway or exit.

That in fact applies to the whole of the section across
the front of the pen down by the perimeter fence? - A.
Yes, approximately 12 metres away.

Regrettably where the largest number of blue dots is? -
A. Yes.

From an engineering point of view, is paragraph 96 in the
Green Guide of any particular significance from the
safety point of view? - A. Well, I think it is
significant in the width of the gangways, but this is not
an area in which I am an expert in any way.

So your involvement only went so far as to observe there
seemed to be a breach of this paragraph? - A. That
paragraph within the Guide, yes.

It is quite important from the point of view of the
safety of the people at the front of the pen? - A. Yes,
of course.

The next topic I want to ask you about, can you look at a
document you produced this morning, C.499? - A. Yes.

Withthat on the screen can you go back to the familiar
drawing 390 in the bundle? - A. Right.

The reason I have asked you to look at this is to try to
bring into focus your calculation of the capacity of pen
3 at the density of 54 people per 10 square metres, as in
Chapter 16 in the Green Guide? - A. Yes.

Which you worked out in pen 3 at 1,015? - A. Yes, without
taking any account of barriers.

That was to be compared, as we found out a few moments
ago, with the 1,200 figure in 390, which also seemed to
have been worked out on the same basis? - A. Yes.




     Q. From an engineering point
                                         C. E. NICHOLSON

From an engineering point of view is this tolerance
acceptable? You have worked it out at 1,015 and they
have got it as 185 more. - A. Yes.

Is that an acceptable tolerance in engineering terms? -
A. I would have thought it was not acceptable; it is
not as accurate as it could be.

So it is not an acceptable tolerance, you think? - A.
No.

Is that because the calculation of these numbers, where
the lives of large numbers of people are potentially at
risk, is a particularly important matter? - A. Well it
obviously is very important, yes.

There are just two other topics that I would like to
ask you about. The first relates to the collapse of
barrier 124A, and I would like you to just collect
together what you said about that briefly, and then I
want to ask two further questions about it. Just for
the purpose of illustration can you look at 383? - A.
Right.

The evidence which you gave was that by the
calculations which you have done the Health and Safety
Executive would reach the conclusion that the barrier
collapsed at somewhere between a pressure of 6 and 8
kilonewtons per metre width? - A. Yes.

And we know from the Green Guide that the test pressure
is 6 kilonewtons? - A. Per metre, yes.

So if it collapsed at the bottom of your range, between
6 and 8, then it collapsed at the test pressure? - A.
Yes.

In doing your exercises I wonder if you took into
account these matters too? First, I take it you have
visited the ground, obviously? - A. Oh, yes.

You have had a look round the other safety barriers
along that terrace? - A. Yes.

The ones that have survived? - A. Yes.

Have you noticed that many of them are, in fact,
deformed? - A. Yes. There are several that are curved
in the horizontal rails, and as I said before one or
two with holes in, yes.

Those are not only, the curved rails, i.e., forgive me
saying, bent rails, are not only in pens 3 and 4, but
                                        C. E. NICHOLSON

also in the wing pens? - A. Yes, I think that is my
recollection of it.

The Jury will be able to see when they go back   to the
Ground, and in particular under the Police Box   or in
the vicinity of the Police Box, there are some   rails
which are quite noticeably deformed. A. Right,   yes.

Do you accept. Dr. Nicholson, that this is consistent
with those rails having been subjected at some time to
very severe crowd pressure? - A. Either crowd pressure
or pressure of some form, yes.

Right, pressure of some form. When you did your
exercises to work out the range of pressure within
which barrier 124A may have collapsed, did you take
into account the fact that that barrier may already
have been deformed by previous pressure applied to it?
- A. No. We made no allowance for that because it
would be completely unknown; we had no idea what shape
the barrier was in before that day, and I think there
is probably no way of establishing that without
photography or previous measurements.

If in fact like many of the other barriers which can be
seen, it was already deformed, would that make any
difference to the result of your exercise? - A. It
would make a difference in detail, yes.

In what way? - A. This material will what is called
strain harden when it has been deformed, so that if it
is deformed to a certain position it will then harden
to some degree, so that it might require then a
slightly difference force in order to break it, but I
don t think it is possible to take account of a
previous deformation to modify our figures. I don't
think that is possible.

I a^ree, you can't do it scientifically because we
don t, in fact, know whether it was bent or not. - A.
No.

And we can only go on the condition of other barriers
and see what inference can be drawn, but I just want to
see if I have understood your answer. If, in fact, it
had been bent on a previous occasion would it be more
likely to collapse at a greater or lesser pressure? -
A. Everything else being equal, if no other damage was
done to it, say at the ends, I would expect it to
require slightly more pressure if it had been
previously damaged.

Is that because of the hardening exercise that you were
talking about? - A. Yes.
                                        C. E. NICHOLSON

The other factor that I would like you to build into
your exercise is this: looking at 383 just as point of
reference, bearing in mind that barrier 144 was not
present --- I don t think I have chosen a very good
example of this and I am going to ask you to move to
another drawing - 276. We can see in the area from the
entrance to the tunnel into pen 3, there is roughly
speaking a square area without a barrier in it at all
now that 144 has gone? - A. Yes.

Broadly speaking the dimensions of that square area are
6 metres by 6 metres? - A. Yes, approximately.

You have explained already that uphill from the barrier
that collapsed there is an unprotected section,
stretch, which you think you measured at 7 metres? - A.
Yes, it is.

Using your leaning model, just to remind ourselves, you
have reached the conclusion that with a leaning crowd,
not one exerting any conscious pushing, the leaning
crowd up that passageway, as it were, would exert
sufficient pressure to produce a 6 kilonewton load onto
barrier 124A? - A. Yes, 6 kilonewtons per metre,
spread load across the barrier.

So an ordinary crowd, in fact, in that 7 metre stretch,
but leaning forward, would be enough to break the
barrier? - A. Yes. Our model would predict that there
is sufficient stress there if everybody is leaning,
yes.

In your exercises have you built into the equation the
fact that just inside the entrance from the tunnel
there is a large area unprotected by any barriers,
within which a pressure could build up which could be
transmitted through the crowd, through the gap and down
to the barrier 124A? - A. As a diagonal force?

Yes. - A. We did not take account of such stresses but
recognise that they would, they could influence the
force brought to bear on 124A.

If that happened would the absence of barrier 144
contribute to an increase in the pressure which would
result on 124A? - A. I don't think I am qualified to
say. I don't know how much crowd pressure could be
transmitted through that gap at an angle.

The final topic, but it is still dealing with 124A, and
for this purpose I would be grateful if Sergeant
Griffiths would put up C506 on the screen, please, and
you will need the Green Guide, Annex C, page 74. I
wonder if you would just work through these numbers on
                                         C. E. NICHOLSON

this chart, so that we can try and understand exactly
what has happened here please, Dr. Nicholson, to help
us. The one we have got to look at is the bottom two
lines on the screen. - A. Yes.

We can't see but on the left hand margin, which is just
unfortunately blotted out, appears in the original
124A, does it? - A. Yes, it does.

So this is the barrier we are talking about? - A. Yes.

Let's run along the top line, please, and see with your
help what has been recorded there. At the top of the
first column are there the words, "Barrier size and
number of spans"? - A. Yes.

And we can see that it is 1 and 2? - A. Yes.

"Test Load" is the next column? - A. Yes.

Under that "kn/n", that is 6 kilonewtons per metre is
the test load? - A. Yes.

"Applied Load, 1.44 tonnes"? - A. Yes.

What is that? - A. I presume that is the load that was
applied to the rams within the testing, in order to
give the distributed load of 6 kilonewtons per metre
along the horizontal.

So luckily we don't have to worry about that then, all
we need to know is that the test load is 6 kilonewtons?
- A. Yes.

Let's do test 1, and let us first of all look at the
boxes at the top of the columns to try and understand
that. Test 1, what is the first word, "Rest"? - A.
"Rest", I think, yes.

Next word? - A. "Load, U/Load", which must be "Unload",
and then "Percentage Rec.", which is percentage
recovery, I think.

Percentage recovery. Now let's do the exercise with
Spans 1 and 2. Starting at "Rest.", that is 0? - A.
Yes.

Does that mean it has not been pushed forward at all
there? “ A. I think that is a measure of a pointer on a
ruler which is at 0 before the pressure is applied.
So nothing has moved at 0? - A. No.
                                                           62

                                             C. E. NICHOLSON

Q. And we have got the barrier in its condition, as it was
   when the test rig arrived at the ground? - A. Yes. The
   test rig I think at   this stage will have been mounted
   so that the pointercould have    been placed on the
   barrier.

Q. But no pressure exerted? - A. That is what I presume.

Q. Now then, "Load, 29"? - A. Well it says at the top of
   the area where it says, "Test 1, Test 2, Test 3", that
   all dimensions are in millimetres, so I take that to
   mean that under the   load of 6 kilonewtons per metre in
   test 1, that it deformed by 29millimetres.

Q.   So what has happened here, as they have applied 6
     kilonewtons of pressure per metre? - A. Yes.

Q* The barrier has leaned forward or bent forward by 29
   millimetres? - A. I presume so, yes.

Q. Of course, we don't know which part of the barrier
   because it just spans 1 and 2? - A. We don't know where
   that 29 millimetre measurement is made.

Q. Now then, "Unload". We have gone forward 29, now we
   unload, and we get 12? - A. Yes.

Q. Meaning? - A. I think that means that the load having
   been taken off the barrier, that the marker on the
   horizontal, or wherever it was taken, has moved back to
   a position to 12 millimetres. So the recovery, it has
   moved back by 17 millimetres and is therefore 12
   millimetres from its position at 0.

Q. So having taken the pressure off .... - A. It has not
   gone back to its original position.

Q. So the percentage recovery then? - A. In a percentage
   term this is 59%.

Q. That is 12 is 59% of 29? - A. No, it is the other way
   round, 17 of 29.

Q. It has gone back 17? - A. Yes, so that is the
   percentage of recovery.

Q. So it has recovered 59%? - A. Yes.

Q. That completes Test 1. - A. Right.
                                                                63'

                                                   C. E. NICHOLSON


Q. Test 2,'rest' is marked as 0? - A. Yes.

Q. Is that the    same 0 that we had 'at rest' in test 1? -
   A. I do not   think it is. I think that 0 isin fact    the
   position at    'unload' in test 1. I think that is the
   same really   as the position of 12 millimetres.

Q. Of 12. So although it is recorded as 0 actually we are
   starting at 12 from 'scratch'? - A. Comparing it to
   'scratch', yes.

Q. So we apply the load and what happens? - A. It deforms
   a further 19 millimetres.

Q. A further 19meaning on top of the 12 which we have
   already got? - A. Which would take it, if you go back
   to 0, 31 millimetres total deflection.

Q. 'Unload 5'. So it comes back then to 5? - A. Yes, and
   so that means it has recovered by 14 millimetres from
   its position from the load applied during the second
   test.
Q. 19? - A. Yes.

Q. But it is now 12 plus 5 millimetres from 'scratch'? -
   A. Yes.

Q. That is right, is it not? -A. Yes.

Q. So it is now     17 millimetres from 'scratch'?       -      A.Yes,
   think that is right.

Q. Here we have got recorded 'recovery 74'? - A. Yes.

Q. 74 per cent. How has that been worked out? - A. I
   think the 74 per cent is purely with respect to test 2
   and it does not take into account the position at the
   start of test 1.

Q. Now we do test 3? - A. Yes.

Q. 'Rest' is 0? - A. It has effectively been re-zeroed
   that means, yes.

Q. Is that the same 0 we have had in test 1 and test 2? -
   A. No, it is really 12 plus 5 which, if we are going
   back to the original datum point before any testing
   took account, that now becomes 12 plus 5 which is
   really 17.

Q. So we are starting at 17 millimetres? - A. Yes.
                                                                64'

                                                    C. E. NICHOLSON


Q. From 'scratch'? - A. Yes.
Q.    This time under 'load' it goes forward 19? - A.Yes,
     19.

Q.    'Unload'? - A.   Back to 0.

Q.    So back to 17? - A. Yes.

Q. We cannot see because it is not shown on the acetate? -
   A. On mine it shows 100 per cent recovery which is what
   I would expect it to since for test it started at 0 and
   finished at 0. Therefore, recovery is 100 per cent.

Q.    So 100 per cent would be all right, would it not, if
     that is in fact what had happened? - A. Yes.

Q.    Actually ifwe look at the trueposition we are now    17
     millimetres further forward than we were when we first
     started? - A. Yes.

Q. Are you able to help as to what the percentage recovery
   is if one takes that figure? - A. With difficulty. I
   think it will be 17 millimetres.   17 compared to the
   maximum that it went in...

Q. Do we have to add together the different loads, add
   together the unloads? - A. Yes.

Q. And see what we get? - A. Yes, it is not difficult to
   work out. I think it just needs plotting out so that
   you can see the position graphically. It is easier to
   grasp then. I cannot work it out in my head what the
   figure is.

Q. Our calculations make it that the recovery, if one does
   it by the cumulative method, finishes up at 60 peer
   cent? - A. I would think that is something like about
   right, yes.

Q. Which, of course, is less than 75 per cent? - A. Yes.

Q.    In which case the barrier would fail the test? - A.
     Would have failed, yes. It would have failed that
     interpretation of the Green Guide.

          THE CORONER:   We must use the right word if we are
     going to use the word. It would not have failed the
     test. It would have been subject to a retest.

          THE WITNESS:     Sir, yes.

          THE CORONER:    On that assumption.
                                               C. E. NICHOLSON



     MR. PAYNE: Quite. I want to ask a question about
this; you explained that there are two interpretations
which can be placed on Annex C as to how those should
be done? - A. Yes, in my opinion that can be. It is
open to two interpretations.

Dr. Eastwood has done one of them? - A. Yes.

We have just worked through the other one? - A. Yes.

From an engineering point of view, and the point of
view of an engineer concerned with safety matters, do
you understand that? - A. Yes.

If one comes across instructions which are capable of
two separate interpretations, what do you use as a
guideline in deciding which interpretation should be
applied? - A. Generally from the HSE's point of view, a
safety point of view, one would always try and veer on
the safest side, to go for the safer interpretation.

That would be the cumulative method? - A. It would but
this — no, I will leave it at that.

It was span 2 which collapsed. Which was the other
span which collapsed? Was it 1 or 3? - A. Span 3/4 and
span 2/3. They were the two that collapsed in the
incident. This test was done on 1/2 and 2/3, the one
that we are referring to.

Which are the spans which collapsed? - A. Span 2/3
collapsed but also span 3/4 collapsed.

Span 2/3 and span 3/4. So we have not got a 3/4 tested
on this sheet? - A. No.

But we have got span 2 and as we look at our drawing
276, is that the left hand of the two dotted lines as
we look at it? - A. Yes, 2/3 is the left hand of the
dotted lines, yes.

     MR. TOULSON: In order that we be not at cross
purposes about this, there has been a different method
of numbering used by the HSE from the one in the
Certificates. This has, in fact, all been gone through
on a previous occasion and the two which were tested
and results recorded are the two which failed.

     THE CORONER: Say it again? Yes, I do seem to
remember in the other proceedings in the same place but
at a different time I think it was established that the
                                                C. E. NICHOLSON


results referred to the spans which collapsed rather
than to the one which stood.

     MR. TOULSON: It is simply that the questioning is
proceeding at cross purposes because of two different
methods of numbering. His spans, his numbers, 1, 2 3,
4 do not correspond with the numbering here. We can go
through it in further detail. I will deal with it if
necessary but it seemed to me it might help shorten
matters if that was understood.

     MR. PAYNE:  It might be helpful to the Jury to
know now when we are looking at that drawing 274 which
numbers are the two that collapsed.

     THE CORONER: Will you help us, Mr. Toulson,
because as you very rightly say we do not want to spend
time arguing about things which have no relevance. Can
you see the two spans which are broken in 176?

     MR. TOULSON:    Iwill have to check which way round
they are but I know, because we have been through it
before, that the two which are recorded in the test and
which were u p .on the acetate...

      THE CORONER: Mr. Toulson, we are going to stop
for coffee now and what I suggest is if you could do
that.

     MR. TOULSON:    Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER: Secondly, if you would look at
C.501, and we will give you a hard copy of this, if you
could perhaps in ink amend the numbering.

     MR. TOULSON:    To correspond with this?

     THE CORONER: Yes, so that we can see it. It is
this diagrammatic sketch. Then we will know which
numbering it is.

    MR. TOULSON:     Yes.

     MR. ISAACS: Could we also have made available
during the coffee break hard copies made of 506? That
is the chart of the test results. I think the Jury
might benefit from it and, of course, part of it is
excluded anyway.

     THE   CORONER: We will do that for you. We will
have our   coffee break. Actually before we have the
coffee I   want to ask one more question on this because
it might   save a lot of discussion.
                                                                67'
                                                    C. E. NICHOLSON


                     Further bv THE CORONER
Q. One of the problems with testing these barriers and
   movement is what I think is known as bedding in? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Because the barrier itself is in concrete, ash, sand,
   or some substance in which it is located? - A. Yes.

Q. That is right, is it? - A. Yes.

Q. Am I right in saying that even in the new revised guide
   you have allowed, if that is the right word, a re­
   zeroing between the first test and the second test? -
   A. Yes, in the new Green Guide which has been written
   since the incident and been subject to close scrutiny
   following the incident it now stipulates that the first
   application of load is a bedding in load of some 5
   kilonewtons per metre which is purely to settledown
   the equipment and make sure everything islined up and
   in line and it then has two further tests at 6
   kilonewtons per metre which is the actual two test
   loads.

Q. If one were to take a cumulative figure, and I know the
   tests are different now and so one cannot compare, but
   if one were to take a cumulative figure, trying to
   apply the new rule to past practise you would only take
   cumulatively from test 2 and test 3? - A. That is
   right.

Q. Because you would go back to 0 after the end of test
   one. Put it up on the screen. If you look at that,
   test 1? - A. Yes.

Q. 0-29 I think, 12? - A. Yes.

Q. I cannot read the percentage there? -   A. 59 per cent.

Q. The loading in the new test is slightly different but
   assuming that had been fulfilled and those were the
   figures, you would take that unload figure as being the
   bedding in figure and you would ignore it? - A. The
   first test would be bedding in.

Q. So the second test would start exactly as that picture
   shows at a 0? - A. At 0 for the start of test 2.

Q.   The third test would look differentunder the   new
     system? - A. Yes.
                                             C. E. NICHOLSON


It would not start at 0 but would start at whatever? -

A. Whatever it recovered from at the end of the first
test, that is right.

In that particular example I cannot quite see the
figures. Is it 19-5? It would start with a 5, would
it not? - A. Yes, that is right.

     MR. TOULSON: While that remains on screen, I can
actually answer the question you were putting to me a
moment ago, that 2/3 in the bottom line corresponds
with Dr. Nicholson's 2/3 and so there is no problem
there. That was one of the two which failed. 1/2
penultimate line on the acetate corresponds with Dr.
Nicholson's 3/4 because they are counting in the
opposite direction. So the other one which failed is
1/2 on here and Dr. Nicholson's 3/4 upon which the
debate turns.

     THE CORONER: The one we have not got anything on
is the one that stood up?

    MR. TOULSON:   That is right.

    THE CORONER:   Very well, coffee now.

                   (Short Adjournment)
                                                           69

                                          C.E. NICHOLSON



        THE CORONER: Before you start, Mr. Isaacs, can
  I say one thing? I don't think you were in the room
  but I did say to my colleagues that compared with some
  of the complexities which we have had that is all
  child's play compared with what we could be doing
  with Dr. Nicholson and Dr. Eastwood when he comes along.
  We were getting very near the edge beyond which I
  definitely would not want to topple.

        What I do not want to do, I do not want to go
  over all the mathematics and the arithmetic and so
  on all over again merely to make points because at uhe
  end of the day all of us will be just simply confused
  and it is more important to get the general picture
  than necessarily the fine detail. We have got to
  remember we are dealing with an Inquest and not with
  a civil trial or something like that where we might
  well want more detail.
        Now that is not a criticism of you, Mr. Payne,
  because I could have stopped you if I had wished when
  you were doing the sums so to speak but it is just
  a general comment. Mr. Isaacs?
        MR. ISAACS:  I am sorry, sir, could you just give
  me a moment.  I am just looking at the sheet of the
  figures that I won't be asking any questions about.

        THE CORONER:  I am not trying to say you must
  not ask any questions but please don't do all the sums
  again. New stuff please do.

        Mr. Griffiths, what are you handing out, can you
  just remind me.  Is it C506.

        MR. GRIFFITHS:    C506 sir.

        THE CORONER: Can you see that is C501, we are
  not changing the numbering, but what we have done, we
  have written above Dr. Nicholson's numbers the numbering
  system which Dr. Eastwood in fact employed.

        Mr. Toulson, could you just check that that is
  in fact right?

        MR. TOULSON:     That is right.

        THE CORONER:     Dr. Eastwood is nodding.

Q. I take it, Dr. Nicholson, that you are not going to
   argue if Dr. Eastwood says that is the way he numbered it?
   - A. No, not at all.
                                                                70


                                               C.E. NICHOLSON



       Q. It depends which way one does it? - A. That is right,
          yes.
       Q. And the other thing, C506 which we were handing out,
1| I      simply because it is easier for you to read, we nave
          written on there where we have got Dr. Nicholson s
          it should be Dr. Eastwood's, "DR. E 3-4" in the first
          line. Okay? - A. Yes.

                  THE   CORONER: Mr. Isaacs.

                  MR. ISAACS: Sir, I appreciate what you said a
            moment ago but I would like to ask one or two Questions
            because there was something Mr. Payne said which I did
            not  quite understand and I think I could deal witn it
            relatively quickly.
                  THE CORONER: You understand what I ara trying to
            say, I am sure. You have got the point, but subjecc to
            that please go ahead.


                          Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

       0. And it is only now Dr. Nicholson that we have the fiqures
          actually in front of us that I can perhaps ask you about
          this and see if I understand the position.

                   It was only in relation to Mr. Payne's 60%. You
            remember him asking you about that and saying on his
            assessment and you did not actually do the calculation
            whilst you were sitting there, the percentage recovery
            •was 60%.
                  Looking at the figures I think perhaps the
            percentage is lower than that and just over 50% and could
            I put to you the figures and see if I am right about
            it.
                  Would we if we look at that line, that is the
            line that now starts 124A "(DR. N's 3-4) we would be
            looking at these fiqures, would     we not.   We   move along
            starting from "REST" we move effectively up 12, the
            first 12 we come to? - A. Yes.

       Q. which is the first position. We then move along again
          a further 5 and that would be the second position, so
          we get to effectively 17? - A. Yes.

       0.    So we are at 17 when we start the third test? - A. Yes.

       Q.    The third test goes on another 19 which of course brings
            us to 36? - A. No, 19 in the third test is the maximum
            deflection during that test, it recovers to zero.
                                          C .E . NICHOLSON



Q.   But the zero is 17? - A.   Fine thank you, yes.

Q.   So we have gone from 17,   a further 19 which is 36?
     - A. Right.
Q.   Back to zero which is in fact 17 and of course 17 taken
     from 36 is just a fraction over 50%? - A. Yes, fine.

Q. The second point I wanted to ask you about tests is this:
   the Coroner said to you just before the breaK tnat thej-e
   was the new system and the new system had one beading
   down test and then two further tests rather than the
   three tests we had at the time when these tests were
   being carried out? - A. Yes.
Q. But as I understand it the bedding down test^ only used
   5 kilonewtons per metre? - A. Yes, that is tne design
   load of the barrier.
Q. And as a result the deviation, if there was any, from
   zero on the first application of force, wouldn't be what
   we see on this first test result? - A. No, I don t think
   the two are comparable.

Q. That is the point I was going to ask you about. The
   first test result on this is not comparable with an
   application of 5 kilonewtons? - A. No.

Q. And similarly neither is Test 2 or Test 3 because the
   results on Test 2 and Test 3 here would be totally
   distorted by the initial application of 5. That must
   be right, mustn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. These don't help us at all as to what the present
   circumstances, the present test would produce? - A. That
   is right.

0. Thank you very much. An entirely different matter, it
   was to do with your leaning model. You were asked some
   questions by Mr. Maxwell. - A. Yes.

 Q. Your leaning model assumed that the crowd would be up
    on its toes inclined forward at an angle. You estimated
    or you used 10%? - A. 10 degrees.

 Q. And as I understand it you took the view that 10 degrees
    was conservative if anything having regard to the^ way
    football crowds are likely to behave? - A. I thinjc 10
    degrees is a reasonable figure to get some form of
    overall stress pattern.

 Q. They were up on their toes; inclined forward at this 10
    degree angle to obtain a view of an incident in ^ront
    of""the crowd? - A. That is the idea, yes.
                                                           72

                                        C .E. NICHOLSON



Q. Let us posit an incident at the other end of the ground
   where for example a footballer, let us say Peter Beardsley
   is having a shot at goal and hits the cross bar? - A. Yes.

Q. That is exactly the sort of situation that you would be
   assuming? - A. Some form of incident that people will
   stretch to see.

Q. In order to see what is going on at the other end of the
   pitch people will be up on their toes looking forward
   and craning their necks and therefore you would get the
   sort of situation that you would be assuming? - A. I
   think that would be correct for almost anything on the
   pitch. When something of special interest occurs people,
   will crane to see it.

         MR. ISAACS:    Thank you very much.

         MR. MANNING:  I have written these words carefully
   sir:  "I have no questions. Thank you very much sir."
   (Laughter)

         THE CORONER:    Now, Mr. King, it is all yours.


                 Cross-Examined by HR. KING:

Q. Dr. Nicholson, when it comes to mathematics and
   engineering I am a very simple fellow and I want to try
   if I can from all your figures to see if I have correct
   conclusions which I may not.

         Can I deal first with the figures you have givon
   us as to the best estimate of the numbers of spectators
   who entered turnstiles A-G together with those on th<_-
   best estimate who entered Gate C, and what we arc
   dealing with is the best estimate of those who enteren
   apparently going on to the West Terrace, the Leppings
   Lane terrace. - A. Right.

Q. We know that some 10,100 tickets were sold for that
   terrace? - A. Right.

Q. That is a starting point. On your best estimate the
   total numbers who went through both the turnstiles and
   Gate C was 9,734? - A. Yes.

Q. Which is less than the total number of tickets sold?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Though of course that does not allow for some people
   who may have gone through turnstiles 1-16 or some
   people who may have gone through Gates A and B? - A.
   That is correct, yes.
                                                        73

                                       C.E. NICHOLSON



Q. But even allowing for that, on the best estimate it does
   not look as if the problem on the best estimate figures
   which we are having to deal with in looking at what
   happened on the Leppings Lane terrace on the 15th April 1989
   is to do with large numbers of people in exce ss of the
   numbers of tickets sold in relation to the Leppings Lane
   terrace. That is correct, isn't it? - A. That is correct,
   yes.

Q. And even if one were to take the maximum numbers, w hi ch
   is the next numbers up, you come to a very similar
   conclusion, don't you? - A. Yes.

Q. Because the maximum number on your estimate going in
   is 10,124? - A. Yes.

Q. Which is more or less identical to the number of tickets
   sold? - A. Yes.

Q. And then we have to allow for some more in relation to
   Gates A and B and in relation to 1-16? - A. Yes.

Q. It therefore - and see if you agree with me or not - it
   would follow from that that the problem which arose on
   the Leppinqs Lane terrace, this disaster, does not appear
   on these figures to have arisen as a result of the overall
   numbers who have entered in relation to the numbers of
   tickets sold, but simply where they ended up on the
   terrace? - A. Yes.

Q. In other words the distribution of those people among
   the different pens on the terrace? - A. Yes.

Q. Let me now move to the two central pens where we know
   so many people did end up that it resulted in deaths?
   - A. Right.

Q. You have given us your estimates of the numbers who ended
   up in those two central pens. Let me just deal first
   with your numbers as you gave us them. Pen 3, 1,57 6?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Pen 4, 1,607, total 3,133? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. Just in the round, just trying to draw conclusions from
   that figure as best one can, if one were to take the
   capacity for those two pens based on 5.4. Right? - A.
   Yes.

O. I have made a note and I will be put right if I am wrong
   but the total you gave us for Pens 3 and 4 was 2,051.
   Take it from me.  It was 1,015 for Pen 3 and 1,03 6 for
   Pen 4? - A. Fine.
                                                        74

                                       C.E. NICHOLSON



Q. So we know that 3,183 in fact went in and if one simply
   applied the 5.4 Green Guide principle it should have
   been only 2,051? - A. Yes.

Q. So in very rough terms as half as many again went in
   who should have gone in on the Safety Principles of the
   Green Guide? - A. It is actually 45% over, about half
   as much again, yes.

Q. I in fact could have qiven you the figure while all other
   figures were being worked out I was busily working out
   at 44.68%? - A. Aareed, yes.

Q. But   as a rough guide that is as good as anything, isn't ■
   it? - A. Yes, of course.

Q. And   if in fact one were to take the figures which we know
   we have seen on the plan of Dr. Eastwood, I think it was
   2,200, something like that, again we are going to come
   at a similar sort of figure, as half as much again?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Of course if we were to take the very low figures or
   your recalculation based on a number of factors which
   leads to Pen 3 only having 822 and Pen 4 having 371,
   one reaches a safe capacity of only 1,693 for the ttfo
   pens together? - A. For the two pens, yes.

Q. Which of course means, and I did my calculations on
   that, it is some 88% over the top? - A. I agree. That
   is exactly the figure we have.

O. But putting it very simply, clearly those central pens
   were easily on any view overcrowded, weren't they? - A.
   Yes.




                       Q . We know
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON


We know as regards pen 3 and, indeed, pen 4, but
particularly pen 3, that people lost their lives who were
at the front of the pen? - A. Yes.

Just so I can demonstrate that clearly while we are
thinking it through, if we look at C.275, this is a plan
showing the locations of deceased last seen alive - one
can never be sure that these are exactly where it was
where unfortunately people lost their lives, but it is
very clear that there were a considerable number who were
at the front of pen 3 who did lose their lives? - A. Yes.

Indeed, there are a number, not so many fortunately but
nonetheless very tragically, in pen 4 near the front? -
A. Yes.

Now when you were calculating the numbers in pen 3 you
had to make an estimate as regards the density of the
people right at the front of the pen? - A. Yes.

The front section.   The density you estimated and used
for your calculation was 10 persons per square metre? -
A. Right.

You told us in fact that when that was experimented with
in the ante room, 10 per square metre, in fact although
it was very tight, it didn't actually cause distress
amounting to injury to those involved? - A. That's right.

There must be a possibility that as regards the numbers
who were at the front of pen 3, who we know lost their
lives, who we know were in distress, who we know were
being injured because of the pressure, there must be a
possibility that your estimate of 10 per square metre is
a very conservative estimate? - A. Yes, we believe it to
be conservative.

It could in fact have been more than that? - A. Yes.

If in fact was more than that, then it follows that the
numbers in pen 3 on your calculation, would be in excess
of 1,576? - A. Yes.

So that 3,183 as the total numbers for pens 3 and 4, is
really a relatively conservative number? - A. Yes.

It will not, of course, alter the overall numbers who
entered for the west terrace, that stays at the numbers
we have been through already? - A. Yes, that is on
admissions rather than density.

Yes, very similar to the numbers of tickets sold? - A.
Yes.
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON

However, as regards the numbers who ended up in pens 3
and 4, we may in fact be dealing with even more than the
3,183 I have referred you to? - A. That's right.

One thing is certain, it is highly unlikely to have been
less than that? - A. Very unlikely.

Is there any way you can help us, given that we know
unfortunately, and we can see again on C.275 the tragedy
of it and the numbers at the front and what happened at
the front, what sort of density it could have got to?
Is there any way you can help us? - A. I haven t got an
exact reference for this figure but I have seen some
figures which would suggest that densities could go up to
as high as between 12 and 16, but this would depend on
the sort of people who were being crushed.   However,
this was so inexact and so difficult to quantify that we
couldn't use the figure.

If one could translate that on top of your figure 3,183 -
I know it is terribly difficult - is there any figure you
can give us in advance of 3,183 which, if you add in a
little more for the possibilities I have given to you,
which could well be a figure - you know how you did best
estimate to maximum? - A. Yes.   It is not a difficult
sum.   I think it adds a further 300.   If we assume it
could go up to 16 per square metre from 10, it would add
a further 300 to the number in the front row.

Whereas we had 3,183, in very round terms we might get up
to 3,800?   I know that is a little over. - A. Well, it
would be more than that because that includes pen 4 as
well, so it is 300 per pen.
So it is 600 I have got to add in? - A. Yes.

If I very roughly say 3,200 on your present figures - I
know it is just under - we are talking about 3,800,
something like that? - A. That is speculation on this
figure of 16.

But it is a possibility? - A. Yes.

Bear with me while I do a calculation.   I have just done
a very brief calculation on the basis of the figures on
Dr. Eastwood's plan, taking 2,200 as the overall total.
At 3,800 I would make that something like 72% over the
top of the numbers? - A. Yes.

Can I deal with something else?   You have given us the
figures, and I need not go through them, of the numbers
of turnstiles which were serving the various different
parts of the ground on the 15th of April, 1989. - A. Yes.
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON


It may help if you find your table. - A. Yes.
We know that the Liverpool end, the Liverpool fans, were
using the West Terrace, the Leppings Lane terraces, the
North Stand seating and the West Stand seating.   We know
that was a total of 23 turnstiles? - A. Yes, 23
turnstiles.

We know that the Nottingham Forest end had the Spion Kop,
the South Stand covered seating and the South Stand
uncovered seating and the total number of turnstiles
serving the Nottingham Forest fans, if I can put it that
way, was some 60 turnstiles? - A. Yes.

So we had in the round some 24,256 Liverpool ticket
spectators - take that figure from me - for 23 turnstiles
and some 29,800 Nottingham Forest fans having 60
turnstiles? - A. Yes.   I take your word for it the
figures add up, but I didn't know the split between
Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.
One can conclude from that, just looking at those two
sets of figures, that the three groups of turnstiles
which required the highest admissions rate to get
everybody in by kick-off were all at the Liverpool end? -
A. Yes, all three.
You have told us, of course, that as regards the Leppings
Lane terrace itself, which of course is where the tragedy
occurred, they were being served by turnstiles A to G? -
A. Yes.

The seven.   They had 10,100 ticket holders. - A. Yes.

You told us that that worked out at 1,443 per turnstile?
- A. Yes.

To be compared with only 500 per turnstile for the Spion
Kop? - A. Yes, exactly that.

Hence your conclusion that it required three times the
rate of entry at the A to G turnstiles, the Leppings Lane
terrace, compared with the Spion Kop? - A. Taking things
as averages.

You very helpfully gave us some figures as to the rate of
flow which you were able to calculate from figures
provided by the Sheffield Wednesday Club.   I think you
started as early as one o'clock, but I am particularly
interested in the period from quarter to two to three
o'clock.   You in fact were able to plot a graph showing
the numbers entering turnstiles A to G - that is the
Leppings Lane terrace - over the period from just before
one o'clock in the afternoon until the end of the
                                           C. E. NICHOLSON


records, which, of course, was somewhere around three
o'clock? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Where did these figures come from upon which you based
your figures? - A. The actual figures came from counting
each entry that came through the turnstiles.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am asked if what is Figure 3 in
the report I have, could be provided as an acetate.   I
think it has been provided.

     THE CORONER:   Yes:

It is in your report but I have forgotten what number it
is.

     MR. KING:   It is Figure 3 in the report which I
have, Dr. Nicholson, which at the bottom says, "Total
number of people emerging from turnstiles A to G."    At
the bottom of the graph it has the times, starting at
before one o'clock and ending at three o clock. - A. It
is Figure 2 in my report.

On the left hand side of the graph we can actually see
the numbers of people who entered? - A. Yes.

One can actually take a time - I won't give you a time
yet to look at but one could plot a time and from that
graph find out exactly how many people had gone through A
to G at a given time? - A. Yes.

This material came from material supplied to you through
the Club? - A. It is a combination of data from Sheffield
Wednesday, corrected with respect to the actual figures
we counted through the turnstiles so it is a combination
of the two.

You are fairly satisfied that it is accurate? - A. I
think it is as accurate as any reasonable figures could
be obtained from this situation.

What I was interested in in working out, and see if you
will agree with me from your graph, was how many people
had entered through the turnstiles A to G, making for the
Leppings Lane terrace by 2.30?   That was with half an
hour to kick-off.   Now I have plotted it but I don't
want to give you the answer because I may have got it
completely wrong.   You tell us from your graph. - A. The
graph would suggest 4,300.

That means all my figures are wrong because I thought it
was as many as 4,600, but never mind, it is even less
than I thought. - A. Let me examine the scale again. No,
4,300.
                                                C. E. NICHOLSON


     THE CORONER:      What time did you say?

     MR. KING:      Two-thirty, sir.

     THE WITNESS:      Can I point to it on the graph?
Would that help?

     THE CORONER:      Yes, please.

     THE WITNESS:   (Indicating graph)      This is the line
for two o'clock.   Two-thirty is here.     Fourth thousand
is there and so that is 4,200/4,300.

     THE CORONER:     Can we give this a number?

     MRS. PERKINS:     That is C.507.

     MR. KING:   So again see if you agree with my
calculations arising out of that. At 2.30 we know that
only 4,300 people had gone through turnstiles A to G,
making for the Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A. Correct.

I know in the calculation one has to allow for numbers
who might have got in through 1 to 16, but as a rough and
ready guide this is going to be reasonably accurate? - A.
Yes, I think so.

So at 2.30 there still remains, out of the 10,100 ticket
holders for the Leppings Lane terrace, some 5,800 people
still to come? - A. Yes.

I have just done my calculation.   My calculation would
indicate, therefore, that at 2.30 the percentage of
people who had arrived through A to G for the Leppings
Lane terrace, the percentage of the number of ticket
holders, the number to be expected, was less than half
and was some 42.5%? - A. That seems a reasonable figure.

And that the numbers who had still to come, based on the
numbers who had gone through by 2.30, some 5,800, was
over a half, obviously, and was some 57.5%? - A. That
seems reasonable.




           A. I want to do another
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON

I want to do another calculation, if I may. If one was
going to get 5,800 people in, in that last half hour,
through seven turnstiles, one can work out the flow
rate, can't one, which one would require through seven
turnstiles? - A. Yes.

And one can express that as an hourly rate? - A. Yes.

And so everybody knows how I have done   it, I took
5,800, which I have got to get through   in half an hour,
I multiplied that by 2, which gives me   the numbers who
will go through in an hour at the same   rate. - A. Yes.

And I have divided that by the number of turnstiles,
which is 7, so that gives a flow rate required of 1,657
per turnstile? - A. Yes, that seems correct.

Now, at the best of times, looking at what was being
experienced up until just near the end of these events,
it never got much beyond 650, did it, as a flow rate? -
A. No, not while there was still a crowd outside.

And the most it ever reached near the end was 1,000? -
A. Yes, momentarily.

Yes, and that was momentarily, and you know that the
Green Guide, and it is worth looking at - could we look
at paragraph 47, page 20, of the Green Guide? We have
heard a lot previously from the Green Guide, but we
have never had paragraph 47 clearly read out. This is
the chapter, Dr. Nicholson, in the Green Guide, which
gives guidance about ingress, doesn't it? - A. Yes.

We are looking at a paragraph which is dealing with the
rate of entry through turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Could you read out to us paragraph 47, please? - A.
Yes:

     "The maximum notional rate at which spectators can
     pass through turnstiles will depend upon a variety
     of factors; for example, the design and age of the
     equipment, the ability of the operator and the
     ticketing arrangements. The admission rate will
     therefore depend greatly upon local circumstance
     but in general, based on observation and
     experience, it is unlikely that the maximum
     notional rate per turnstile would exceed 750
     persons per hour."

And we have heard other people use - I think the
evidence from the Club was they were expecting 800, was
the figure they were working on, which is not totally
dissimilar, but clearly on 700 persons per hour or 800
                                           C. E. NICHOLSON


persons per hour, there was not any chance whatsoever,
was there, on that rate that some 5,800 people could
get through these turnstiles in the last half hour? -
A. No.

The figure required is appallingly high. 1,650 is way,
way over the top, isn't it? - A. Yes, I think it would
be almost impossible even in an experiment for people
to fly through a turnstile at that rate. It would not
be possible.

You have still got the Green Guide in front of you at
page 20, and you have already had paragraph 44 read out .
to you, but could you read from the second sentence,
beginning, "Turnstiles should be of such numbers as
.... . — A. Yes:

     "Turnstiles should be of such numbers as to admit
     spectators at a rate whereby no unduly large
     crowds are kept waiting for admission and yet at
     no faster rate than the arrangements for
     distributing spectators within the ground permit".

So from the figures of entry at 2.30, I know we have
got to allow for the possibility that numbers could
have gone through turnstiles 1-16, but in the round,
looking at those figures, it was more or less
inevitable, wasn't it, that if the 5,800 all turned up
in that half hour, to get in, that that was going to
fall squarely within paragraph 44, namely it was going
to be a large crowd which was going to be kept waiting
for admission because the number of turnstiles just
were not going to be enough to cope after half-past-2,
that is right?

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I will let him answer
this question but he is not an expert on turnstile
entry he is an engineer and a metallurgist, and if you
want to qualify your questions as to his expertise in
his field, I don't mind. It is an interesting point
and he has worked out ....

     MR. KING:      Well, sir, it is based on figures not
engineering.

     THE CORONER:     But he is an engineering expert,
and we don't ....

     MR. KING:   Sir, this is the vital information
which certainly I have been looking for and which we
have not had before, in this graph as to numbers
entering in this way.
                                        C. E. NICHOLSON

     THE CORONER:   That is why I am allowing you to
ask the question. What I am saying is I think we have
gone far enough down the road. You may want to look at
it from a different angle, I don't know.

     MR. KING:   Just taking the figures, Dr.
Nicholson, it is your figures and you have told us
about flow rates, because you have done calculations? -
A. Yes.

If there were 5,800 more people still to go through A-G
on the ticket holders, from half-past-2 to 3 o'clock if
they were all going to get in before kick-off, that is
right? - A. That is the assumption based on ....

On the figures we have .... - A. On the figures you
have developed so far, yes.

Yes, but those are based on the fact that only 4,300
had arrived at 2.30? - A. Yes.

And based on the fact that we know that the numbers of
turnstiles serving those people were merely seven? - A.
Yes.

And based on the flow rate which we have been through,
and you have agreed with me that on a flow rate,
engineering, mathematical calculation, one would have
needed a flow rate of 1,650 to get 5,800 in, in the
last half hour? - A. Yes.

If 5,800 people arrive in that last half hour to go
through those seven turnstiles, and cannot get in in
that half hour, they have to wait, that is right? - A.
Yes.

     MR. KING:   Sir, the conclusions can be drawn from
those basic facts.

     THE CORONER:   Yes. I am not complaining about
the way you have put it at all, not at all.

     MR. KING:   I am obliged:

Finally, can I deal with another matter? Can we have
back up on the screen the doors of the tunnel, which is
C265? Those are the gates of the tunnel which lead out
on to the Leppings Lane Terrace, Dr. Nicholson. - A.
Yes.

My learned friend Mr. Payne asked you about your
opinion of the practice which had developed apparently,
it was apparently a practice developed when the Police
had been controlling the terrace, of closing those
                                                           83

                                           C. E. NICHOLSON

   gates to prevent further entry, and you were asked your
   view on that? - A. Yes.

Q. You said that so long as they were manned, that seemed
   to be the basis of your concern, that they should be
   manned if they were going to be closed? - A. Yes.

Q. I wonder if I can put to you, and see if you agree with
   it because you are an engineer - you may not agree with
   it - we have heard an opinion from a Mr. Seamen. Mr.
   Seamen, I have to tell you so you can assess his
   opinion for us, was an Assistant Chief Fire Officer who
   had had some 23 years experience as a fireman, and was
   dealing with safety at sports grounds in that capacity
   over a number of years, and he had been asked the
   similar question, and what he told us and the Jury was
   that - I am paraphrasing and will be put right if I am
   wrong - so long as there were stewards and Policemen on
   the tunnel entrance when the doors were shut, although
   the doors were opened in the wrong direction, because
   that was the point being put to you, that they would be
   opened against the crowd, he would not see any problem
   because if there was an emergency, for example, on the
   terraces, it would take longer for the crowd to come
   down the length of the tunnel than it would for the
   Policemen or the stewards to open the gates. Do you
   understand that opinion? - A. Yes, I understand that.

Q. That was the opinion of the Assistant Chief Fire
   Officer. Am I right in saying you would not disagree
   with that? - A. It is not my sphere of expertise at all
   to comment against an expert in fire egress. I only
   gave a general opinion on the position of the gates,
   and that I thought they should be manned.

Q. Of course, you were asked the question further along
   the line. - A. Yes.

Q. Can I put it this way then: you would, as a matter of
   expertise, bow to the expertise of the Assistant Chief
   Fire Officer rather than yourself on this issue? - A.
   Yes, I would take expert advice.

Q. And the sort of expert advice you would take would be
   from somebody who was an Assistant Chief Fire Officer
   dealing with safety at sports grounds and the exit of
   people at sports grounds? - A. Yes, certainly.

             Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE
Q. Dr. Nicholson, can I just deal very briefly with the
   turnstiles and the flow rates, rate of entry? We know
   that on the day figures eventually momentarily got up
   to 1,000 per hour, notionally? - A. Yes.
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON

You speculated on that, that was probably because that
is when the pressure was off, it was about the right
time? - A. Yes.

It follows from that, as an engineer, you can confirm
that turnstiles operate less efficiently if they are
subjected to pressure? - A. Yes, and we did some tests
on the turnstiles that showed that quite clearly.
So when we see the graph of a rate of 660 or 650
average flow rate throughout the period including the
last half hour, that is a period, that graph has to be
weighed in the context of any evidence we have heard
about the pressure which those turnstiles were being
subjected to at that time? In other words, if they are
under pressure they will be less efficient, but being
less efficient they are still puttingthrough an
average of 650 an hour? - A. Yes.

You also had your attention drawn to Chapter 5 of the
Green Guide, page 20, and paragraphs 44 and 47. The
very last sentence of 47 says:

     "The admission rate will therefore depend greatly
     upon local circumstances but in general, based on
     observation and experience, it is unlikely that
     the maximum notional rate per turnstile would
     exceed 750 persons per hour".

Two things out   of that, one is it depends onthe local
circumstances as to what the notional rate is going to
be, it can vary according to turnstiles, is that right?
- A. It would appear so, yes.

But also it   has to be based on the experience and
observation   of those who actually operate that system
or are used   to watching people go through those
turnstiles?   - A. Yes, that is reasonable.

They are in the best position to judge? - A. Yes.

So you would expect that in judging, and you have heard
the Club s basis of 800 an hour, that would be drawn on
their experience of how many you could put through, and
they discussed it with the Police who also police that
end of the ground, the two sit down together and agree
on a notional rate based on their observation and
experience. That is what you would expect? - A. I
expect that is how the figure was arrived at.

There is nothing wrong in that, because that is exactly
what you would want and exactly what the Green Guide
points you towards? - A. Yes, it purely states it is
                                        C. E. NICHOLSON

unlikely that the maximum notional rate would exceed
750.

And the other factor to throw into this particular
calculation is, of course, the difference between a
paying match, where people have to get change, which
naturally slows down progress through a turnstile, and
an all ticket match where people just have to hand in a
ticket? - A. Yes, that is dealt with in 47 as well.

Can we go back to the figures that you calculated
entering through Gate C and turnstiles A-G? We know
that it excludes an unspecified number who would have
entered through Gate B, so obviously the maximum
number that went onto that terrace, or at least were
queueing or in the crush outside the turnstiles leading
to the West Terrace, the Leppings Lane Terrace, is
likely to be higher than your figure of 10,124, that is
right? - A. If such entries occurred then it could be
above that figure, yes.

We have heard a lot of evidence from people who went
into pens 3 and 4, and I just want to go through the
figures and see what conclusions we can draw about
other people going through those turnstiles and through
Gate C. We know that the best estimate you can give of
the numbers in pens 3 and 4 was 3,183? - A. Yes.

And on your maximum number, 10,124. If we deduct that
figure, 3,183 from the maximum number, we get around
6,941? - A. Yes.

So that is about, roughly, 69%, approaching 70% of the
people who entered through turnstiles A-G or Gate C,
who went, wherever they went, other than into pens 3
and 4? - A. Yes.

And we have got to add onto the top of that, of course,
the notional figure of any people who may or may not
have come through Gates B or A? - A. Yes.




        /Q. If we take your best
                                                                 86/

                                                     C. E. NICHOLSON


Q.   If we take your best estimate for the numbers that came
     through A to G, just to be fair, that brings the figure
     down to about 9,734 which gives, by my maths which is
     not necessarily a good guide, about 6,551 who went to
     other parts of the ground wherever they may be? - A.
     That figure seems reasonable obviously.

Q. That is roughly 66 per cent? - A. Right.

Q. We are talking between 66 per cent and 70 per cent of
   people who went to other parts of the ground other than
   Leppings Lane, Pens 3 and 4? - A. Yes.

          THE CORONER: Mr. Toulson, are you likely to
     finish in ten minutes?
          MR. TOULSON:   No, sir.

          THE CORONER: I am wondering whether in those
     circumstances we should adjourn because I do not want
     to go on beyond 4.30.

          MR. TOULSON:   I am entirely in your hands on that
     matter, sir.
          THE CORONER: I think it would be wiser not to
     start and allow you to begin from scratch.

          MR. TOULSON:   Very well, sir.   I am in your hands.

          THE CORONER: We cannot finish Dr. Nicholson
     today, it is obvious and so we might as well finish
     now. Dr. Nicholson, it is 9.30 tomorrow. It is 9.30
     tomorrow morning then for everybody. Ladies and
     gentlemen, would you leave us?

                  (The Jury retired from Court)

          THE CORONER: Can we have estimates please from
     the people still come about how long you are likely to
     be? I do not expect you to be tied to it.

           MR. TOULSON: In the light of questions which have
     been put earlier I have got more ground to cover than I
     anticipated, not arising out of your questions, sir,
     but arising out of ones which have been put in cross-
     examination. I would hope to be not more than half an
     hour.

          THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, have you got any idea?
     You might have no questions but I want to know.
                                                 C. E. NICHOLSON


     MRS. McBRIEN: I have got 11 questions written
down here but I think I may even add to those tomorrow.

     THE CORONER:   Well, do not try too hardl    I must
not say that.

     MR. RUSSELL:   I will not be very long at all.

     THE CORONER: It looks as if we will get to Dr.
Eastwood tomorrow morning.

     MR. TOULSON: If I am under-estimating my half
hour we shall certainly get to Dr. Eastwood, I would
profoundly hope, comfortably in the course of the
morning.

     THE CORONER: Dr. Nicholson, you can leave us as
well. Were you going to say something else, Mr.
Toulson?

     MR. TOULSON: I was going to ask if I could have
permission to show Dr. Nicholson a plan in order that
he could have an opportunity of looking at it overnight
rather than be shown it blind tomorrow morning.

     THE CORONER: It depends. I have not seen the
plan and so it is difficult for me to say but on the
whole plans I would have thought it would be much more
sensible to look at them beforehand but does anybody
object? (no response) Are you going to want to
exhibit the plan?

     MR. TOULSON:   I would hope not.

     THE CORONER:   Is it a great big thing?

     MR. TOULSON: It is quite large and I think in
fairness to him he should have an opportunity of
looking at it beforehand.

     THE CORONER: I see no reason why you should not
do that because we want to get his expert evidence.
Yes, that is fine. Mr. Catchpole, I am most grateful
to you for organising things for us to go Tuesday
morning at 10.30 and we will take the opportunity if we
may. The only thing that worries me a little bit is
Mr. Holdsworth because I realise you are actually
offering him so that the Jury can see the system
working but the problem is, when we do the business as
you know, the Jury go by themselves, I go by myself and
you go by yourself. We have split groups. I am a
little reluctant they would be shown things and have
things discussed with them when we are not all there.
                                             C. E. NICHOLSON


It is not because I think Mr. Holdsworth would do or
say something which was improper but simply because it
is not part of the Court. So what I would suggest,
unless somebody disagrees with this, is to ask Mr.
Holdsworth to switch the machinery on so that the
things are working but says nothing.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: Sir, I certainly did not
anticipate that Mr. Holdsworth would be saying anything
at all to the Jury and I had anticipated that Sergeant
Griffiths would be with the Jury to ensure that that
did not occur.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.
     MR. CATCHPOLE: It was only perhaps to have him
within reach through Sergeant Griffiths if the Jury had
wanted to see something in particular. I do not know
what questions they may have.
     THE CORONER: I can see the advantage of it
because obviously if they are there they might want to
see how the screens work and which buttons you press
but, on the other hand, I can see such difficulties
with it, theoretical difficulties, that I...

     MR. CATCHPOLE: I have to add that I am not
certain whether we can get Mr. Holdsworth. He is an
independent contractor and may well be elsewhere but I
am sure we can find someone to switch on the machines
so that they are up and running.

     THE CORONER: Nobody is going to suggest to the
machines being switched on, are they?
     MR. ISAACS: Sir, not at all. May I just say
this? We are very grateful, of course, to the Club for
allowing us all to go and look again. No doubt, you as
I am are mindful of the fact that however much one
wants to go and try and recreate conditions it is very
difficult to do so. The Jury will be going to, for
example, a Control Box not during a match atmosphere.
So there is then a tendency, of course, to think it is
like that on the day. I know your are mindful of that.
I am just wondering whether we can arrange for a crowd
of 50,000 people to be there at the same time. I
understand there is a match there on Wednesday and I
understand there is a Semi Final on Wednesday night and
I am sure the Club would be very happy to accommodate
the Jury and my colleagues.

     THE CORONER: We did toy with that idea as well
actually but I have decided against it. I take your
                                             C. E. NICHOLSON


point. In fact, I think the Police Control Box has
changed, has it not?
     MR. CATCHPOLE: Certainly I believe the old one is
still there. At least it was there when I was last at
the ground but the new Control Box is in operation.

     THE CORONER: We will want to go to the old one I
would have thought. There is no point really in going
into the new one except for inquisitiveness.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: None at all. It will have been
designed taking into accounts that have no doubt been
learned.
     MR. KING: Would there be any objection, following
what I understand did happen on the last occasion,
namely the invitation to attend could be extended to
those members of the immediate family of the deceased?

     THE CORONER: I would like to do exactly the same
as we did last time so far as I am able subject to the
Club's consent. I do not know whether we have
organised it yet but we are going to arrange for a
minibus for the Jury which we have got to do. After
all we have got to transport them. We are going to
arrange for a small coach for those legal
representatives who wish to go and any additional
spaces for relatives in the first instance and any
additional spaces for anybody else who is present and
who wants to come. Once we have used up those spaces,
any other relatives if they want to make their own way
by private transport and so on, I do not mind subject
to the Club not objecting. I do not think you would,
would you?

     MR. CATCHPOLE: Not at all, of course, not. There
is one matter which is rather difficult and I hope this
is not taken in the wrong way and it is certainly not
meant in that way. Many of the employees there have
been affected as much by this — affected badly by
this. Certainly on the last occasion, very
understandably, flowers were placed on the Leppings
Lane terraces themselves and I believe they were placed
while the Jury were still in the ground though I am not
certain about that. It did require members of the Club
to actually gently remove them to a memorial. I am not
quite certain where it is but they were certainly
placed in a proper place.   It is really a plea from me
that it does actually upset members of the Club. I
know it is upsetting for the families and I can
understand the reasons.
                                             C. E. NICHOLSON


    I quite understand that but it does mean someone at
the Club has to pick them up. They were there. It is
their ground as well. They see it every week and the
longer it remains in that way is just a constant
reminder. If it is possible, sir, not to put flowers
there and particularly not when the Jury are there we
would be very grateful but, of course, we do not mind
how many families would actually like to attend.

     THE CORONER: Perhaps people would bear that in
mind. The other thing I want to say is that last time
what we did was that we all went in separate groups. I
think I mentioned that yesterday. The Jury wander
round with Mr. Griffiths wherever they wish. They know
where they want to go. They want to go up to the
commentary box and they want to see the Club room.
Somebody will have to tell us where the locations are.
I went around and looked at everything I wished to look
at including everything that the Jury looked at and
then legal representatives and others did the same. We
know where we want to go and we can follow each other
around but what I want to avoid is meeting as far as
possible because the Jury are supposed to be doing this
on their own. I do not know why but that seems to be
the procedure in Coroners' Courts.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: Yes, I can understand that. I
hope it is acceptable, sir, that the gentleman who met
us the last time will also be present at Gate C to meet
us this time.

     THE CORONER: We obviously need somebody to let us
in. My feeling is that last time it went perfectly
smoothly and there were no problems and if we do the
same again I do not foresee any difficulty.

    MR. CATCHPOLE:   Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER: Shall we finish for today and carry
on tomorrow morning at 9.30?

       (The Inquests were adjourned until 9.30 am
                   the following dav)
