                                                                                           M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and tim e raised "2 — \       °V Q       .______   Num ber

 ~ n i                                    ^
                                                CL_J—             \O
Include source and any document number i f relevant)                            Tss=y
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/N o   ____
                                                                                                                         Receiver




                                                                                                                         Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                   Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                         Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised                                                                                           '5§ii
Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                         SIO

                                                                                                                   f -

                                                                                                                   1531

Further action No(s)                                                                                                     Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Number Form
      HER M A J E S T Y ' S CORONER FOR SO UTH Y O RKS HIRE
                           (WEST DISTRICT)



              INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

        VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                     STADIUM DISASTER

                  ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



                 INQ UE ST INTO THE DE AT H OF


                    DAVID STEVEN BROWN




                            Before

DR.    S.L.    POPPER,   LL.B,    B .M E D .S c i , B M , B S , MR C G P

                  (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                                 At

                 The M edico- Le ga l Centre,
                       Watery Street,
                         Sheffield.

                                 On

                     26th April,        1990




                 TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




         From the Notes of J.L. H a r p h a m , Ltd.,
              O f f i c i a l Shorthand Writers,
          55, Q u e e n Street, S h eff iel d SI 2DX
                    A
                                                                        It\D £X

                                                                                  p a ge


                        OPiiiUilG STATEMENT BY THE CQ;U)NE^

                    B
                        DR.    .1. J .      SHOiliLA^O C a l l e d

                              By Xne C o r o n e r


                        POL.    CON.        G.    PARKS C a l l e d

                              ii y The C o r o n e r


                        DET.     IiIS ? .    H.    LAYTON C a l l e d

                              By The C o r o n e r

                    D




                    E




                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                            26ta April,   1990


                                Ii-iOUESX IiJTO THE DEATH OF DAVID STEtfEfl BROiM
•     •                 A

                                 THE CGROHER:    I do apologise, ;1r. Fraser, about
                            not warning you.   This is a case where we .mow that
                            nobody is co:aing, I believe.

                                  Hit FRASER:   I understand, sir.  Sir, tne next
                        B   evidence you will hear relates to David brown.     David
                            is fro.n i/rexha.n. His family nave had the _opportunity
                            of seeing the su;a.iary prepared by the Officers, and
                            they have decided that they will not be present whilst
                            it is presented, sir.    The practice tnat represents
                            David's family is a member of ray group and I therefore
                            appear as their agent through tae usual agency of the
                        C   Steering Compittee.

                                 THE CORONER:    Yes,  and as I have said niany times,
                            and I repeat it, it is perfectly proper for      the
                            families not to be here.     I do not want any family to
                            taink tnat I asa upset by  the-.nt not coding or that I
                            think they have acted incorrectly.     They raust act as is
                            best for them and as how they can cope with the
                        D   situation, so no criticism of theui whatsoever.

                                 This then is a resumed inquest which I opened on
                            13th April, 1939.  On that occasion rieil Anthony
                            Parkin, Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                                 *,rfhe body which is the subject of this Inquest has
                                 been identified to PC 1827 Fisher of the South
                        E        Yorkshire Police as that of David Steven Brown by
                                 Anthony iiark Brown, his brother.    He was 25 years
                                 of age, having been born on 29th September 1963 at
                                 Wrexhaoi.   He was a married saan and he lived at


                              it is written in ink, that is why I a.-.i having
                            difficulty.  vie have got            |near Uraxaaoi, DUt
                        F   we will come to that.   I think that is actually an
                            error

                                 "He was a machine operator by occupation.   He died
                                 at Hillsborough Football Ground, following an
                                 incident there on Saturday 15th April 1989.   PC
                                 1827 Fisher caused the body to be removed to the
                                 tiedico-Legal Centre, and there he identified it to
                        G        Detective Constable Si;non lleigold, who
                                 subsequently identified the same body to Dr.
                                 Shortland.   It is the family wisn that the body
                                 should be buried."

                            Then I circulated ray standard form, which you have
                            probably heard about, and it was signed by S. J. Brown,
                    H
                                                   -   1   -


    J. L. Harpham Ltd
who I believe was this gentleman's wife, and she
confirmed tae name as David Steven iirown and the
addcess we nad was             ....   I don t know how
you pronounce it.  Is tnere a Uelsh person among us?

     DET. SGT G R I F F I T H S ;   Yes,   sir,

     THE CORONER:    Now do you pronounce this?
     (Det. Set. G riffiths a s s isted the Coroner with the
pronunciation of                  .... near l;rexnam.  we
have also got ___________       Can  you have a  look, Me.
Fraser - it does not matter too much, but I am just
interested to see ....

     HR FRASEii:   Sir, tne only information I have got
is on a fora completed by David's solicitors in the
earlv days, and I have got his address on tnat as CD
                   that Welsh town, near Wrexham.   I
can't take it any further than tnat   I am afraid, sir.

      m e CORONER:    Well I think we will stick to what
iirs. Brown signed  as the correct address and ye will
cross out               but maybe ... wno is the
presenting Officer m   this case?

     POL.   CON. G. PARKS:          I have got


     THE CO;?ON Eli: It is not vital at this stage, but
will you be in touca at all with the family at some
point or other or not?

     POL. CON. G. PARKS:            That has been done this
morning.

     THE CORONER:          You checked it this morning?

     POL. CON. G. PARKS:            Not the address but I have
spoken to the family.

     TNE C O R O N E R : If you speak to theoi again can you
just do uble-check and let us know what the correct
address is.      Let's leave            in.          _s what
                                              T hat i;
the most recent information is, so it is
                           Urexham.  So that is, if you
like, a correction to the opening, and in addition to
that the identification was not done by Simon Weigold
to Or. Shortland, and in fact we nave got a statement
by Simon Ueigold, and - this is what I keep on
forgetting - in the other two cases which we dealt with
this morning, Ian Whelan and Mr. Asncroft, the
situation was exactly the same, where I read out that
the identification had been done by Simon tfeigold, tnat
was in fact incorrect and it has been corrected in the
files.   Hr. Eraser, I am just crossing a "t*1 here.         I
hope that is satisfactory to you.       The alcohol in this
case was estimated by Dr. Forrest in the usual way and
tne level was 15 mg. per 100 ml.
                                                                         DR.   SHORTLAi’ D


                                      OR. JOHH RICHARD SHORT LA IQ Called

                                                3y THE C O R O N E R :

                        0. I a:a obliged to you for coming this morning, Dr.
                           Shortiand.   You have already bean sworn, of course,
                           haven't you? - A. I have indeed, sir, yes.

                        Q. And you are James Richard Shortiand? - A. John.

                        0. John - it shows you tnat you just read what is put in
                    B      front of you because I do know you.    we have already
                           established that Si.non iieigold did not identify this
                           lad to you. - A. Yes, sir.

                        0. Can you just briefly tell a e how wa know tnat the
                           evidence you are giving relates to David Steven Brown?
                           - A. Yes, sir.   I am totally convinced that the
                           evidence relates to the body of David Steven Brown
                           because it was identified to me by Mortuary technicians
                           and so.ne other Police Officers, whose naae I cannot
                           give you.   In addition to that there were ;aarks placed
                           on the body indicating firstly his natne and secondly
                           the number, the sequential number, of the body, and
                           that corresponds with all the the docuiaentary evidence.

                    D   0. So there is no question? - A. Wo question about it.

                        .). Dr. Shortiand, would you be kind enough then just to
                            tell me the cause of the dea th and the basis on which
                            you have arrived at it. - A. Yes, sir.   The external
                            features were those of congestion and s.nall
                            haemorrhages, coupled with internal features ;auch the
                            satne and a considerable degree of swelling of the
                    E       brain, and I concluded frojn that that this gentleman
                            died fro.ii traumatic asphyxia.

                        Q. Uould I be right in thinking that there was no natural
                           disease which could have played any part in this? - A.
                           No significant natural disease at all, sir, no.  He was
                           a 25-year-old healthy ....

                        Q. Fit aan,   yes.

                                THE CORONER:      Mr. Fraser, any questions?

                                HR FRASER:      The family have no questions,    sir,
                           thank you.

                                 THE CORONER:     Have any of you got questions?        (No
                    G      res po n s e )

                        Q. Hr. Shortiand, it will be perfectly in order for you to
                           leave us if you wish. - A. Thank you very siuca, sir. I
                           will take you up on that.


                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                        PARKS


                                     THE C O R O N E R :   (The Coroner addressed the Members
                                                                                T
                           of the Jury)           You    have  understood, naven't you?  I am
                           assuming       that    you    now  follow the pathology evidence
                           w i t h o u t too much difficulty.

                                        POL. CON. GILLIAN PARKS Called:

                                                 By THE C O R O N E R :

                        0. Can I have your name for the shortnand writer? - A.
                           Gillian Parks, Police Constable, of the iJest Midlands
                    B      Police Force.

                        0. If you uri.ll take me through the suaunary, please. - A.
                           On Saturday 15th April, 1989, Mr. Andrew Mark Brown
                           travelled with his brother, David Steven Grown, by
                           private car to Sheffield with the intention of watoning
                           the se.ai final football match at the Hillsbor ou gh
                           Stadium that day.    After parking the car they took
                           refreshments while snaking their way to the stadium.
                           They entered the stadium via the Leppings Lane
                           turnstiles at about 1415 hours, and stood together in
                           enclosure 3, directly behind the goal, about half way
                           up the terrace.

                                As the snatch started Andr ew Brown describes a
                    D      surge in the crowd coming from the rear of the
                           terracing and in tne crush and confusion that followed
                           he lost sight of his brother David.    After some time
                           Andrew was able to free himself frora the crowd but was
                           unable to locate his brother David.

                                 Following the severe crushing in the Uest Stand
                           terracing Police Constable Gerard McManus made his way
                    E      to the Leppings Lane end of the stadium, where he
                           assisted in the removal of a number of spectators from
                           the terraces.   During tnis time he saw a man he now
                           knows  to be David Steven Brown lying on the pitch,
                           After unsuccessful attempts at resuscitation he was
                           assisted by unknown members of the public to carry
                           David to the gymnasium wnere a temporary mortuary had
                           been set up.

                                At 1555 hours     that day Police Constable Colin
                           Fisher took charge     of David and was present at 1558
                           hours when Dr Alan     Paul Redgrave examined him in the
                           temporary mortuary     and certified his life extinct.

                                At 0215 hours on Sunday 16th April, 1989, Andrew
                           Mark Brown identified the body of his brother David to
                           Police Constable Fisher in the temporary mortuary at
                           the gymnasium

                                Police Constable Fistier later escorted the body of
                           David Brown to the Medico-Legal Centre and confirmed
                           the identification to Detective Constable sieigold.

                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                             G . PARKS
                                                                                          i i . LAYTOiJ



                                  On Sunday 16th April 1989, Dr. Shortiand carried
                             out an autopsy and submitted a report giving the cause
                             of death.

                                  Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                             blood sample taken from David Brown, where the presence
                             of ethanol was detected.  The witnesses proving
                             continuity of the blood sample are Detective Constable
                    B        Jones, Detective Sergeant Tur ne r and Detective Sergeant
                             Fletcher.  Dr. Alexander Robert Walker Forrest carried
                             out the analysis.

                                   Found in the personal effects of David Brown was a
                              part ticket for the serai final aiatcn and it is clear
                              tnat iir. Brown entered the ground via the Leppings Lane
                              turnstiles.   This concludes the suaiuiary, sir.

                        o. Taere is just one tiny point.               I think Andrew Hark
                           Brown in his first statement,              which is page 1, says:

                                   “tie arrived at the football ground at 2.15

                             which is what we nave got in the su.waary. - A. That is
                             right, sir, yes.
                    D
                        0.   1415, but on page 3, uhicn is in fact a furtner
                             statement that he made, he says:

                                    'We go t to the ground at 2.25 and we went straight
                                   m

                              - A. That is correct.
                    E
                        0   . So there is a suiall discrepancy in tiraing but it is
                              only a matter of ten minutes or so, that is right? -
                              Tnat is right.

                                   THE COitOllEii:        Hr.   Fraser, any questions?

                                   iiil FRASER:      The faaiily have no questions,          sir,
                              thank you.

                                         PET.     IKSP.   MIC HAEL LAYTON C a l l e d :

                                                      By THE C O R O N E R :

                                   THE WITNESS:   iiichael Layton, Detective
                              Inspector, West midlands Police.   Sir, an examination
                              has been made of visual evidence and David has been
                              identified on the terraces of enclosure nu.aber 3.

                                   Andr ew Brown, that is David's brother, has in fact
                              been shown video film and photographic evidence and he
                              has identified his brother in enclosure number 3, on a
                              BBC tape which has been given tne reference number
                    H
                                                           - j
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                           ij. LAYTQii


MAP 1, and, sir, timed at 1446:13:08.   He nas also
identified his brother alive in enclosure number 3 on
the same video tape, timed at 1456:32:02.   dr. Brown,
that is Andrew Brown, sir, has indicated a person who
Kiay be his brother, on further photographs, but those
can't be confirmed.   Sir, in particular, on a
photograph reference DB16/29, reference has been .nade
to a possible identification of David on tnat
photograph, but it is very inconclusive.

      Sir, on photographs referenced Pitl/llA, Pi?l/15A,
Fill/16 A and PR1/19A, timed at 1504, David is shown at
tne front of enclosure number 3.    Again there is a
slight element of doubt.

     PC Mciianus nas indicated on a plan of the pitch
area the approximate location at which he found David
and tnat plan, sir, is referenced Gitil.

     Sir, can I refer you to a plan of the terraces
which has been given the reference number HWJL15?

C114. - A. And, sir, do you wish to refer to tiie plan
by PC tictianus, Giiitl, which is a plan of the pitch.

Yes,   I think we will do - Cl'15.

   (The witness referred to the large scale p l a n )

- a . Sir, in respect of MUJL15, specifically referring
to enclosure nusnber 3, the unconfirmed photograph, the
first one, is shown in this location h e r e . The video
references referred to, which I would say to you are
the conclusive ones, show hi*a in this location h e r e ,
and then the other photographs I referred to, which
again there is a slight element of doubt, is in this
location here.

So the video evidence shows hini just below the barrier
.... - A. That is right.

... which at soaa point was broken? - A. That is right
and that is the identification whicn I aa happy with.
Sir, in respect of the pitch plan, GllMl, the point at
which the Officer PC McManus has indicated is in this
location h e r e .

Yes.

       THE COROUExt:        Any questions,   Mr. Fraser?

       HR F R A S E R :   Ho thank you,   sir.

     THE COROilER:   That is the evidence we are taking
in this case.   Perhaps when you coiamunicate with the
solicitors of the family of this young cian, would you
                        please be kind enough to convey to tne family (a) we
                        respect their decision, and secondly, and m uc h ia o r e
                        importantly, that I a<a very sorry that they have
                        suffered this tragic loss in their fauiily set up, and
                        tnat David lost his life at Millsborougn.

                             HR FRASER:    I certainly will,   sir.

                              THE CORONER:   tfe are going to rise. we are a
                    B   little bit behind schedule - that is nobody's fault
                        except mine tnaybe, but we will nave tiae for tea and
                        tiien we will come back and hopefully we will catch up
                        with ourselves.


                         (The Inquest into the deatn of DAVID STEVES 3RO'.-7M
                               w a s adjourned to a date to be f i x e d )




                D




                    E




                    F




                G




                H
                                                 7   -
J, L. Harpham Ltd
