 INQUISITION                                                                                          75

 An inquisition taken for our Sovereign Lady the Queen


  At    C o ro n e rs C o u rt                  inthe W est D i s t r i c t                   of S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e

  On the               1 8 th        ***< *
                                                A p ril                       1989
  [Andby adjournment on v a r i o u s d a t e s up t o a n d i n c l u d i n g t h e
                             28+-W              day of      C T )0 ~ *C ^                     1991         ]
  [Before and by] [*] me                                             STEFAN LEOPOLD POPPER

  One of Her Majesty's coroners for Jt®                              S o u th Y o r k s h ir e       (W e s t) D i s t r i c t

  [and the undermentioned jurors] touching on the death of
                                                                     DERRICK GEORGE GODWIN

  The following matters are found                                    DERRICK GEORGE GODWIN
1 Name of deceased

2 Injury or disease causing death: [2]
                                                                     1 (a ) T ra u m a tic A sp h y x ia

3 Time, place and circumstances at or in which injury was sustained: [3]
  ‘3 >'*<ScX or\          Wsie.    V5 ^      A pn\                cx-S      c \ f <?s»ov\\c           cla_v<s^
  S v x s tK X v n e rA    cxte.   W A \s \o c > < ~ a        *fc>oVE\oex\\ G « s u .n c ^ y                    e \c k .


4 Conclusion of the jury/coroner as to the death: [4]

                            K clcJ\cLoj^ J ^             CD&e^v-v

5 Particulars for the time being required by the Registration Acts to be registered concerning the death

   a Date and place of birth                                        e Date and place of death 1 5 . 4 . 8 9       S h e ffie ld
   24.10.1964            C ir e n c e s te r                         H i l l s b o r o u g h F o o t b a l l G ro u n d ________
    b Name and surname of deceased                                  f Occupation and usual address
     DERRICK GEORGE GODWIN                                             A c c o u n ts C le r k


   c Sex        M a le
   d Maiden surname of a woman who has married


                                                                    Signature of c

   Signature of jurors:




                                                                                                                        Please turn over
   NOTES

1 Modify this as necessary according to whether the
  inquest is held with or without a jury or partly
  with and partly without a jury.
2 In the case of a death from natural causes or from
  industrial disease, want of attention at birth, chronic
  alcoholism or addiction to drugs insert the immediate
  cause of death and morbid conditions (if any) giving                   Date             19
  rise to the immediate cause of death.
3 Omit this if the cause of death is one to which
  Note 2 applies.

4 a Where the cause of death is one to which Note 2
    applies, it is suggested that one of the following
    forms be adopted:
     C.D. died from natural causes.
     C.D. died from the industrial disease of
                                                                         Re

     C.D. died from dependence on drugs/non-dependable
     on drugs.

     C.D. died from want of attention at birth.

     (In any of the above cases, but in no other, it is
     suggested that the following words may, where
     appropriate, be added:
     "and the cause of death was aggravated by lack of                   Cause of death
     care/self-neglect').

  b In any other case except murder, manslaughter,
    infanticide or stillbirth, it is suggested that one
    of the following forms be adopted:

     C.D. killed himself/herself (whilst the balance of
     his/her mind was disturbed).

     C.D. died as the result of an attempted/self­
     induced abortion.                                                   Verdict
    C.D. died as the result of an accident/misadventure.
    C.D. was killed lawfully.

    Open verdict, namely, the evidence did not fully or
    further disclose the means whereby the cause of death
    arose.

 c In the case of murder, manslaughter or infanticide
   it is suggested that the following form be adopted.

    C.D. was killed unlawfully.

 d In the case of a stillbirth insert 'stillbirth' and do not
   complete the remainder of the form.




 Price £4.00 for 25 copies or £14.00 for 100 copies (exclusive of tax)
 ISBN 0 11 340764 5
 Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty's Stationery Office
 Dd 291453 C130 11/88
                                OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR        MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                  WATERY STREET
                                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                  SHEFFIELD
                                             (West District)
                                                                  S3 7ET
   STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                 CORONER


                            Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721                      .19.




Your Ref: CALD/MER/Godwin

Leighton Davis,
Solicitors,
Buttercross House,14 Langdale Gate,
Witney,
Oxon 0X8 6EY.

Our Ref: Hills/Sol/4/SLP/JT                                      17th September 1990


Dear Sirs,

Re: RESUMED INQUESTS 19th NOVEMBER 1990.


If you are not already aware, I intend to resume the Inquests into the deaths
of the 95 people who died at Hillsborough, one or more of whom you represent,
on the 19th of November 1990 at 10.a.m.  Details of venue will be notified in
due course.

I do not have to remind you of the fact that a considerable amount of
evidence has already been taken, nor of the nature and limitations of a
coronal investigation which you will recollect is not adversarial but
inquisitorial in nature, and which of course has only limited objectives.

Subject to the Coroners’ Act 1988 and the Coroners’ Rules, the Inquest is
under my control, and in particular, it is my responsibility to select the
witnesses who wish to give evidence.  I am at present engaged in considering
this and in determining who I wish to invite to attend.

Without prejudice in any way to my rights in the matter, I am writing to you
to give you an opportunity to draw to my attention the names and other
appropriate details of any witness or witnesses whom you would like me to
consider calling to give evidence at the resumed Inquests.

May I please ask you in considering whether you wish to draw any names to my
attention, to bear in mind the scope and limitations of an Inquest.

I also want to make it absolutely clear that the submission of a name or
names for consideration is nothing more than that, and that the decision as
to who to call to give evidence is and remains a matter for me.

I would be grateful if you could respond as soon as possible. If I have not
heard from you by the end of September I will assume you have no names to
submit.

Yours, faithfully,
                                        LEIGHTON DAVIS
                                                    SOLICITORS

Alan Leighton Davis MA (Oxon.)                                                                               Buttercross House,
Carol A. Leighton Davis LLB (Lond.)                                                                          14 Langdale Gate,
Robert Lacy Thompson (Consultant)                                                                            Witney
                                                                                                             Oxon
Our ref:                                                                                                     0X8 6EY
            CALD/MER/Godwin                                                                                  Tel: 0993 779977
Your ref:                                                                                                    Fax: 0993 702048




            H.M. Coroner,
            South Yorkshire ( West District)
            Medico-Legal Centre,
            Watery Street,
            Sheffield
            S3 7ET.



            12th January 1990
            (Die 11th Jan.)



            Dear Sir,

            re: Derrick George Godwin.

            We acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 4th January, and are able to
            confirm that we can agree to the terms upon which you are willing to
            release a copy of the post mortem report in respect of the above
            deceased.

            We should therefore, be glad to receive a copy at your convenience.



            Yours faithfully,



            LEIGHTON DAVlfe




                          This firm is regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of investment business.
                                             4th January        199fi©

SLP/JT.„
CALD/MER/Godwin.


Leighton Davis,
Solicitors,
Buttercrosa House,
14 Langdale Gate,
Witney,
OXOM. 0X8 6EY.

Dear Sirs,

Re: Derrick George Godwin.

Thank you for your letter of the 19th of December. I regret
that you are misinformed with regard to the issuing of full
Death Certificates. This can not be done at the present time.

Wi did however agree, subject to certain conditions, to release
copies of post mortem reports to solicitors and various other
selected people. I enclose a copy of the standard letter which
was sent out. If you are able to oonfirm that you can agree
to the forms. I will arrange for a copy of, the post mortem report
to be forwaried to you.


Tours faithfully,



S.L.Popper,
H.M.Coroner.
                                         LEIGHTON DAVIS
                                                     SOLICITORS
Alan Leighton Davis MA (Oxon.)                                                                                Buttercross House,
Carol A. Leighton Davis LLB (Lond.)                                                                           14 Langdale Gate,
Robert Lacy Thompson (Consultant)                                                                             Witney
                                                                                                              Oxon
° ur ref:   CALD/MER/Godwin                                                                                   0X8 6EY
                                                                                                              Tel: 0993 779977
Your ref:                                                                                                     Fax: 0993 702048




            The Coroners Office
            Medico-Legal Centre,
            Watery Street,
            Sheffield
            S3 7ET



            19th December, 1989.


            Dear Sir,

            re: Derrick George Godwin deceased

            Further to our previous correspondence we understand that the Post
            Mortem Reports and full Death Certificates are now available in respect
            of the Hillsborough deceased.

            We should therefore, be glad if you could supply us with a copy of each
            document and we will of course, pay any necessary copy charges.



            Yours faithfully,




            LEIGHTON DAVIS




                         This firm is regulated by the Law Society in th e conduct of investm ent business.
                                    OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR            MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                     /                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                          WATERY STREET
                                                                          SHEFFIELD
                                                   (West District)
                                                                          S3 7ET
  S T E FA N L. P O P P E R , LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                         CORONER


                               Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721
                                                                                  August     19"-89,
  SLP/JT/H/006.

 Leighton Bavin,
 Buttererosf? House,
 14 Langclal§ Gat®,
 Witney,
 mm        ox8 6sr.


  Dear          Sira,

  Re:        SBBSSOK G& GQQSWIM (deceased) iio. j'5.

  As you are aware, the Inquest(s) arising out of the Hillsborough
  Disaster stand adjourned to a date to be fixed. You may also
  be aware that it had been in my mind to resume these Inquests
  on the 15th of January 1990.

  I have now been informed that the Director of Public Prosecutions
  has decided to have a criminal investigation undertaken on his
  behalf. In these circumstances, I have decided not~ to resume the
  Inquest(s) on the date mentioned.

  I will review the matter further after the Director of Public
  Prosecutions has announced his decision as to what action (if any)
  he may wish to undertake.

  I am not in a position to say how long the Police Inquiry
  or the Director of/Public Prosecutions consideration of the
  matter will take. I anticipate however that there will be
  a substantial period of time before I am in a position to comnrunicati
  on this matter further.

  I would be grateful if you could please ensure that this information
  is conveyed to members of the bereaved family so that they may be
  fully informed of the position regarding the Inquest(s).

  Yours/faithfully,



^.L.Popfafe/.
                                                 LEIGHTON DAVIS
                                                             SOLICITORS
Alan Leighton Davis MA (Oxon.)
Carol A. Leighton Davis LLB(Lond.)                                                                                    Buttercross House,
Robert Lacy Thompson (Consultant)                                                                                     14 Langdale Gate,
                                                                                                                      Witney
Our ref:      CALD/LPT                                                                                                °xon
                                                                                                                       0X8 6EY
Your ref:                                                                                              Tel. Q993                 7?9977
                                                                                                                       Fax: 0993 702048
                                                                                                                       DX 40213 Witney




              Dr. S. L. Popper,
              H.M. Coroner,
              South Yorkshire (West District)
              Medico Legal Centre,
              Watery Street,
              Sheffield,
              S3 7ET.

             8th May 1989.


             Dear Sir,

             Re,       Derrick George Godwin — Deceased.

             Further to our telephone conversation with your officer this
                           ^ lte to confirm that we have been instructed to act on
             circumstances “                    delti^ ^                             in C°“              " With the

             We should be grateful if you would kindly keep us informed of
             developments m connection with the inquest on behalf of our clients.
            Yours faithfully,

                   j      a                       Q



            LEIGHTON DAVIS

                                                                                                      S e ^ T      V'7 _ ' S - ^ C\




           By Appointment at Radcliffes & Co., 10 Little College Street, Westminster, London, SWlP 3SJ.
                              This firm is regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of investment business.
    TELEPHONE:                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
    SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                  POLICE HEADQUARTERS

    TELEX: 547996                             SNIG HILL
    FAX: (0742) 523243                          SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


    P WRIGHT CBE OSt J CBIM
    CHIEF CONSTABLE


Dr S L Popper                                18 April 1989
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield
S3 7ET



j              I    >
    (                    'A
I refer to your recent conversation with Superintendent
Sleath concerning the release of the deceased persons from
the Hillsborough incident to their respective next of kin,
following the adjournment of the inquest.

After consultation with Professor Usher, I have no objection
to this course of action.




                              1
