                                                                                                   MIR.15



       OTjmER DpeUMENT FORM                            Date and tim e raised                                    Number

  / . •+
:*^[it[e                                         fes C T .                     -______ lV*SNfe>v     i P l<uf       'IjoOlvfl'Q
           lude) source and any document number i f relevant)
               i
■’ V
       Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                                Receiver




                                                                                                                                Indexer
       Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

       No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                         Statement Reader
       Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                                Indexer
       Indexed as indicated

       No(s) o f actions raised

       Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                           O /M         SIO




       Further action No(s)                                                                                                     Indexer


       When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Number Form
  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL,           1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


              HENRY THOxMAS BURKE




                       Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                          At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                          On

               26th A p r i l ,   1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes .of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                                  INDEX

                                                             Page

                    B                                           1
                        OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER


                        PROF. J. S. P. JONES Called

                           By The Coroner


                        PET. SGT. G. McCOMBIE Called

                           By The Coroner
                           Cross-examined by Ms. Norcliffe


                        PET. IHSP. M. LAYTOH Called
                    D
                           By The Coroner                       7
                           Cross-examined by Mr. Catchpole      8




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
26th April, 1990


    INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF HENRY THOMAS BURKE


     MR FRASER:   Sir, the evidence you will hear this
afternoon starts with that relating to Henry Burke.
Mr. Burke's wife is in Court, sir, and several members
of her family and some social workers. The solicitors
who represent Mrs. Burke are a member practice in my
group and I therefore appear as their agent, through
the agency of theSteering Committee in   the usualway.

     THE CORONERS   Good afternoon. I will outline for
you the procedure so that you know the format and have
a rough idea of what is going to happen, because it is
much easier for you to follow.

     First of all I am going to read to you the
evidence which was taken on 19th April, 1989, which was
the opening right at the beginning when I then allowed
the body to leave so you could have the funeral. Then
I am going to deal with any amendments that need to be
made, tell you the blood alcohol or ethanol. Then w$
are going to listen to Prof. Stephen Jones, who is a
pathologist, who will tell us what we need to know with
regard to the pathology. Then the West Midlands Police
Officer will present a summary of the evidence, and
Inspector Layton, another Officer, will present the
visual evidence.  I pause here because first of all we
are going to have references to plans with numbers and
things of that nature. Try not to allow that to
confuse you because we need it for the record, but you
try and listen to the account. He will, when he has
finished talking, come over here and on these big
plans, where it is relevant, he will show us what he is
actually saying, so when we finish we should have some
idea of what it was about. When that has been done we
will terminate the proceedings today. Have I made that
clear?

     This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened
on 19th April, 1989. On that occasion Neil Anthony
Parkin, Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

     "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has
     been identified to PC1844 Catley of the South
     Yorkshire Police as that of Henry Thomas Burke by
     James W. Swaine, his friend. He was 46 years of
     age, having been born on 23rd March, 1942 at
     Liverpool. He was a married man and he lived at
                            Liverpool.  He was a
     roofing contractor by occupation.

     He died at Hillsborough Football Ground, following
     an incident there on Saturday 15th April, 1989.
                                                                   PROF.   J.   S.   P.   JONES


                                  PC 1844 Catley caused the body to be removed to
                                  the Medico-Legal Centre and there he identified it
                                  to Detective Constable Simon Weigold who
                                  subsequently identified the same body to Prof.
                                  Jones.  It is the family wish that the body should
                                  be buried."

                          and then we adjourned the Inquest.  I wrote to you,
                          Mrs. Burke, I don't know if you remember, but I sent
                          you a form asking you to check the details, whether we
                    B     had them right, and in fact you signed it and you
                          confirmed that what I have read, names, age, place of
                          birth, was correct, that is so, isn't it?

                               Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol estimations on
                          everybody, including Henry, and the level in his case
                          was 16 mg. per 100 ml. When I say blood alcohol, by
                          the way, in some cases we refer to ethanol.  Ethanol is
                    C     just the correct name for a particular alcohol which is
                          the one we are talking about.

                                  PROF. JOHN STEPHEN PHILLIPS JONES Called:

                                                 By THE CORONER:

                    D             THE CORONER:    Prof. Jones has already taken the
                          oath:

                        Q. Yes, Prof. Jones, could you just repeat your name for
                           the shorthand writer? - A. Yes, John Stephen Phillips
                           Jones, Home Office Pathologist and Consultant
                           Pathologist in Nottingham, and Professor of Forensic
                           Medicine in Nottingham.
                    E
                        Q. Prof. Jones, would you be good enough to take me
                           through your post mortem finding into this young man's
                           life - slightly older than some but still young. - A.
                           Yes, the body was identified to me as Henry Thomas
                           Burke, and was designated the number 31, by Detective
                           Constable Weigold at the Medico-Legal Centre.

                    F           The body was that of a middle-aged man. He was of
                           average stature and good general physique. There was
                           very marked congestion and cyanosis, that is, blue
                           discoloration of the skin of the face, neck, ears and
                           of the upper chest, and also of the fingertips. A
                           number of very minor injuries were present on external
                           examination. These consisted mainly of minor bruises
                           and abrasions, present on the knee and upper arm. They
                    G      were all of a trivial nature and did not in any way
                           cause or contribute to death. On further examination
                           there were multiple petechial haemorrhages. These are
                           pinpoint haemorrhages which were present in certain
                           characteristic places in the body, particularly in the
                           region of the voice box, on the surface of the lungs
                           and of the heart. These little haemorrhages were also
                H
                                                   -   2   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                PROF. J .   S.   P.   JONES



                             present on the face of the deceased. There was no
                             evidence of any natural disease present.




                                  The characteristic features of these petechial
                    B        haemorrhages and the cyanosis which was present caused
                             me to designate death as being due to traumatic
                             asphyxia.

                        Q.

                        Q. I know you did not do the alcohol estimations yourself
                    C      but you heard the figure as 16 mg. per 100 ml? - A.
                           Yes.
                        Q. Can you just tell me whether you think that that amount
                           of alcohol is a significant amount in the cause of
                           death at all? - A. No, it is a very insignificant
                           amount of alcohol.  It would not have caused any
                    D      behavioural disorder.  He would not have behaved in any
                           way differently to somebody who had no alcohol in them
                           at all.  It is a very minute amount and possibly was
                           the result of drinking half a pint of beer probably
                           quite a long time before, and it would not have
                           influenced his behaviour and would not have influenced
                           his death at all in any way.

                    E   Q. Yes, and for the sake of reassuring the family, you
                           have already told me in many other cases,
                           unconsciousness in a situation like this supervenes, I
                           believe, very, very quickly indeed.  It is a matter of
                           seconds, isn't it? - A. Yes, indeed. The pattern of
                           these types of injury certainly is that the person
                           would become unconscious at a very early stage of this
                           crushing effect and once they are unconscious they
                    F      would not suffer any of the ill effects of the
                           asphyxial change, and in particular they would be quite
                           unaware of any pain or suffering, and it is true to
                           say, and we have witnesses who have survived this
                           episode and other episodes, and they were aware of
                           crushing occurring, they were rendered unconscious and
                           then they knew nothing further about it until they
                           regained consciousness, and I think we can be very
                    G      certain with those who died that they cannot have had
                           any prolonged suffering, and all the changes that I
                           have described would have occurred after
                           unconsciousness had occurred.

                        Q. And one final point, Prof. Jones, I am asking you but I
                           know the answer, but you have indicated that if the
                           families want to talk to you privately afterwards you
                H
                                                  -   3   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  PROF. J. S. P. JONES
                                                                           G. HcCOMBIE


                             would make yourself available? - A. Yes, sir.  I would
                             be very pleased, if there are any unexplained matters
                             that they want me to go over, I would be very pleased
                             to go through it with them.

                        Q. We will have to do the same as we did yesterday and
                           take the evidence ___ - A. If they could wait until
                           after the second Inquest then I shall come and see
                           them.
                    B
                                  MR FRASER:   Sir, Henry's family have no
                             questions, but thank you for the offer.

                                 THE CORONER:    Any questions?    (No response)

                                      PET. SGT. GRAHAM McCOMBIE Called:
                    C                           By THE CORONER:

                                  THE WITNESS:   Sir, it is Graham McCombie,
                             Petective Sergeant in the West Midlands Police.       I have
                             already taken the oath, sir.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   Thank you. Please go ahead. - A.
                    D        Sir, the circumstances are that at about 10 a.m. on
                             Saturday 15th April, 1989, Miss Christine Burke saw her
                             father Henry Thomas Burke leave the family home with
                             the intention of travelling to Sheffield.  He was
                             travelling by private car with friends to attend the FA
                             Cup Semi Final at Hillsborough.

                                  James William Swaine travelled to Sheffield with
                    E        Henry, also James Murphy, who in fact is Mr. Burke's
                             brother-in-law, Steven Odger, and they all arrived at
                             about 2 p.m.

                        Q. And Paul Cook, is that right? - A. I beg your pardon,
                           sir, I missed Paul Cook out.

                        Q. Yes. - A. They arrived at about 2 p.m. They all walked
                    F      to Hillsborough Stadium where Mr. Burke and Mr. Swaine
                           separated from the others as they did not have tickets
                           for the match.

                                  Mr. Swaine went with Henry to the coach parking
                             area where they purchased two terrace tickets. They
                             then joined the crowd-outside the stadium but were
                             separated due to the pressure. Mr. Swaine entered the
                    G        stadium via a large gate near the turnstiles but did
                             not see Henry again.

                                  Following the severe crushing in the Leppings Lane
                             terracing Police Constable James Grant went to the
                             perimeter fence in front of the West Stand and assisted
                             to remove injured persons through Gate 3. A man, now
                H
                                                  -   4   -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                      G.   MeCOMBIE


                          known to be Henry, was passed from the terraces and
                          Police Constable Grant was assisted to put the man on a
                          hoarding and carried him to the gymnasium where a
                          temporary mortuary had been set up. The Officer wrote
                          his Police number on the hand of the man and then
                          returned to the pitch, before returning to the
                          gymnasium and resuming responsibility for Henry Burke.

                               At about 4 p.m. Dr. Matthew Bull examined Mr.
                          Burke in the temporary mortuary and certified life
                    B     extinct.
                               At 8 p.m. Police Constable Grant was relieved from
                          duty and identified Mr. Burke by reference number to
                          Police Constable Catley.

                               At about 2.30 a.m. on Sunday 16th April James
                          William Swaine identified the body of Henry Thomas
                    C     Burke to Police Constable Catley at the temporary
                          mortuary.

                                The Officer later escorted the body of Henry to
                           the Medico-Legal Centre and confirmed the
                           identification to Detective Constable Weigold.

                    D          On Sunday 16th April, following identification by
                          DC Weigold, Prof. Jones carried out an autopsy and
                          submitted a report giving cause of death.

                               Sir, evidence is included regarding the analysis
                          of the blood sample from the deceased, where the
                          presence of ethanol was detected. The witnesses
                          providing continuity of the blood sample are Philip
                    E     Rich, Detective Sergeant John Turner and DS James
                          Fletcher. Dr. Forrest carried out the analysis.

                                Sir, there was no ticket found on Mr. Burke and in
                           the circumstances it cannot be established how or
                           exactly when he entered the stadium.

                        Q. When I was looking at this again last night, paragraph
                    F      2 or 3, the first sentence might possibly be slightly
                           over-stated.  If you turn to page 3 of Mr. Swaine's
                           statement, at the bottom of the page, he says - can you
                           just read me that line and the first line on the next
                           page? - A. This is the statement of James William
                           Swaine:

                                "Henry and I didn't have tickets so we made our
                    G           way to the coach park to buy some tickets. We
                                then made our way towards the ground."

                        Q. He doesn't actually say in so many words that they
                           actually succeeded, does he? - A. No, sir, not in his
                           statement, no.

                H
                                                -   5   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                             G.   MeCOMBIE


Of course, they may have done. We can't say positively
one way or the other on the basis of the statement, can
we? - A. No, sir.

So perhaps .... - A. There is one other paragraph, sir,
just further doiim:

    "I was queuing up and when the gates opened I just
    walked in. I remember thinking to myself that I
    had wasted £6."

Yes, thank you. That would indicate that he had bought
a ticket.  I had missed that. Thank you very much.

     MR FRASER:   No questions for the Officer, sir,
thank you.
          Cross-examined by MS. NORCLIFFE:

     MS. NORCLIFFE:   Sir, Belinda Norcliffe, for the
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police:

Just one question, Officer:  paragraph 3, where after
the visit to the coach ground this gentleman and Mr.
Swaine joined the crowd outside the stadium, is there
any evidence as to what time that was, please?

     THE CORONER:    Page 3, I think you will find it,
Sergeant. - A. I think the best we can narrow it down
to is round about 2.30 p.m., sir. Do you want me to
read that paragraph?

Yes, well that is what he says, yes. - A. "Upon arrival
in Sheffield we parked the vehicle near to the ground
and made out way to the match at approximately 2.30
p.m."
I think it is only fair, Officer, that it is not clear
from the statement, assuming that the statement is
chronologically correct. - A. Yes, sir.

Then they must have gone to get their tickets after
that because he then talks about getting his ticket?
Of course, people don't always give their accounts in
strict chronological order, do they? - A. No, sir.
There is clarification in another statement if you wish
me to read that?

Yes, can you draw my attention to it? - A. Page 7, at
the top of the page, sir, the second paragraph.

Oh yes, that is right, you are right, you are quite
correct. Yes, read that. - A. It reads - this is the
statement of James Patrick Murphy -
                                                G. McCOMBIE
                                                  ti. LAYTON


    "We all set off walking to the ground.   It was
    about 2.10 p.m.   About 15 minutes later we got to
    the ground in the Leppings Lane end of the
    ground."

Yes, and then I think this particular chap sayshe went
to a shop to buy some cigarettes and then they
approached the turnstiles? - A. That is correct, sir.

    THE CORONER:      Any questions from you?

     MS. NORCLIFFE:      No thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER:     Mr. Fraser, any questions arising
from that?

     HR FRASER:     No thank you, sir.

         PET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                    By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
Inspector, West Midlands Police.  Sir, an examination
has been made of video film and photographic evidence
in respect of Henry Burke and he has been identified in
the enclosure referred to as number 3, and also
subsequently on the pitch.

     Sir, PC Grant has viewed visual evidence and he
identifies himself on a BBC video tape, sir. That
reference for that tape is MAP 7 and it is timed at
1535:02:24. This, sir, shows the Officer engaged with
Mr. Burke on the pitch.

     Sir, Mr. Peter Murphy, who in fact is in Court
today, assisted us in viewing visual evidence and he
has identified his late brother-in-law actually in
enclosure number 3, and specifically, sir, with
reference to a photograph which has been given the
reference number PR1/10A.  Sir, if you could give me a
moment I will just give you the time for that.

Of course. - A. Sir, that is timed at 1503. Sir, can I
refer you to a plan which has been given the reference
number MWJL117, which in fact relates to that
particular identification?

Yes, and that will be C124. - A. And then, sir, a
further plan, MWJL55, which is a plan of the pitch.

And that will be C125.     Can you show us what they show?
                                                                             H.   LAYTON


                                (The witness referred to the large scale plan)

                             - a . Sir, if I can deal with the plan MWJL117,  that
                             refers to the photographic identification in respect of
                             Pfil/lOA, and the position at which Mr. Burke is shown
                             is in enclosure number 3, approximately in this area
                             here.   Sir, in respect of HWJL55, which is a plan of
                             the pitch, there is a video identification here, and
                             also a further identification here, and I wonder if you
                             can give me a moment, sir, I could perhaps just give
                    B        you,a time for that?

                        Q. Yes, certainly. - A. Sir, there is certainly a
                           reference to 1535:02:24 which is the time when Mr.
                           Burke is apparently being carried from the Leppings
                           Lane end of the pitch.

                        Q. Yes. Which one was that? - A. It is on a BBC tape,
                           sir, MAP 7.
                        Q. Yes. - A. And the second identification is just a
                           little bit further on.

                        Q.   Yes, it was part of the same movement? - A. It is the
                             same, that is right, sir, yes.
                    D                              Mr. Fraser, anything of this
                                  THE CORONER:
                             witness?

                                  HR FRASER:     No thank you, sir.

                                       Cross-examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

                    E   Q.    Just one question: are you able to tell whether Mr.
                             Burke is alive from the photograph PR1/10A, at 1503? -
                             A. It is my impression that he, yes, he probably still
                             is.
                        Q.        THE CORONER:   In the end you do your best? - A.
                             That is right, sir, yes. That judgment is from the
                             photograph, not from anything evidential.   It is purely
                             ray assumption from the photograph.

                        Q. Yes, that is fair enough.            Thank you,

                                  THE CORONER:   Mrs. Burke, that is all the
                             evidence we are going to take.   It is very sad that you
                             have had to travel here and listen to all the evidence
                             and I am sure it has brought it back to you, although I
                             don't suppose for a moment it is very far from your
                             mind, and most days I am sure you are thinking of your
                             husband and indeed I ara sure the other members of the
                             family also think of him.   I would like you to know
                             that as far as we are able we feel for you and for the
                             rest of the family in this terrible grievous loss which
                             you have suffered.   I am very much obliged to you all
                             for coming.
                H
                                                    -   8   -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                We will rise as we usually do for a moment or
                        then we will proceed.


                            (The Inquest into the death of HENRY THOMAS BURKE
                                  was adjourned to a date to be fixed")


                    B




                    C




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                    H
                                                -   9   -
J, L, Harpham Ltd
