HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                    (WEST DISTRICT)




      INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

           ON THE 15TH APRIL,            1989




                       Bef ore

. S.L. POPPER,    LL.B, B.MED.Sci,            BM, BS, MRCGP

           (Her M a j e s t y ’s C o r o n e r )




                          At

                 The Town Hall,
                   Sheffield.

                          On

              22nd November,          1990




          TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




   From the Notes of J.L. H a r p h a m , Ltd.
        Official Shorthand Writers,
    55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                Page

A. HOCKENHULL Sworn

     By The Coroner                               1
     Cross-Examined     by Mr. Payne             10
     Cross-Examined     by Mr. Manning           10
     Cross-Examined     by Mr. King              11
     Cross-Examined     by M r s . McBrien       18
     Cross-Examined     by Mr. Russell           21
     Further by The     Coroner                  22

J .L . TAYLOR Sworn

     By The Coroner                              24
     Cross-Examined by Mr. King     *            30
     Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien              33
     Further by The Coroner                      35
     Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King          37
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne                 41
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole             43
     Further by The Coroner                      43

E.L. LEE Sworn

     By The Coroner                              45
     Cross-Examined by        Mr. Payne          55
     Cross-Examined by        Mr. King           55
     Cross-Examined by        M r s . McBrien    56

D.G.L.   MATTS Sworn

     By The Coroner                              57

P.K. MARJORAM Sworn

     By The Coroner                              63
     Cross-Examined      by    Mr.   Hale        67
     Cross-Examined      by    Mr.   Manning     67
     Cross-Examined      by    Mr.   King        68
     Cross-Examined      by    Mr.   Russell     68

J.D. SHELLEY Sworn

     By The Coroner                              70
     Cross-Examined by  Mr. Payne                73
     Cross-Examined by  Mr. King                 74
     Further by The Coroner                      74
                Index to Transcript   (Cont)

                                               Page

G. TAYLOR Sworn

       By The Coroner                           75
       Cross-Examined by Mr. Hale               BO
       Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne              81
       Cross-Examined by Mr. King               81
       Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien           82
       Further by The Coroner                   85
       Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King       85
       Further by The Coroner                   86

M.J.   TISSINGTQN Sworn

       By The Coroner                           87
                                              A.   HO CK EH HU L L




               FOUjtXH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

             THURSDAY. 22nd NOVEMBER 1990

      THE CQROi-iER:  Good morning.    A few minutes late -
there was a minor hiccup, but I hope you don t suinci -
not of my making, in fact.     Are we ready to press on or
are there any burning matters which need to De raised.
We have prepared for you at this stags, I suppose you
might call it a core bundla, if I raay use tnat awful
word.   What we have done to start you off is to prepare
some folders similar to these, in wnich we have put tne
overheads which we have had up to now, and I will
supply these to you     so that we have got tnera avaiLaoie.
If we need to add any .sore, or if you need to ada any
more, then the usual rules will apply with regard to
production but these are, if I can put it luce that,
with ay coiaplisnents, and I hope you will find tiieni
helpful.    Of course, you don't have to use then - 1
■aean you don't have    to use the binders, y o u can use any
system you like but    we thought it znignt be helpful.

      (Addressing the J u r y ) We have got four sets we can
use in Court, so that you can each have a look as well.
If we put them up on the overheads then of course you
don't need to look at theia or you can do whatever you
like.   Whatever is easier for you, that is tne point.

      I think our first witness is Angela Hockenhull.

           ANGELA HOCKSiiHULL Galled (Sworn)

                     3v THE CQRQ^SR

Good aorniag. - A. Good morning.

You are Angela Hockenhull,    that is rignt? - A. I au.

    Leppings Lane? - A. That is right.

 And you in fact are a aarriad l a d y , and you are a
 carpenter, is that right? - A. That s rigiit.

 You work on the premises, in fact,    tnat is rignt,       isn t
 it? - A. I do.

 And you and your husband, in fact, on I5tn April Ijoi,
 were ia your workshop.   Is tnat downstairs or upstairs.
 - A. It is downstairs.

 Is it, in fact, the front room of your house wnich you,
 ara using, or is it at t-.ve baci of tna nouse? ~ A. It
 is at the back of the house.
                                                    A.   IIOCrvEIiHULL




    Q. On 15th April, 1939, if you can think back to that
       tiaie, I think that, in fact, you spent a fair bit of
       tiiae in your kitchen, frora about aalf-past-lw onwards.
       - A. That is eight.
B
    Q. Does the kitchen overlook Leppings Lane, or how is your
       nouse orientated?  Can you see out of the windows?
       What do you see when you look out? — A* There are two
       windows in the kitchen.  One overlooks Leppings Lane,
       the other one overlooks the garden at the rear of the
       property.

    Q. Which window were you looking out aiainly, or was it
       both that you just happened to be looking out? - A. It
       is a very small kitchen, you can pretty inuch see out of
       both windows.

    Q. And I think you have got a garden and you have got a
       driveway which leads down to it? — A. That is correct.

    Q. And at one point you had a garage there but that ojay or
       raay not .... - A. It was demolished some years ago.

    Q. Yes, and it had already disappeared on 15th April,
         1939? - A. Yes.
    Q. Am I right in thinking that froa about half-past-10 you
       noticed that there was a trickle of spectators going up
       towards .... - A. People were starting to arrive.

    Q.   3ut not huge numbers at that tiine? - A. Ho.

    Q.   I think soiae of them were sitting on the garden walls
         eating chips and drinking .... - A. Yes, sraall groups,
         families, people like that.

    Q. Nothing .... A. - Nothing unusual.

    Q. In the beginning I think soae people did feel tne need
       to find a toilet and they went down your pataway to
       look if there was anything down there? - A. Yas, again
       that is not unusual.

    Q. Yes, and you banged on the window I think and they just
       smiled and went off, that is right? - A. Went away.

    0.. So no problems whatsoever at tnat ti»ae? — A. Jot at
        that time, no.

     Q. I suppose if people are strangers and they don't know
        where the public toilets are they may hunt around? - A.
        Well, yes.  There are a few around but they are not
        easy to find.




H
                                                           3

                                               A.   flOCKENHULL




Q.' Yes, I will just ask you this now - do you actually
    know where the public toilets are other taan the ones
    in the ground, in your iiaiaediate vicinity? - A. Yes.

0.   Do you want to tell us now? Tell us where the aain
     public toilets are in relation to your house, and tne
     ground, because you are very close to the ground? -
     That's right.  I am not very good with distances, to be
     honest, but they are just at the top of Leppings Lane
     and to the left, at the entrance to Hillsborough Park.
     I don't know if you have got a aap or anything.  It is
     about two or three sainutes walk.

Q. Can we show the lady, is it C230, number 36?   Can you
   see Leppings Lane there? - A. Yes, can you see tne
   school, where it says "Middlewood*1 in large letters
   there is a little road, Parksids Road.   The toilets are
   inarked actually there, toilets and disabled toilets.

Q. Yes, so the toilets ara marked on C280 witn a " T " , I
   think, on the corner of iiiddlewood Road and Parkside
   Road, is that right? - A. That is right.

Q. Any others that you are aware of? ~ A. ilot that    I know
   of, no.

Q. Right, and then I think from noon onward, I aa going
   back to you in your kitchen, things began to liven up
   in the sense that there were store people? - A. Yes.

Q. This built up, we will take from noon until about one
   o'clock - there was an increase of people? ** A. That s
   rignt, yes.

Q. I take it walking towards the ground? - A. Towards tiie
   ground, yes.

Q. And proportionally siora people started coining down your
   side entrance looking for somewhere to wee, shall we
   say? - A. Yes.

0. And you banged on the window, and did tney still aove
   off without any problem? - A. Host of tnem were still
   going away when they realised that they were in fact on
   stage.

0. At that time - we are talking about between 12 and one
   o'clock - did you hava any who actually responded to
   you in a negative way, shall we say? - A. Yes, there
   were one or two that sort of looked up and waved, and
   waved other things, yes, they were starting to get a
   bit jovial.
A                                                   A. HOCKE^HULL




    Q.'What do you mean when you say a bit jovial? - A. Tney
       were starting to find it abusing tnat I was distressed
       by the fact that they were urinating on the garden.

B   0.' In other words what-you are saying is that tney
        actually persisted even when you asked them to desist?
        - A. Yes.

    Q. Wot all, a few? - A. Most of them continued because by
       that time they had already started.

    Q. They had started and they couldn*t stop, I suppose,  vie
       have assumed that these are all supporters and also
       maybe that they were supporters of Liverpool but did
       you have any indication that they were supporters? - A.
       A lot of them were wearing red tee-shirts and scarves.

    Q.   Did you know that the other team had the same colours?
         I don*t know whether you knew that?  - A. I wasn*t sure
         what the other colours were.

    Q.   No, did any of them speak to you at   all, that you can
         remember? - A. When I actually went down the garden to
         ask them to move on sosae of them did speak to me.

    Q.    And did they in their speech indicate to you that   they
         supported Liverpool at all? - A. I believed it to    have
         been a Liverpool accent.

    Q. You were satisfied that in your opinion .... - A. In my
       opinion.

    Q. And it was, of course,   the correct end of the ground? -
       A. That's right.

    Q. I think in fact one of the persons actually said,   ^
       "Don't worry about this, it's only lager**. - A. "It s
       only lager", that's right.

    Q.    3ut that was just one and it stuck in your mind? - A.
         That was one comment that stuck in my mind, yes.




                         0. From one onwards ....




H
                                        A.   HO CK EN HU LL




    Q. From one onwards was there an increase in this behaviour.
       Did it stay steady or did it come down? - A. As time went
       the number of people coming through who appeared to be
B      drunk did definitely increase.

    Q. When we are talking about people w h o appeared to be drunk
       - I will come to the word ’drunk" in a m i n u t e - are you
       talking about the people who came down your garden to
       urinate, or are you talking about the people who were
       walking past your house? - A. To be honest I was mostly
       taking notice of the people in my garden, but m general
       people did seem to be...

    0. The word "drunk", of course, has got a spectrum.    What I
       am interested to know is when you use that word, wnat is
       it you are trying to convey to me? ~ A. Well, on the
       scale from slightly merry to drunk, I would say when I
       refer to them as being drunk at the stage of having
       difficulty speaking and standing.

    0. So they were more than just... - A. They had had quite a
D      few.

    0. But they were still able to walk? - A. Just.

    Q. They weren't paralytic drunk?   This is what you are ^
       trying to say, from zero to paralytic you would put tnem
       on to the slurred... - A. Roundabout 8.

    0. It may be an almost impossible question for you to answer
       and if it is impossible say so, but can you give me any
       indication of how many people came down your pathway.
       Never mind how many stopped and wee-ed, but now many
       would you say came down either to urinate or who went
       away when you asked them to? - A. It was in tne hundreds
       but. it would be very difficult to put an actual figure on
       it.

    Q. There were a lot? - A. There were an awful lot of them.

    Q. It wasn't just tens or twenties or anything            like that?
       A. No, it was well into the hundreds.

    0. So it was quite a serious problem for you.^  You have
       told me you went down out of your kitchen into the garden
       and did you remonstrate with some of the people? - A. I
       tried, but, of course, as soon as they had gone tnere was
       another lot.   It becomes an endless battle.

    0. You have already indicated to me w h e n y o u banged the
       window they did not take too much notice, in fact waved
       their appendages at you.   Did that nappen when you were
       outside as well? - A. Oh, yes.




H
                                      A. HOCKENHULL


0. Did you find that distressing? - A. I found it very
   distressing, yes.

0. I think we had better get-this appendage right.  We know
 ' what we are talking about.   What you are really saying
   is that they were... - A. They waved their genitals at
   me.
0. Was there a lot of litter about as well?      *kere were
   a lot of chip papers, burger boxes, cans, bottles, tnat
   sort of thing.

0. The cans and the bottles w h i c h you saw, were these ° nJ ^ e
 ' whole of soft drinks or alcoholic nature? - A. Tnere was
   a fair proportion of coke, milk, that sort of thing, but
   mostly they were lager, bitter.

0. So there was a mixture?   There were people who were
   drinking non-alcoholic drinks which they had disposed of.
   - A. Yes.

Q. I think you said you have got a dustbin which has a
   capacity of 240 litres, which is quite a big tning/ - a.
   I t is about three feet square and a b o u t four and a halt
   feet deep.

0. Did you fill that or not? - A. At the end of the day when
   we went out and sort of collected up the litter from otr
   the wall and in the garden, there was about three or four
   inches at the top to spare.

0. That was from your garden and immediately outside...
   You didn't clear the whole of Leppings Lane? - A. On, no,
   I didn't go on to the street.

0. It was your bit that you wanted to have neat and tidy?
   A. That's right.

Q. You have already told me there was an increase of what
   appeared to be people who had taken more alconol as
   compared with the earlier ones.  Was there also an
   increase in numbers? - A. As time went on tne number or
   people going towards the ground definitely increased.

 0. Can you say what time it peaked, as far as y o u remember?
    - A. Somewhere between half past two and a D o u t five pa s t
    three, that sort of time.

 0. In the last half hour or thirty-five minutes? - A. Yes.

 0. Was it a large increase or just a small increase over
    that period? - A. It was quite a large increase, yes.
    There seemed to be larger groups of people coming down.
                                                            7




                                     A.   HOCKENHULL


Q. These, were they family groups? - A. No, the families and
   couples and older people seemed to go in first and
   towards kick-off time the groups tended to be large
   groups - men, youths.   Some couples were still going
   down but mostly large groups of youths.

0. This group which was coming through.from 2.30 o n w a r d s ,
   did you notice any difference?   Apart from the age           .
   distribution, which you have already mentioned, were tn y
   apart from that, similar in their benaviour a n d attitude
   to the group which had been through, say, from 1.30 to
   2.30? - A. They were generally a little more rowdy^ and
   boisterous.   They were shouting and chanting as tney
   went down the road.

0. In these groups coming past your house, did you notice^
   whether any were carrying cans? - A. A lot of people
   passed carrying cans most of the day.   They weren t
   unusual in the fact they had got cans.   Some of them had
   got full cans that they seemed to be desperately trying
   to get rid of.  Whether or not that was to get into tne
   ground I don't know.

Q. But by no means all, I would deduce from your answer? -
   A. Most of them had got cans.   As I say, it was a very
   warm day and most people that day had got cans anyway.

Q. It was a warm day, yes.   Did you notice any people
   walking in the opposite direction away from the ground? -
   A. Some of the people were coming away and on occasion i
   heard them to be asking if anybody had got s p a r e tickets.




            0. So you did hear
A

                                                    A.   hockenhall




    o       so vou did hear that. Can you say about how many
            people you heard? ^ You may not
            peoplejou                       be most
                                          £or   able of
                                                      to answer
                                                             «
B
            I could not honestly say.   While I was outside I did
            notice that.
    O. The problem with the urination in your garden, if
       invthina got worse? - A. As that time approached I
       started to get very distressed b y i t
       went and found a Police Officer wfao. s^atl?"®drr^ .n_
       Constable on the garden to stop anybody else going
       down there.
    Q. Did that help? - A. Oh yes, it definitely stopped it.

    Q. Where did you put the Officer? On Leppings Lane?
       A. He actually stood on the drive.

    Q. Once that happened? - A. Nobody else went in.

D   Q. It is a shame you did not think of ^ -   Where wa3
       that Officer found? Where was he? - A. The actual
       Officer?
    Q.       Yes. - A. He was in Leppings Lane.
        0    Apart from that one Officer did you see any other
             Officers in Leppings Lane? - A. There were plenty of
             Policemen around at that time.
        o. Then, of course, you were content once your garden
           was protected? - A. I was quite happy then.

        Q. Your next contact with the fans was actually after
           the incident? — A. That is right.

        Q. When they came back and wanted to use the
           telephone? — A. That is right.
        Q. But we do not need togo into that.        How longhave
           you lived there? ■ A. Five years.

        Q. You have seen matches before? - A. Yes.
        0. fqn you by chance remember the 1988 match which was
           between the same teams? - A. X do not actually follow
           the football so I have difficulty in....
        Q. Let me put it this way; was the crowd behaviour, the
           timing, any different from the normal crowd which
           past your house so far as you n o t i c e d and saw.
                                         A- hockenhall


A. Most of it was normal to a large match of that
kind. I do not think X can ever recall seeing
anybody more drunk than that on any occasion but it
was fairly consistent with a large football match.

The timing which you have mentioned with the pe°ple
coming, was that the standard, the normal? - A . No,
larger numbers of people were coming later than is
common. Normally the road is fairly clear by that
sort of time.
When you say that sort of time, can you say what
bracket of time you have got in mind? - A. Sort o£
quarter to three time onwards it is all levelled out
and things get back to normal.
Are you saying at quarter to three on this day it was
still busy? - A. People were still flocking in.

You are bound to be asked this question so I will ask
it myself. Is Leppings Lane provided with dust bins
where people can deposit cans? - A. There are more
d u s t b i n s now than there were at the time. They have
recently put some up but there have always been dust
bins on Leppings Lane.
 Are these the small ones that hang on lamp posts?
 A. That is right.
 Can you recollect whether or not any extra ones were
 put in on that day? - A. I can only really speak for
 the area immediately outside my house. I have never
 noticed any.
, You did not notice any extra ones. Again y o u m a y not
  be able to answer this and if you cannot, just say
  so. Were there any public dust bins outside or near
  your house at that time? - A. No, I do not believe
  so.
 You cannot say whether they were actually used, these
 dust bins? - A. I could not tell from where I was.

 Are you the only local resident who had this problem
 with regard to urination in gardens?   A. No, it is a
 local problem. We have always had it. It was not
 unusual to that match.
                                         A- HOCKENHALL


             Cross-examined bv M R ■ PAYNE:

During the five years that you have lived there, have
you ever seen such large numbers coming (town to the
ground at about quarter to three? - A. Not as late as
that, no.
This was the worst case? - A. This was the worst that
I have seen.
            rT-nfis-tayamined bv MR. MANNING-

Just following that through, you do not remember
seeing anybody more drunk than this? - A. Not than at
this time, no.
 The scenario is a larger number than ever before
 coming urinating in your garden? - A. As far as I
 have ever noticed, yes.
 A larger number of cans and bottles being deposited
 in your garden? “ A. That is right.
 That finished when the Police Officer took up
 position? " A- That is right.
 We have not actually established at what time that
 Was? - A. It was getting to round about twenty to
 three. I cannot say exactly but round about that
 time.
 The ones who were coming that you described at
 quarter to three and indeed even up to 3.05 you
 describe people still going down towards the
 ground? - A. That is right.
. Which is them making their way down to the ground
  five minutes after what would have been an ordinary
  kick off time? - A. I do not really follow the
  football but I believe it to have been three o'clock,
  yes.
. Those people from twenty to three onwards up to 3.05
  they would not have been the ones responsible for the
  deposit because the Police Officer would have
  prevented that? - A. The deposit?

. Of the cans? - A. Oh no, sorry. The cans did not
  necessarily stop. He was there to stop people coming
  on to the garden.
                                            A. HOCKENHALL


0. Even though there was a Police Officer to stop them
   coming in the cans still came over? - A. People have
   a tendency to throw things, yes.
Q. So more drink, more people late, more urination in
   the garden, more cans from bottles than ever
   before? - A. As far as I remember, yes.
                Cross-examined bv MR. K,|N<£:

Q. Mrs. Hockenhull, this is not the first time you have
   given evidence about the events of the 15th April, is
   it? - A. No.
Q. You have given evidence to the Taylor Inquiry, have
   you not? - A. That is correct.
Q. You were asked a series of questions and you gave a
   series of answers? — A. That is right.
Q. The Taylor Inquiry took place in June of 1989? - A.
   Yes.
Q. Not long after the disaster? - A. Yes.
Q. I suspect things would be fresher in your mind then
   than they are now? ~ A. Correct.
0. Of course, with the passage of time things do change,
   do they not? You read, all sorts of people talk to
   you, and you have a whole lot of images building up
   in your mind. Can I just ask you about one or two
   things you told the Taylor Inquiry?
      MR PAYNE:    I am sorry to interrupt my friend but if
 he is going to embark on this exercise then he ought to put
 the whole of her evidence to her and not selected or edited
 passages.
    MR. KING:   I am delighted if the whole of her
 transcript is put before the Jury. I have no objection to
 that at all.
      THE CORONER:   I am not because if we do that we are
 rerunning the total Inquiry. I do not think that is
 helpful.  I think it is quite proper for you to test her
 evidence by selecting. If I feel you are going too far or
 that it is not proper I will stop you but I have no
 objection and I do not think there is anything
 objectionable to you asking the questions.
                                                       12

                               A. HOCKENHULL


      MR. KING:  Can I say, sir, on behalf ° f the
that we, so that my learned friend Mr. Payne on behalf of
the South Yorkshire Police can hear, we have     ° ^ e c tj°n
to every word of any witness going before this 3 ^ y .    I
understand your ruling sir, because you
but I say that so my learned friend can hear in case he
thinks I am making objection, I am not.

      THE CORONER:  Could you just sit down for one moment
because I just want to say something to the jury.

        Ladies and gentlemen, it is common knowledge, there
 is nothing to hide about it, Lord Justice ^ a£ lor     "ot
 in this chair but in this place in 1989 and he spent a
 in Liixo v-iiaj-j. ^    __*      lot- of the witnesses whom
 long time taking evidence and a lot or tne w ™
 we have got did not appear before him so they are if you
 U k e new" but some, like this young lady, was called and
 gave evidence.
       There is already transcripts of the evidence.    I
 have thought about this and    we   could just read that
 straight off but I don't think that  that would be parti
 cularly helpful because some of the transcripts       Jnu°
 hundreds of pages and I don't think we
 benefit from it.  That is why I am calling the witness
 so that we can hear them.
       On the other hand if,    as   Mrs.Hockenhullhas told
 us something which differs,   then itis quite right for
 one of the lounsel to say:  "Can you 3 ^ 0 0 ^ 0 1 which
 of these versions is actually correct?   and this lady
 is on oath now at the moment and that is really what
 we are trying to establish.
       As I said right from the word go, what I want to
 try and find is the truth of how these young men and
 women, and there were one or two oider people,
 by their death.  That is what I am interested m , that
 is what we should be interested in.  Go ahead and
 see how we get on.
        MR. KING:  Sir, if it is of any assistance to
  you sir, I don't know whether you have the transcript.
  Sir, I am looking at pages 34 and 35 of the transcrip

        THE CORONER:  Unfortunately I have got them
  rerun and the page numbers will differ from what you
  have got.
        MR. KING:  Sir, if it is of assistance to you
  it is the beginning of her evidence when she is
  being examined by Mr. Goldsack.

). You told us this morning, Mrs. Hockenhull, that you
   were telling us about the people in your garden.
   - A. That is right.
                                 A. HOCKENHULL


0. When the learned Coroner asked you about the number of
   people who appeared drunk increased you made clear tnat
   you were talking about the people in your garden. - A.
   Sorry, which particular time are we talking about there.

Q. We are now talking about this:  "As time went on the
   number of people who were drunk increased . That is
   you have said today? — A. Well,  yes.

Q. And the learned Coroner asked you whether y o u were_talking
   about the people outside or the people in your garden and
   you said:  "The people in my garden".  All right? - A. Yes.

Q. And that is what I want to ask you about.  You have told,
   us that the Police Officer who stationed himself at the
   front of your garden stopped people coming m , was it
   about 20-to-3? - A. Roughly.

o. And I suppose the great bulk of people who came into your
   garden came in between which hours would you say? - A.
   Most of it I would say was between, it is curficult to
   say, but about half-past-1 to about 20-to-3 or whenever
   the Officer was placed there.

Q. Could you tell us again how large your garden is? “ A *
   Oh dear.  I am not very good on distances.  It is about
   half the size of this room.  I don't know what that is.

Q. That gives us a picture.  You indicated that the numbers
   of people who entered your garden, I made a note of it,
   were "Well into the hundreds"? - A. Over the span of
   time.
Q. Yes, over the sort of span of time we are talking about
   and I just want to query that with you.   Sir, it is     ^
   about the second page at the top sir.   You see hundreds
   gives the impression of perhaps 200 or 300 people,
   something like that.  Is that what you are talking about.
   - A. Oh yes.

 Q. Now you were asked the specific question about that,
    that very same matter of how many people over that span
    of time came into your garden.  You were asked that
    question at the Taylor Inquiry.  Do you remember being
    asked, you may not? - A. No, I am afraid I don t.

 Q. All right.   Let me remind you what the question was and
    it was this:    "Between say 1 o'clock and half-past-2
    how many people were coming ihto y o u r garden?"  That
    was the question.   All right?  Now I know you add another
    ten minutes on in your evidence today but roughly the
    same sort of time we are talking about.     All right.
    - A. Yes.

 Q. And this was your answer:   "It would be difficult to
    say, quite a large numfi^r of people, several dozen over
                                 A. h o c k e n h u l l


the span of that time."  - A. No, I actually Jaid J6™ ” 1
d6zen at a time.  I specifically remember that.  It was
in groups of several dozen at a time were coming m .

Are you saying that in any one time 36? - A. Well may be
24.
You call that "several dozen"? - A. Several dozen.

So you are saying that you did not tell the Taylor Inquiry
"several dozen over the span of time ?   A.    no.

Now let me move on to something else.                  Sid
that you were asked this  question:   "What condition did
they appear to be in?" and this was your answer:    Most
of them appeared to be quite drunk.   They appeared to
have been drinking anyway."  That was the answer you gave.
- A. I was asked actually whether I knew that they were
drunk and I could_only answer that they appeared to me
to be drunk.
There is a difference, isn't there, between someone who
 has been drinking and someone who is drunk? - A. On yes.

 We all of us now and again have a drink. - A. That is
 right.
 All of us may have a couple of pints or even more bu *
 we are not necessarily drunk afterwards.  You agree
 that? - A. Oh yes.
 And isn't that the correct impression you got which was
 the people who came into your garden appeared to have
 been drinking? - A. Yes, I suppose so.

 You see when you were asked about the numbers coming
 into your garden you were asked another question, next
 page sir.  You have just told us that you did not say
 "several dozen over the span of time" you were saying
 you said "several dozen at a time"? - A. Yes.

. You were actually asked about the increase which
  happened just before the Police Officer arrived because
  there was an increase then in the people coming in t°
  your garden, w a s n ’t there. There were more people
  coming into your garden then than there had been between
  say 1 and quarter-past-2? - A. Yes.

. And you were asked this      question:   "what about the
  last half-hour or so before kick-off, half-2 to
  3 o'clock.   Were people still coming down?          Answer:
  "People were still coming in quite large crowds . And
  bv 'large c ro w ds ' what do you mean?"   Answer:      Wei
  taking over    the road sort of spilling off the pavement
  on to the road."      Question:   "And how m a n y were coming
  into your garden at that stage?"       Answer:      At that
  stage quite a lot.      They were coming down in large
  groups of perhaps 20 at a time."       - A. That is right.     •
                                                                   15

                                        A. HOCKENHULL



    Q. And that was just at the end before you called the Police?
       - 'A. That is right.

    Q. So when you were asked earlier how many people were coming
       over the whole span of  time that was the time when you
B      said "several dozen over the span of time"?' - A. No, you
       know how you have just read that I said they were coming
       down in groups of 20, well that was the several dozen
       at a time" that I was referring to.

    O. I see.  Now you were also asked about - s.ir this is -ne
       cross-examination of Mr. Jackson - more questions about
       the people in your garden who had been drinking.    A1
       right.  You gave evidence which you have given to us
       about people speaking with slurred voices.   Sir, it is
       the second full page of Mr. Jackson's crofs-ex ^ i n ation.
       You were talking about the earlier stage before half-past
       All right? - A. Right.

    Q. But you are still talking about between 1 and 2.30 but
       before the great bulk, you said the increase came at
       2.30, and you were asked this question:          'They were coming
       into your garden to urinate.    Somebody made some flippant
D      remarks about 'It's only lager' but what were the other
       signs they had not only had some drinks but they were
       drunk?" which is the question I asked you.          You see .-he
       difference between drunk and drinking.        And this was
       your answer:   "Well they spoke with slurred voices. One
       or two of them did actually have difficulty standing up.
       To me that gives the impression they were quite drunk.
       That was the answer.    But you were p r e s s e d further, i
       I can remind you, because you were reminded then, just
       as I am reminding you now what you said to the Taylor
        Inquiry you were reminded what you had said on an even
        earlier occasion when you gave a written statement to
        the Police and this is what you said on that even earlier
        occasion:  "One or two were quite noticeably drunk.          I
        remember one telling me in a. slurred voice        I      ^ now
        what you are worried about it's only lager'" and your
        answer to that was:   "That was at an earlier stage before
        the bulk of them came down at half-past-2." - A. Yes.

     Q. But do you see the difference between moving from one
        or two" to "all of them"? - A. No, the one or two that
        I was specifically referring to at that time were with
        the man who was telling me that it was only lager.   It
        was that specific group of people that I was talking
        about at the time.

     Q. The suggestion has been put to you, and I am sure^a lot
        of people are getting the impression from you thau you
        are saving that not only were the people in your garden
        very drunk but that all the people going past your house
        at about half-past-2 onwards were all very drunk.  You
        are not trying to say that, are you? - A. No obviously.
        You can't say that everybody was drunk.




H
                                                                 16

                                       A. HOCKENHULL


    Q. But this distinction was put to you and it is an important ^
       one about what was happening in your garden and wl?at
       happening outside and this was the question, sir it is o n .
       the next page:  "If you will accept that you are r? ^ r^ £ ? i n q
       only to those who were misbehaving m your garden and putting
B      a number on those, the majority as being drunk, I          n°
       further questions.  I am concerned wxtn the majority Oi.
       people going, coming to the ground that end.    Answer:
       "The ones who actually came into the garden wrere nearly
       all drunk.  The ones on the road quite a large percentage
       of them I would say had been drinking.  I am not s a y i n g ^
       they had all been drinking."  Would you say that is fair.
       - A. Yes.




D




F




G

                                Q. So as far as
                                                             17

                                                 A . HOCKEIWULL




Q. So as far as the people outside are concerned, in the
   road, your impression was they had been drinking? - A.
   iry impression was - I never actually got very close to
   most of them to be able to tell for sure.

Q. So you are not telling this Inquest that the people
   that were going past your house in tne road were all
   drunk?  You are not saying that? - A» I am  not in a
   position to be able to say that, no.

0. As regards - it is a terrible thing, people urinating
   in your garden, no one would like that - but you know
   that there wera about 50,000-odd people going to tnis
   match?  That doesn't surprise you?

         THE CORONER:  I think you ought to put the
   numbers that were going to the aatcn at that and
   D303.US& • • • •

        MR. KING:   Sir, with respect to ay learned
   friend, I could hear what he was saying.

        MR.     PAYNE:   I said, "What, down Leppings   Lane*’.

        HR. KING: Sir, if my learned friend     has a
   question to ask he can ask it.   Sir, if I could take it
   in stages r and you may think I have been unfair to the
   witness, you may not.

        THE COROWER:   I don't think you have been unfair
   up to now, but I agree that I think bearing in mind we
   ara talking about tne one end of the ground - for all I
   know there may be a hundred public toilets at the otner
   end, I have got no idea because we have not
   investigated that - you have got 24y000 people, a
   substantial number whichever ’
                                w ay you look at it.

            MR. KIS3G:  Sir, I am very conscious of being
    fair.     I will be as fair as I can be:

Q. Overall we know there were about 55,000 people,
   overall.  At the end going into the Leppings Lane,
   which is the Liverpool end - I will ba stopped if I am
   being unfair - there were some 24,000-odd people.   They
   could come from all directions, thav don't all have to
   come down Leppings Lane, but a lot of taem would co.vie
   down Lappings Lane.  Many thousands would come down
   Leppings Lane.  The only public toilets which you '<uow
   about in the area ara those whica you nave very -cindly
   shown us on the map? - A. That is rigat.

 Q. How many are there there, do you know? - A. well I
    can't say for the gents, but there ace three cubicles
    in the ladies.
O'

                                                        A. HOCilEHHULL




         Q. So it would be fair to describe them as a small group
            of toilets? - A. Yes.  Plus obviously the toilets that
            are inside the ground.
     B   Q. Yes, of course, inside.   Thank-you very siuch.

                       Cross-Examined by MRS. uc3&I£i? .

         Q. iirs. Hockenhull, you mentioned that taera are only one
            lot of toilets in that area? - A. That I know of.

         0. Yes.  How, those are very often closed, a r e n ’t they? -
            A. Well they have never been closed when I have aad tae
            need to go when I aa in the park wit a the dog, no.

         0. 3ut they are closed soaetiaes? - A. Nevar in ay
            knowledge have they been closed.

         Q. You have lived in the house in Leppings Lane for seven
            years? - A. Five years.

         Q. Have you ever had the problem of fans urinating in your
     D      garden before? ~ A. Oh yes -* never in quite such large
            numbers, but yes it is a running probleca.

         Q. Have you ever thought about locking the entrance to
            your garden up so that these fans would not have access
            to your garden? - A. It is a very difficult place to
            actually put a gate that would open to allow a car to
            park on the drive, because there is a water-course bang
            at the side of it.  There is no actual place to fasten
     E      a post at one side.

         Q. So there is no caeans whatsoever of blocking your garaan
            area? - A. Well I could actually block it oft but it
            would nave to be a permanent blockage rather than a
            gate.

         Q. When you saw a few people coining into your garden dia
            you think of getting in toucn with a Police Officer? -
            A. I thought about it but to be honest it was a long
            tiise before the .natch was due to kick off and I tnought
            possibly the Police Officers at that ti.ne would have
            aore things to worry about than being stood on :ny
            garden all day.

          0. Well, at this Inquest it appears a very important part
             of it, this urinating in the garden •'••» ” A. I ara on
             about at the time, and at the tirae I didn't know tnat
     G       what was going to happen was going to happen.

          0. As I see it is so iiaportant today, the tiae we are
             spending on it, I think it nsight have been well
             worthwhile to call somebody ....




     H
                                               A. I1QCKEHHULL




          THE CORONER:   I asn sorry, Hrs. HcSrien, I allowed
     you to ask the question about blocking the entrance
     off, which I wasn't quite sure whether I should permit,
     but I can't have you criticising the conduct of the
     witness.

Q.        MRS. cicBRIEN:  So you just allowed it to go on? -
     A. Well no, I did everything that was in iay power at
     the time to stop it happening, but obviously wtien you
     are dealing with large crowds, apart froai actually
     standing there yourself all day - and I do have a
     business to run - I wasn't able to do tnat.

Q. Did you say your husband was at honie with you that day?
   - a . My husband went down several times as well.

Q. Did he speak to the fans? - A. He spoke to the fans on
   several times, yes.

Q. Did they refuse to stop going down? - A. Host of taes
   went away but as I pointed out before, once you have
   started to urinate it is very difficult to stop.

Q. I aia asking if your husband asked them to not go taere
   in the first place? - A. He asked groups of tnea not to
   go there but obviously when most people have moved on
   there is a fresh group of people that cotae down, and
   they don't know that he had asked the last group not to
   go down the garden.

0. The ones who were asked,    they did move on? - A.
   Eventually, yes.

Q. With no trouble? - A. Sorry?

Q. With no trouble at all?  They did go? - A. I don't
   understand what you mean by trouble.

Q. Well they didn't give any insults, they weren't
   aggressive to you? - A. To be honest I ani not sura.     I
   wasn't there when tay husband went down.  They were
   quite insulting to me on occasion, yes.

Q. Very often don't you think that if an opportunity is
   there for somebody, no .-natter who people are they do
   take opportunities.  If there is an entrance to a
   garden and they are desperate, these people, to use a
   public convenience, ?aight not that Etappen, because the
   opportunity is there for thea? - A. On occasion I nave
   been desperate to go to the toilet.    I nave never counc
   it necessary to urinate in anybody's garden, and
   certainly not so blatantly, no.
No.  I wouldn't expect ladies to, but of course men are
just m e n . (Laugnter) what I am trying to say is do
you think it would be a good idea if there were ^mobile
toilets provided at Leppings Lane or Penistone aoad.

     THE CORONER:  Mrs. McBrien, it is a very
interesting point but it is not for this witness and it
is not for the Inquest either, but it is an interesting
point, I agree, that you have raised.

     MRS. McBRIEH:    Here we have a problem ....

     THE CORONER:   But Mrs.'McBrien    we    are not sorting
out the problems of the organisation    of    football
matches in general.   Insofar as tnat    is   a problem tnat
was Lord Justice Taylor's, not mine,    or    ours.

      MRS. McBRIEN:   As far as I can see the nearest
 toilets were inside the stadium? - A. The nearest
 toilets are inside the stadium.

 That is the obvious place.   Uow I know from the summary
 of ray own son's death that he waited to go to tne
 toilet and went to the toilets immediately he got
 inside. - A. That is very commendable.

 Yes, and I think it is important.  Although he had a
 very long wait outside because of tne excessive build-
 up outside he did what he nad to do to be a gentleman.
 Now, I forgive people if on that day instead of being
 gentlemen ....

       THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, you can ask the
 witness questions provided they are proper but you must
 not make statements.   I know it is so hard for you
 because you are personally involved but I must try and
 keep you on the straight and narrow as far as I am
 able.

       MRS. HcBRIEW:   Are you aware on that day, Mrs.
 Hockenhull, that there was a build-up outside Leppings
 Lane?   That people were not able to move into tne    t
 ground as quickly as they normally would? - A. I wasn t
 aware of that, no.

. You weren't.  That I think was creating a problem for
  the fans in quite a serious way. - A. As far as I know
  the build-up was starting after the Police Officer was
  positioned at the bottom of my garden.  I wasn t aware
  that there was a build-up there when most of the people
  were actually urinating down there.

. Yes, I think it was after about 20-to.  I ara sorry-
  about that.  You mentioned alcohol, saying you t iin.< a
                                              A. HQCKEHHULL




lot of thea were drunk.  Do you think tiiat it is aore
beneficial to drink beer or lager than it is tea or
coffee?

      THE CORONER:   I don't think that is a question
this witness can answer either.   All she can say is
what she saw.   Whether it is beneficial or not is cor
the individual to decide, and she is not an expert in
raedicine so she can't answer:

Don't answer that question. - A. I suspect tea and
coffee are probably better for you but that s all I can
• • • •


     [IRS. Hc3RI£N:   In fact, they are not because they
are stimulants.   They are drugs actually.

     THE COROHER:   We are not going into that, sorry -
stop, Mrs. KcSrien.  Next question.

     MRS. HcSRIEII:  Do you think it is easier for
people to carry cans of coke or lager than it is to
carry a cup of tea into a football ground witn so <nany
people around them? Would it be easier for thesn? - A.
I believe it is permitted to carry a flask of tea or
coffee into the football ground.  I d o n ’t know about
the ease.

     THE CORONER:   I think what Mrs. iicBrien is asking
is if you are walking down a road is it easier to carry
a can of coke or beer or lager or wnatever you lise, as
compared to a cup of tea either in its saucer, or as a
cup.  What is easier to carry?  Is it easier to carry a
cup as opposed to a tin? - A. I suspect it is easier to
carry a tin of something rather than a cup - less
likely to spill, yes.

      MRS. McBRIEH:    Thank you very auch, Hrs.
 Hockenhull.

              Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

 Mrs. ilockenhull, I as sorry, I didn't get a note of
 your address at the outset of your evidence.    Could you
 repeat it, please? - A. It is     Leppings Lane,

 Thank you, and how far is that - you have already saia
 you are not very good at distances but do you xnow now
 far is that from the Leppings Lane entrance to tne
 stadium? - A. It is the opposite end of Leppings Lane
 but in actual distance I ara not really able to say.

 Thank you.
                                                                  22

                                                     A.   iiOCKENHULL




                        Further b y THE CQROBER

    Q. There ara several roads off Leppings Lane.  One of t;iea
       is called Bickerton Field and then there is Farndale. -
B      A. tiy house is


    Q.

    Q.


    Q. Before you go I want to be quite sure tnat we have got
       your evidence right with regard to the numbers of
       people who came into your garden.    I ought to say
       straightaway it doesn't anatter to <ae what the answer
       is.  It is immaterial to ae because all I aa trying to
       establish is, as far as you ara able, what you
       recollect.  How, what I want to find out is you have
       told me that over the period of time, fro:a whatever
       time it was, say one o'clock until the Policeman case,
       several hundred people came down your garden? - A. Taat
D      is right.

    0. Wot all of thesn urinated because soae of the®      went
       away? - A. Yes.

    Q. But several hundred people caae down your garden? - A.
       That is right.

    Q. It was put to you tiiat maybe at Lord Justice Taylor's
       Inquiry the impression you were there giving, or the
       iapression that Mr. King had got from the transcripts,
       was that there were considerably fewer than tnat, taat
       we are talking about dozens rather than hundreds? -'A.
       No, because ....

               HR. KING:   It wasn't that I put that she gave the
          impression.  I put to her that she actually said, whica
          is very different, sir.

              THE CORONER:    Okay,   I will put it to her ....

                THE WITNESS:   Can I just clarify that because
          when you actually refer to groups of 20 or so people at
          a tiraa and then you go on to say how many overall, it
          is wrong to think that I would have said several dozen
          because several groups of 20 at a tinie ;nake it
          considerably more than several dozen.

     0.        THE C0R0N£R:   iiever raind what you said at Lord
          Justice Taylor's Inquiry, never aiind what you said to
          me a few minutes ago.   Sit back, take your tiiae and
          just tell ae now to the best of your ability how many
                                              A.   UOCKEflHULL




 people you believe - I don't saean ia exact numbers -
 you believe caiae down your pathway to the garden? - A.
 It would be very, very difficult to say.   It ran into
 several hundreds of people.

• Okay, thank you.   I a;a niost grateful to you for coming.
  Thank you very sauch indeed, and I hope your cougn will
  be better soon. - A. Thank you.

       THE CORONERS   Would it beconvenient if we rose
  now and had a cup of coffee and   then we will ta&e our
  next witness?  We will do that.    Ten minutes*

                   (Short Adjournment)
                                        J.    L.    TAYLOR




     THE CORONER:     Dr. John L. Taylor please.

               JOHN LAV5RICK TAYLOR Sworn

                     Bv THE C ORONER:

Can you give me your full name? - A. John L a v e n c k
Taylor.
I think you are a principal at      j e t t o n    Hall College of
Higher Education,   is that n g n t ?        - A. Tnat is correct.

That is in West Bretton, Wakefield,                is that correct? - A.
Correct.
Is it right that you are actually a football fan? - A.
That is correct.
It is not terribly relevant, but which team do you
support? -    I have held a season ticket at Nottingham-
Forest for the last ten years.

I suppose in that sense you were pleased when they got to
the semi-finals? - A. It is becoming a regular
occurrence.
Was it your intention to go and watch the match on the
15th April, 1989? - A. Yes, and we purcnased tne ticxets
in advance.
These were tickets, I take it, foe the Nottingham end, as
opposed to the Lappings Lane end? - A. That u correct.

Standing or seated? - A. Standing and it was on the Kop.

You of course live in W a k e f i e l d s o you have to come from
the north downwards? - A. That is correct.

Did you come down the motorway? - A. Yes, I came down tne
motorway and I should say that I am used to joing  o
Hillsborough and I am used to parking well to tne north.

When you say "well to the north" what you are saying is
you were parking, if one divides Sheffield in tne
Nottingham half and the Liverpool half, you were parsing,
in the Liverpool sector? - A. Yes.

 That is not a criticism, I am just t r y i n g t o make sure we
 have understood.   Can you tell me what time did you set
 off from Wakefield, as near as you can remember. - A. I
 think it was 1.15.
                                                               25

A
                                         J.   L.   TAYLOR       -

      /


    0. Did you have a reasonable journey f r o m Wakefield t o
       Sheffield? - A. It was reasonable until we g o - o f f tne
       motorway and then it was a slow crawl into jus      nor
B      the Hillsborough railway station.

    0. I think that is called Wads ley Bridge? - A. That is
       correct.

    0. In fact that is the area you were aiming for to park?
       A. Yes.   I generally park about a quarter of a mile
       north of there.

C   0. What time would you have arrived in that area? - A .    I
       think it was a little before two.

    0. Before we get out of the car can you just tell me was
       there in fact a lot of traffic coming down on the
       motorway when you were driving down? - A. Yes, a good
       deal of traffic and it was a slow crawl the moment we got
       off the motorway for the couple of miles oefore you ge
       to the ground.
D   0. Did it appear to you that some of this traffic at least
       was supporters' traffic? - A. I think the majority
       because it was a mixture of coaches a n d cars w i t]J h .
       usual scarves hanging out of windows indicating tn     ■. y
       are football supporters.

    0. We have already learned that the colours for Nottingham
       and Liverpool by chance happen to be the same.   _If you
£      are a Nottingham supporter you may be able     help me on
       this because I am not and I am not a Liverpool supporter
       either, so I don't know anything about these colours.
       Is it actually possible to distinguish^tne colours in     y
       way? - A. I think it is because there is a mixture o^
       motifs that go on the basic colours.   From, snail we
       say, ten yards away it can be difficult.   I tninis ^own
       to five yards you can differentiate.

    0. It would be fair to say that although there was a lot of
F      what was obviously supporter traffic on the road,_vou
       could not, just by looking at the colours, say w m c n tea :n
       they were supporting? - A. That is correct.

     0. You might have made some assumption because of the     ^
        location, but you could not positively identity t.iem» -A.
        I think the assumption can only relate to tne number o.
        coaches that had, of course, Lancashire indications on
        the back of the coaches, so there were a fair number o.
        coaches that parked to the north of the ground a n d> tney
        did have Merseyside addresses of course on tne bac* o,
        the coach.
                                   J.    L.   TAYLOR



You saw those coming down the m o t o rw ay . .. - A. They were
in the same line of traffic as myself and tney all pars-d
north of the ground.

In fact you did have some evidence for f e e l ^ h a t the
people you were amongst, m your v e m c l e , of course, we
Liverpool supporters as opposed to Nottingham supp        ^ *
in the main? - A. I would have tnougnt so.       It is a well
known fact that the amount of support Liverpool nas is
far in excess of Nottingham Forest.

You are supposed to be concentrating on your d r i v i n g , but
did you notice anything whilst you were driving      . ~
attracted your attention and which you feel to have b~en
unusual or noteworthy? - A. I think the driving w s
much slow motion - stop, start - 5 mph, stop, gom,,.

After you came off the motorway,        that is? - A. After tne
motorway.
Once you got out you, of course, had to get to your end
of the ground, that is, the Penistone R o a d turnstiles.
A. Yes.
What route did you follow? - A. The m a i n route that goes
by the front of Hillsborough, which is the dual
carriageway and it is a good mile and a ha
walk downhill the whole way.
                                                             ?    _
You d i d n ’t pass Leppings Lane entrance at all, did you
A. It is on the right hand side by the roundabout, but
d i d n ’t walk down that route.

You went straight instead of turning into Leppings Lane?
- A. That is correct.

Is there still a plan there?   C.280 is the number.
That plan is not entirely satisfactory because it doesn t
go quite far enough.   Can you see the roundabout where
it says Leppings Lane and Penistone uoad Nortn.
right at the top where the "A" is? - A. Yes.

 Is the area where you parked still on this plan or is it
 already off? - A. No, i t ’s o f f .

 Is it off towards the top, the bottom, or to the left or
 the right? - A. It is due north.   I am assuming it s an
 ordnance sheet and it is north/south in the normal way.

 It is an A to Z actually.   Is    it above the top of the A
 when you say north?   In other    words, tne no.t  is up,
 that is what you are saying? -    A. Yes, and from tnat
 point it is still a mile and a    half north oc tnere.
                                                              z /




                                        J.   L.   TAYLOR

       /
    O. So you had to walk that distance and then when you got to
        the roundabout instead of turning into Leppings Lane you
       went straight along until you got to your turnstiles an
B       then you went into the ground? - A. Correct.

    Q. Just for the record, what time did y o u actually g ^ n t o
       the ground, having arrived at Wads ley Bridge station at
       about two I think you said? - A. I would have thought it
       took twenty minutes at least.   It was slow motion,
       was very crowded.

    0. As you were walking down from where you had parked, at
       least until the roundabout I take it that you were m
       amidst supporters? - A. Yes, indeed.

    Q. Could you distinguish again which team of supporters yo
       were amongst? - A. I don't think one could distinguish
       individually, but collectively you could certainly
       identify by the number of people who were, for example,
       wearing Liverpool shirts, so the majority, I think, we
       Liverpool supporters, as I would expect because tne
       coaches were still disgorging the people arriving on tne
       main dual carriageway.

    0. These were the ones with the Lancashire appellations on
       them? - A. Yes, indeed.

    0. What observations did you make with regard to...      Did
       you wear colours? _ A. No.

    0. So as far as outsiders were concerned you were just
       another man walking down the road?  ^You were not   _
       distinguishable as a supporter, is tnat right. - .
       way.
    0. Can you tell me what observations, if any, you made wnen
       you were walking down from about two o d o e s wO, I tninK
       you said, twenty past or thereabouts? - A. I tains a
       series of observations.   One, it was unusually crowded,
       and I do go to Hillsborough on three or four Saturdays
       during the season and they are used to getting fair y
       sood gates, sometimes in excess of 30,000.     it was
       unusually crowded, number one.    Secondly I woul.. aay
       was aware that it seemed a very large number of people
       were not only suffering the adverse effects or drink but
       also carrying a fair amount of alcohol witn tnem.     in
       the main it appeared to be canned beers.

     0. When you say there were a fair number of people wno were
G       showing the effects of drink, can you try and be a ^lttl.-
        more specific and instance what you would describe as tne
        effects of alcohol? - A. Yes, t h e r e w e r e a number of
        instances where people ware staggering into the road a.d
        fortunately the traffic was going very slowly so tnere




H
                                      J.   L.   TAYLOR



were no accidents that I saw.         People^ w e r e lurching
the pavement into the roadway.         A numDer of otaer People

                                                                "
sssift ? n V ^ s                                         „.aU d.
that if they were suffering from drink.

In other words are you saying...   I mean, there are two
reasons £or urinating.   One“is that y o u ' - e to .ni the
other one in public is because tney tnigi       GaV ? _ 4 t
disinhibited, is that what you are trying to:say? " ^ 1
would say it was so close to tne pavement and m public
view that it was embarrassing.

Did you see any fighting or anything of that sort? - A.
N o , ’I don't think I was aware of a n y o n e b e i n g , a:s it
were, aggressive to each other, altnough I tnirnc there
were instances of the crowd being extremely 1 11
disciplined and provocative to tne police and tnat was
before the game started.      In the main it seem d                Qn
chanting, it saemed to be not being willing                 g
the pavement when the police w e r e doing
shepherd people along the sidewalk.

In this area which was quite a long way away J:r°m the
ground obviously from what you nave said, about a
and half I think you said, are you s a y i n g that that va
policed in that position, or not? - A. Yas, it appeare
that the route was pretty well policed from         ,
station down to the ground and m fact I w0^             “ av
thought there were a fair number of police al         *
from°the railway station and particularly outside on
two of the public houses that were on the w a y . ^
biggest problems I think were encountered outside taos^
public houses.

 You d o n ’t know their names? - A. I'm afraid not.

 Were there crowds outside thase public housas? - A. Y^s.
 I mean, the overall impression was that it w as ^ell i n ^
 excass of the normal people that go t o Hillsborough, but
 I have been to a sami-final before at Hillsborough,
 seemed in excess of those numbers.

 Were you there in 1938? - A. Yes,         the year befora.

 Did you park in the same place? - A. Yes.

. About the same time, or was it a different time? - A.
  Yes.
 You have already given me the answer but I want you to
 repeat it:  was it different then m 1988 compared witn
                                                    J.          L.      T A Y LOR

/


    this year? - A. Yes, I think the pressure was in excess
    of the previous year.

    The pressure did you''say? - A. The pressure in terms of
    numbers was in excess of the previous year.         In fact
    the previous Saturday I had been at W e m b l e y because it
    was an Everton game versus  N   o   t   sorest, and^I think
                                            t   i   n   g   h   a   m


    the behaviour was bad for the Everton/Nottingham corest
    fixture.   I think it was worse, I m afraid, at tne
    Hillsborough fixture.

    If you were to rate behaviour in the matcnes that you
    have seen, and obviously you have seen many, m e r e would
    you place this one on the scale? - A. It was prooably tne
    worst that I have witnessed.
    This was, of course, away from the ground at between two
    and twenty past you say? - A. Yes.

    Just one other matter which interests m e and that is the
    question of whether you were approacned   y ?- P    ‘
    wanted tickets, were'you? - A. Yes.    It's normal to be
    approached by people wanting to sell ti-kets, but thi
    was unusual, I think, because more people tnan ever
    stopped me and others to ask if we nad any tic-cets
    sell.    It was the reverse of the normal and I have n -
    encountered that before in such great numbers.         *
    amazing.
    It is exceedingly difficult to put a number on it, but
    what I am interested in is the bracket.    I «««* fc°
    whether we are talking about between 1 and 10 10 and d 0,
    50 and 100, 100-plus times tnat you were asked by peopi-.
    - A. There were gradations and the gradations, of course,
    were as you got closer to the roundabout you n a v s j u s t
    pointed out Sn the map in front.of me.    I would hava
    thought that Certainly in trie rirst section      *      , ‘
    half wav to the ground it was only a question of a co?e.
    or so people approaching me.    However, closer u o ^
    ground it was every ten yards or so group* <n P ^ ? 1® ~ “
    being stopped and asked if tney nad any tickets uO se L i *
    Seemingly the prices being offered were prices I had
    never heard of before.
                                              ■ T.   L . TAYLOR




Too high? - A. £50 for a standing ticket seemed to me
extraordinarily high.
When you were stopped, this is an interesting point,
was it individuals who stopped you, one man or woman,
or did .it tend to be groups of p e o p l e w h o approached
you asking if you had tickets to sell? - A. I. think
it was both. Individuals were looking for tickets as
well as groups of people.
How large would the groups have been? - A. I think in
my case I was only approached by three or four people
standing together standing on the kerb in the
expectation of picking up the extra tickets.

The grouping was not substantial? ~ A. No.
               rross-examined bv MR - KING:

Dr. Taylor, when entered Penistone Road North having
gone from the roundabout and did not turn right, you
went into Penistone Road North towards the Nottingham
Forest end, what was the state of that road in terms
of numbers? Was it empty? - A. I walked round the
roundabout on the eastern side and it was easy to
walk on that side and there seemed to be greater
numbers on the western side.
 I accept that but was it empty was my question? - A.
 I do not think it was empty by all means, no.

 Undoubtedly there were more, it appears, Liverpool
 supporters going than Nottingham Forest supporters
 and I do not think there is any dispute about that.
 What I am interested in is the sort of numbers who
 you were with going towards the Nottingham Forest
 side. You were not on your own? - A. I imagine the
 Kop holds 5,000 or 6,000 easily and possibly 8,000
 when they are crammed in and so it is a question o
 thousands trying to get into that end of the ground
 rather than the southern end of the ground as I read
 this plan.
. So there were thousands tried to get. in the end you
  were going to go in? - A. Yes.
. The people you had been walked with, it must have
  been quite a few people therefore who were taking the
                                                          31




                                               ■T- L. TAYLOR




      same route as you_to the Nottingham Forest end? — A.
      That is correct.
q   . Although you are able to tell us of your impression
      that there were more Liverpool supporters than
      Nottingham Forest supporters, it is not the case that
      it was 90 per cent Liverpool supporters walking down
      towards that roundabout. That would be unfair, would
      it not, as an assessment? - A. I would be a genius if
      I could put a number on it like that.

Q. It was not that sort of proportion. It was a fairly
   mixed crowd. I accept there were more Liverpool
   supporters by the sound of it but it was a mixed bag?
   - a . It definitely would be mixed, yes.

Q. What I find remarkable is that there was no fighting
   which you saw in this particular incident? - A. No, I
   cannot recollect anybody fighting on the route in.

Q. It is often said, is it not, when you get fans mixed
   together, two sets of supporters, there is often
   fighting but the picture I get is of a fairly happy
   crowd coming along, is that about right? Boisterous
   perhaps but happy? - A. I am not used to people
   fighting on the way into football grounds. I must
   say that to .start with. I think after that in terms
   of the nature of the crowd there was some provocation
   as I have mentioned earlier this morning. Clearly I
   am making a judgment relative to the number of games
   in the First Division that I go to and that must be
   between thirty and fifty a year and being at Wembley
   the previous weekend with a fixture very similar to
   this one.
Q. Of course* So far as going to Sheffield Wednesday is
   concerned in a normal game you are saying that
   perhaps they can get crowds of up to 55,000? - A.
   Correct.
    Q. That would be a very good crowd for Sheffield
       Wednesday, I suspect, without being rude to them? “
       A. Last season I think that is correct.

    Q. This time at this semi final overall about 55,000
       people attended.  I think you would probably agree
       with that from your impression of the game? “ A- Yes,
       I can make the comparisons with Manchester United
* •
                                                                   32
      A

                                                        J. L. TAYLOR




               where they get 45,000 and I would have thought 45,000
               was the sort of number I would start at.

          Q. On any view a semi final is going to attract many
             more people than the normal league game? - A.
             Correct.
          q   . if you were sitting down thinking ahead as to what to
                expect the first thing you would say to yourself is,
      C         "I am going to expect a lot more people? — A. That is
                correct.
          Q. I am not saying you suggested this but are all
             Nottingham Forest fans teetotal? - A. Not that I am
             aware.
          Q. Are all Nottingham Forest fans as good mannered as we
              would like people to be, that is to say, have you
      D       ever seen urination at the Nottingham Forest games
            - you have been to? - A. Certainly no, I cannot recall
              it.
          Q. You have never seen it at all? - A. Not at Nottingham
             Forest.
          Q. So be it. - A. I should add, I think in fairness to
             the Manager at the other end, we have a particular
      E      sort of reputation and the Manager himself has set
             examples but we get relatively small crowds. We are
             talking about 20,000.
          Q. The judgment you have given as to the picture coming
             down then is of a mixed crowd, clearly of some people
             who had been drinking, from your picture. With
             regard to the Police themselves, did you see many
             arrests by the Police? - A. I saw people being
      F      detained.  I do not know whether it led to an arrest.

          Q. How many people did you see being detained roughly? “
             A. I think it was only a small number of groups and
             it was in the main I think outside the two public
             houses on the way down.
          Q. The people stopping and asking you for tickets, you
             say you remember a dozen approached you and then it
             got more every ten yards or so but could you put a
             figure on the numbers who approached you in the
             round? I know it is difficult? - A. Certainly I
             think in terms of the groups, because they were
                                               ■T. L. TAYLOR



     stopping not just me but everybody else that was
     going down, in terms of the individuals and then the
     groups, if you total those together, and if I have to
     estimate, then I would have thought we were talking
     in a bracket of 50 to 100 people.

Q. That sort of number? - A.. Yes.

Q. You have told us that the crowd which was making its
   way to get into the ground, you are talking about
   thousands of people, are you not? - A. Yes.
                Cross-examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Dr. Taylor, you say you saw 50 to 100 people asking
   for tickets. Did you see any Officers approaching
   those ticketless fans? Were they taken to an area
   away from the crowd approaching the ground? - A. Not
   that I was aware.
Q. So they were just left to mingle with the people who
   had tickets and so they would cause a problem?

     THE CORONER:   You can ask, were they taken out? That
is perfectly proper and correct but you can also say, were
they allowed to go on and stay with the people? You can
ask that.
Q.      MRS. McBRIEN:   Were they allowed to approach the
     ground even though they were ticketless fans? - A.
     The distance away from the ground, again if you refer
     to the plan I have in front of me, the distance I
     estimate from the roundabout to the entrance to the
     kop, let us say it is approximately a quarter mile, I
     walked a mile-and-a-half to two miles north of that
     and I think the bulk of the people seeking tickets
     were on that stretch. If your question is, did I see
     anyone arrested or taken aside for seeking tickets,
     no, I did not see anyone taken aside.

Q. The picture you have painted in my mind is that there
   were many problems that day. There seemed to be lots
   of people who had a lot to drink, ticketless fans
   etc. If there were so many problems do you think it
   might have been a good idea for the Police not to
   police the match if there was such a problem?

       THE CORONER:   What was the question?
                                              ■T. L. TAYLOR



Q.      MRS. McBRIEN:   If there were so many problems that
     day arising at Leppings Lane, you say you had never
     seen anything like it before, behaviour-wise, do you
     think it would have been a good idea for the match to
     be cancelled, do you think?
     THE CORONER:   Do not answer that yet.    Does anybody
want to make a submission on that question?

      MR. PAYNE:  No, it did pass through my mind   but I am
perfectly happy for the Witness to answer it. It    is
calling for comment and opinion but I do not mind   it being
asked at all. It is something which the Jury may    have in
mind.
     THE CORONER:      Mr. King, you do not have anything to
submit on that?

     MR. KING:   No.
     THE CORONER:   (to the Witness) It is an opinion but
if nobody objects I will allow you to answer that question.
- A. I am pleased to give a reply if it is in any way
helpful. Being a football supporter I am a great lover of
the game and most of us go to see a sporting contest on the
field and no problems outside at all. I think it was an
unusual atmosphere and the worst I have seen and most
regrettable from a number of points of view but once inside
the ground I think I was reassured certainly in terms of
behaviour at the Kop end which I could see and where I was
standing, it seemed to be not only well behaved but within
the confines of the kop very well managed indeed.   I do not
lightly go and stand on a kop for a couple of hours if I
think conditions are going to be adverse.   I normally sit.
I could not get a ticket to seat myself and a colleague
anywhere else and so the choice was, even as a season
ticket holder at my own club, only to stand. So I think
certainly you will recall the weather was favourable and I
think the crowd control that I saw was favourable.   I
certainly was not alarmed about the safety of the people
inside the ground and certaifily I was not alarmed about the
safety of the people insiddrthe ground prior to the kick
off.
Q.       MRS. McBRIEN:   You would have not been happy to
     have had the same situation as you had outside taking
     place inside the ground that day? - A. That is fair
     comment I think, yes. I think if I had seen that
     sort of behaviour within my own compound - I think I
     was probably one of the first to leave the ground
                                                        35




                                             ■T- L. TAYLOR




  that day by five past three I decided I was alarmed.
  Certainly there was a difference between the
  behaviour I saw on the way down and at the kop end, a
  fundamental difference.
Q. So you had assessed the situation very well yourself
   and knew there were all these problems. Would you
   have expected somebody else to assess that situation
   outside as well? - A. No, I think I am clearly not
   saying that I would have prohibited the game to go
   ahead. I would not say that but I saw behaviour
   outside which was certainly worrying.

Q. It was very noticeable to you and it should have been
   to other people you are saying? - A. I think I have
   said already that it was the worst I have seen.

     THE CORONER:     I just want to take up one small point
and, Mr.King, it is from something you said and Iwill
give you an opportunity to come back on it.

                   Further bv THE CORONER:

Q. Mr. King was asking about the number of people who
   were going down Penistone Road once you had gone past
   the roundabout? - A. Yes.
Q. I think in reply to him you said that there were
   fewer than going down Leppings Lane, it was certainly
   not empty and that there were thousands of people
   getting into the Nottingham area. I am paraphrasing
   a little bit? - A. Yes.

Q. That is more or less what you said, is it not? - A.
   Yes. In terms of the thousands I am only judging the
   capacity of the Kop and certainly the flow of people
   coming down the dual carriageway, the majority of
   those it is safe to assume, were branching off to
   Leppings Lane.
Q. This is what I am trying to find out because you
   obviously did not branch off to Leppings Lane. You
   went round, as you put it, the east side of the
   roundabout where it says Herries? - A. Yes.

Q. Then you entered what is marked Penistone Road North?
   - A. Yes.
                                         J. L. TAYLOR




And walked along presumably towards the turnstiles? -
A. That is correct.
Once you had got past the roundabout, in other words
when you were approximately close to the roundabout
but past it in Penistone Road, before you got to
Bickerton Road, that is the area I am thinking about,
can you see Bickerton Road on the map? - A. Yes.

What was the population like in that area because
obviously the nearer you get to the turnstiles the
heavier it is going to get because it is moving in
from the opposite end. What I am interested in is,
what was the population at the far end of Penistone
Road on that roundabout? - A. I would have thought it
was very difficult to estimate in precise terms but
if the flow, as I saw it, was branching off into
Leppings Lane then if we are talking about several
thousand along Penistone Road I was not conscious of
any build-up on the western side of Penistone Road,
that is Bickerton, Fielding or Vere Road, I was
certainly not conscious of a build-up at the entrance
to those roads.
You were walking on the opposite side of the road? -
A. I was walking on the eastern side which is the
right hand of the map and certainly the major flow
was leaving the Leppings Lane roundabout and going
straight down Leppings Lane. I think the only
congestion encountered then was modest and that was
in terms of the turnstiles as one queued to get on
the Kop but it was not difficult to get into the
ground.
What I am trying to establish is whether it was put
to you that the crowd was mixed, that there may have
been many more Liverpool supporters? - A. Yes.

But that obviously there were Nottingham supporters
because you were there? - A. Of course.

The question I am trying to find out is how many
Nottingham supporters were there and how many were
wearing colours? Perhaps I am asking two questions.
You could have been anybody because you did not have
a colour? - A. Yes.
 If you had worn your colours, how many Nottingham
 colours did you see that you can recollect? It is
                                            J. L. TAYLOR




  very difficult when you are in crowds of thousands
  but once you got into this area just past the
  roundabout? - A. I think I have given the predominant
  feeling up to the roundabout because the weight of
  numbers were there, not only the weight of numbers
  but the people looking for tickets were there. The
  worst behaviour that I saw was north of the
  roundabout. There was considerable easing of the
  congestion the moment you got south of the
  roundabout. The question you put to me specifically
  was south of the roundabout and disaggregating the
  crowd is one that X would be very reluctant to
  answer.
    THE CORONER:    Mr. King, please go ahead.

            Further Cross-examined by MR. KING:

q. Talking about easing of congestion when one gets into
   your road, if I can put it that way, Penistone Road
   North, can I just deal with the situation in Leppings
   Lane and just bear with me because I know you were
   not in Leppings Lane but you were talking about -
   guessing now — twenty past two. What time would you
   say it was when you entered from the roundabout at
   Penistone Road North? - A. I have given a summary of
   parking around two, getting into the ground soon
   after 2.20, It took about twenty minutes to walk
   down the road which normally I would do in ten
   minutes.
Q. So we are talking about 2.15 to 2.20. Can I just
   show you a photograph? In fact I want to show you
   more than one photograph of the state of Leppings
   Lane at about twenty five to twenty six minutes two
   which is just past the time you are talking about,
   perhaps five minutes after? Of course, on your
   evidence the crowd was building up all the time
   coming down, was it not? - A. Yes, correct.

   MR. KING:   I have not checked the bundle which was
produced to see whether that had the photograph.  I
understand from my learned friend that it is not in the
bundle.
     THE CORONER:   It is in my bundle.   Are there any f
the Jury?
                               J.L. -TAYLOR



'     MR. KING:  Sir, I am anxious that the photograph
which I produced yesterday is a fairly i o n g distence view
Sir, can I just invite you, before I go further, I doi
if you have got the bundle I have sir?

      THE CORONER:   Not in front of me.

      MR. KING:  Could I hand you the bundle.        t^ie
photograph which is on the top of that bundle is tne
photograph which was produced yesterday which is
minutes-past-2.  Sir, if you were to turn the page
you are still in Leppings Lane and you have it tnen
at 26-minutes-past-2 a minute later.

      Sir, if you turn the page again, sir mine is not
marked, the copy I have been lent is not marked with
the correct time.

      THE CORONER:   It is I think 2.27 you have got?

      MR. KING:  2.27.  Sir, those three photographs
show the state of Leppings .Lane which of course
is reached just after the break which this witness
has referred to about five minutes or so, perhaps a
bit longer, after the events which this witness is
talking about and after the people who were coming
down the route this witness was coming would have
entered Leppings Lane.

       In my submission it is important that this
 witness can see the state of what was in Leppings Lane
 of the people who had entered apparently from the
 direction he was walking down in the light sir of
 your question.

       THE CORONER:  Well I think actually, I don't
 want to hinder you but the point about my questions
 was I wanted to sort out how many Nottingham people
 were actually coming off, if I can use that term, the
 roundabout, not their state because bearing in mind
 that that end if you like was the Liverpool end as
 we know or will find out, I thought it was important
 to know what the mix was because that was the thing
 that you had put, so I think ....

        MR. KING:  But sir we are also with respect
  talking about numbers.  Indeed this is what the witness
  was talking about sir.  Sir you very properly, I am
  not complaining about your question at all sir, out
  we were trying to build a picture and in my submission
  one should at the same time as hearing this witness
  in his words allow the witness to see the photograph
'~and the jury to see the photograph because they marry
  together.
                                                         39

                                J .L . TAYLOR


       THE CORONER:  The problem is, as you know we don t
/have 20 copies, which is what we need for practical
 purposes of the photographs and whilst we can pass them
 around I think if we do' I would expect you then to produce,
 or not you personally but your instructing solicitors,
 certainly to produce sufficient copies for my use if you
 want me to introduce them.   It is difficult because we
 have got so many people.

      MR. KING:  Sir, this was a bundle of photographs
which was produced by the South Yorkshire Police to the
Taylor Inquiry and sir there is no mystery aoout it.
know not how many of my learned friends have copies or
it.  Certainly it is a bundle which is a photographic
record of the state of Leppings Lane at the sort o^
times this witness is talking about.

       THE CORONER:  Pause.  We will have a look, and I
 am afraid we are not going to run out and .duplicate them
 as we did yesterday, not at the moment.   We may be able
 to help you on this next week, not today.   Are there
 any more of these bundles lying in front of anybody
 else?

       MR. PAYNE:    Sir, the position, so that the jury
 may know, as Mr. King has said, is that in fact there
 are large numbers of photographs, all sorts of bundles.
 Certainly for our part, and we have got we hope most
 of the bundles here, and for our part if Mr. King intends
 to refer to any particular photographs then obviously
 some preparation should be made so that the jury can have
 a copy of the photograph that is going to be referred to.
 If we were given notice of that then we would be glad to
 try to co-operate, but at the moment we are being taken
 by surprise   by photographs being taken out of odd
 bundles   and it is difficult for us to be helpful.

       THE CORONER:   That is the reason why we want to
 build up our own.

       Let me tell you what we are going to do because
 we have   got to get on and we are getting nothing d o n e .
 We will   let the witness look at these photographs; we
 will then pass the one copy round the jury; we will
 number it so that we will know which one we are talking
 about, but the rest of you will either have to go and
 look at that or do without at this stage.    Okay.
 Now then, are you happy with that?

       MR. KING:  Sir, can I just say I do sympathise
 with my learned friend but with respect it is impossible
 - I make no complaint about this - impossible because
 of the nature of the Inquest to know the nature of tne
 evidence which is about to be given, but I would
 to say I am not producing odd photographs out of odd
 bundles, I am referring to one bundle which in fact was
 the primary bundle of photographs which was used
 throughout the Taylor Inquiry.
                                   J.L. TAYLOR


      THE CORONER:  Please don't let's ^et m t o an
argument about bundles.  We have got enough problems
without that.

        MR, KING:    I agree.                         — .>
      THE CORONER:  So you have got a photograph in
front of you.  Which one is it# C282?

        THE WITNESS:    Correct.

      MR. KING:  That is in Leppings Lane, people who
have come down apparently from the direction you have
come from and that is at 25-past~2?

       THE CORONER:  Put it to the witness and say
 "Will you take it"?
       THE WITNESS:  Yes, I would have to take your word
 for that because I don't recognise any of the buildings
 or the nature of the street.
       MR. KING:   Could I just then hand you the bundle
 which   I have shown the learned    Coroner and al
 going   to ask you to do is turn     over.  There isa copy
 of the photograph you are looking at now m this
 bundle.  If you would just turn the page.

       THE CORONER:  May I just have a look because I
 want to give it a correct number so that we don
 track of it.
       MR. JONES:  Sir, can I give the previous one
 the reference C283 ?
         THE CORONER:  C232 is the one we have already
 got.     We are now moving on to the next one which we
 find    at 26 I think, isn't it, and that will be C....^

        MR. JONES:     C283.    And the reference on it
  is MWL 10/21A.
        MR. KING:  It is very difficult but imagine
  that you were walking w ith the crowd shown on those
  photographs at about 26, 27 m m u t e s - p a s t - 2 m Leppings
  Lane and you were there as if you were in the pnotograph.
  Lookina at that would you make any criticism yourself
  i? Ijo^stw those people as depicted on that Photograph
  of their behaviour, just looking at -it? - A. If
  it one by one I am looking at 20A.

). Is that the first of the two photographs? - A. That ± s
   the first that I am seeing here.   The reference ^ L 1 0 / 2      .
    I certainly did not look down Leppings Lane.  I ^ould have
    thought I was a good five or ten minutes earlier t
  . that.
                                                                    41

                                         J.L. TAYLOR


Q. Yes, I understand that, but if you saw a crowd like that, _
   ^and you are a man who goes to many football matches,
    would you have any criticism of the crowd looking at that
    photograph? - A. Sir, 21A does not alarm me.

Q.      No, not at all.    There is nothing on it to alarm you?
        - A. No.

Q.      And if you turn the page again w o u l d you^see anything
        to alarm you in that, the next photograph?

0.            THE CORONER:  What reference isit? Can you
        read the reference? - A. Yes, MWIilQ/21A. - A. Certainly
        the only impression there, and it is a fairly narrow
        lens, not a wide angle, but it looks   as though a fair
        number of people are building up but   it seems well
        behaved and mannered as far as one can judge.

q   .         m r .KING: That is very fair.   It looks as it
        that was later than the times you are talking about.
        - A. Yes.

              MR. KING:  Thank you..     That is all I want to
        ask the witness on that.

Q. Can I just ask you in relation to tickets because you
   are a mgr* who goes to many matches by the sound of it,
   have you ever been to a cup final? - A. Several.

Q. Have you ever been asked for tickets at a cup final,
   whether you had any spare tickets? - A. Yes, I must have
   been.

              MR. KING:    Thank you very much.      That is all I
        want to ask.

              THE CORONER:  Mr. Payne, yes, I have obviously
        got to give you an opportunity.  Did you need to look
        at these photographs?

              MR. PAYNE:  No.  Sir, both Mr. King and Mrs. McBrien
        have asked questions about the function and activities
        of the Police and I wonder if I might be permitted to
        ask some more questions about that?

              THE CORONER:   Yes, so long as it is within bounds
        but yes, indeed.   I should not have said that.  I
        withdraw that because you have not asked anything.


                        Cross-Examined by MR. P A Y N E :

    Q. Dr. Taylor, you have described the approach road trom
       -the railway station to the stadium as "well policed ?
       - A. Yes.

    Q. And you     have described the behaviour of the supporters,
                                                            <±2


                                       J.L. TAYLOR


      the Liverpool supporters before.    I am not asking Y°u    -
     'go over that again.    You were asked particularly whether
      you saw people being detained by the Police and you
      you saw a number being detained outside two public houses.
      - a . That is correct.

Q. Nov/ can you just tell the jury please, give them a
   picture in your own words what the Police were doing
   manage and help the crowd along the approach road thau
   you saw? - A. I think the photograph C232 is indicative
   of what was happening on the road down to the roundabout.

             MR. PAYNE:     Have the jury got that?

             THE CORONER:     Yes, they have.

              THE WITNESS:   That is the first one we saw some
        ten minutes' ago.   The Police very largely were keeping
        the pedestrians on to the pavement because there was
        some difficulty in terms of shepherding the crowds to
        make sure they did not overflow on to the road so in
        the main their job was in fact directing traffic and
        making sure that people, as far as possible, stayed on
        the pedestrian way.

q   .         MR. PAYNE:  So although 282 is at a different
        place it gives a fair impression of what you saw on
        your approach road does it? - A. Yes, that is a fair
        summary.
Q. Now you told the Court that sometimes when the Police
   were trying to keep the crowd on the pavement they were
   not successful? - A. I think very largely they had a
   difficult job in terms of the numbers but in the main
   I think the majority of the people were on the pavement.
   I think it was perhaps the minority that were the ill-
   disciplined ones and I think that is the greatest
   difficulty on how many Police you would need to control
   everyone because the only barriers I recall around the
   pedestrian areas were only at the roundabout.

 Q. In the circumstances from what you saw did it appear
    to you that there was anything more that the Police
    could reasonably do to manage and control the crowd on
    the approach to the ground, from what you-saw? - A . I
    could not imagine that you could do much more with the
    weight of numbers and the route down into the roundabout.

    Q. There is one other topic I would like to just if I
       may please ask you about before I finish and that is^
       you have drawn a distinction between the behaviour Ot
       the crowd on the way down to the roundabout which leads
       into Leppings Lane, the behaviour of that crowd, and
       the behaviour once you got inside the stadium- at the
       Kop end? - A. Yes, correct.
                                   J.L. TAYLOR


Now I would like you just to explain that in your own
words.  What do you mean by the difference m behaviour.
- A. I think I have mentioned two things already this
morning and number (1) was the amount of people^ that
appeared to have been drinking heavily before tney got
into the ground and also the number of people that were
carrying alcohol in cans into the ground and I was nou
conscious on the Kop because people are packed rather
tightly together that people certainly had any alcohol
in their hands on the Kop end, but I was certainly        .
conscious of it in terms of walking down to the roundabout.

One last question then about the Kop.  Although the people
were tightly packed on the Kop were you conscious or any
surging movements through the crowd during the time that,
you were waiting for the game to start on the Kop. - A.
None whatsoever.

      MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, might I be permitted t o _put
one question arising out of Mr. Payne's cross-examination.

      THE CORONER:      Indeed.


            Cross-Examined by MR. C A TC HP O LE :

Dr. Taylor, were you aware that alcohol was actually
banned at Hillsborough? - A. Yes indeed.

       MR. CATCHPOLE:     Thank you.

       MR. KING:  Sir, I have no wish to prolong the
 witness.  I am sure my learned friend did not mean it.
 He said we have heard from the witness about the
 behaviour of the "Liverpool supporters".  Well we nave
 just been through a lot of evidence about the mixture
 in the crowd and I don't think the evidence, my learned-
 friend can be suggesting that everything was to be
 directed, each and every incident, to Liverpool supporters
 and I am sure he did not mean that but that might nave
 been inferred into his question.

        THE CORONER:  Can you comment? - A. It is a fair
 point.   No one could differentiate everyone there.  The
 predominant feeling is what the summary is about.

       MR. KING:     Thank you very much.


                   Further by THE C O R O N E R :

. I just want to get one other point right, just for the
  record.  You were talking about cans being carried in^o
  the ground and you-were saying that it did not happen
  at the Kop but the inference was that it happened at
  the other end, but of course you weren't there so you
  have no idea whether the cans or things people were
                             J.L. TAYLOR


carrying ever got near to the ground at the Leppings Lane
end because you did not go down? - A. No, I was certainly
not on Leppings Lane at all.

      THE CORONER:  I did not think you would have meant
that but I just wanted to be sure.

      MR. KING:  Sir, it may help since we have got
the photographs we have just seen, if one just looks
at those photoraphs the absence of cans completely at
that stage.

      THE CORONER:  Yes, what I was anxious about was
whether or not they were being carried into the ground
and I did not think this witness could say that because
clearly he had no idea.

      I think we will leave it there. I am most grateful
Dr. Taylor to you for coming. Thank you very much indeed.




                          EMMA LEE Sworn
              EMMA LOUISE LEE Called (Sworn)

                      3y THE CQRQnER

Good afternoon.  Now, you are Emma Louise Lae, is that
right? - A. Yes.

You live at       Fielding Road, is that right? - A. Yes.

And you are    a student? - A. ?lo, I have left school now.

You were a student at the time? - A. Yes.

And in fact    how old are you now? - A. 15.

So you were    about 15 or 14 actually at the time? - A.
Yes.

Your date of birth is             ? - A. Yes, 15.

How long have you lived at Fielding Road? - A. Four
years.

Your house, you live there with raum and various otner
members of the family? - A. Yes.

It is about          away from Leppings Lane going down
Fielding Road? - A. Yes.

If you come up Fielding Road you would have to turn
left to go towards the stadium, is that right? - A .
Yes.

 You would say that the distance     from fielding   Road to
_the stadium is about 100 yards, I think?  - A. Yes.

Hum had a job at that time - she may still nave'- in
the newsagents, which was between fielding Roaa and the
stadium, is that right? - A. Yes.

In fact, it is between     Fielding Road and   ’/ere Lane, is
that right, this shop?     - A. Yes.

We are talking about 15th April, 133V. - A. Yes.

And you got up jolly early that morning because you had
a part-time job didn't you, about half-past-5 o c
something like that? - A. Yes.

You went off and you did whatever you had to and then
you came home, you finished at about 11, I think, is
that right? - A. Yes.
  /

Q. You caise back hoxae and you   went into ;sus inthis
   newsagents, is that right?     - A. Yes.

0. As you were walking past Fielding Road had the Police
   already put up the barriers, or were they just putting
   theia up? - A. Yes, they had.

0. They had put them up? — A.     Yes.

Q. v/hafe were they? Were they    metal barriers? - A. Yes, at
   the top of the road.

Q. Did they nave Policemen standing nearby those? - A.
   Yes, they did.

Q. But of course you just said, '*1 live down there*', and
   you just went through, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. And you went home? - A. Yes.

Q. At that point there wasn't really very auch to see was
   there, at about 11 o'clock? - A. No, just couples and
   families about.

Q. A few people, yes, faraily groups, and everybody was
   fine and happy, would that be right? - A. Yes.

Q. In fact you stayed at Giura's until about 11.30 and then
   you went home, that is right? - A. Yas.

Q. Can you from your house actually see Leppings Lane? -
   A. No.

Q. When you got home what did you do? - A. Just watched
   telly.

Q. Until about what time? - A. Until about quarter-to-12
   and then I went to a friend's house.

0.    '/hare was that? - A. It was on the road opposite to the
      shop on Leppings Lane.

Q. So you had to coiae up Fieldings Lane across Leppings
   Lane and go to your friend. - A. Yes.

Q. Was there any difference at that point in tioe? - A. It
   was a bit busier, but not ....

Q. Your friend wasn't home? - A. i*o.

Q.    So you went back to   the newsagents? -A.   Yes.

Q.    And spent a bit aore tiae with ausa? - A.   Yes.
Or whatever.  At this time I think it was 12.15, is
that right, or thereabouts? - A. Yes.

What was happening in Leppiags Lane because now, of
course, you could see, because you were in the
newsagents? - A. There were raora gangs about and there
were a number of lads sat on a wall.   There were^a
number of men sat on a wall outside a car lot drinking
at this time.

On the little wall on tae opposite side? - A. Yes.

There is a river or something there? - A. There is a
car lot across froas the shop.

There weren't very aany, were there, in that group? -
A. There was a group of about eight people, and again
the rest were just families.

So you weren't particularly worried or concerned or
anything? - A. No.

Then I take it you went honae again?

     MR. RUSSELL:   Excuse me.  Sir, I ani sorry, I
can't hear what you are saying.

     THE CORONER:   I aia sorry, I sat back.  I forgot I
have to sit forward as well.   Thank you, Mr. Russell.

You then    went hoiae again? - A. Yas.

You stayed at  home I think until about 2o'clock is
that right? - A. Yes, we went out and then we came
back.

Your boyfriend caiae didn't he? - A. Yes.

You went out.  What tinie did you go out then?        Did you
go out with him? - A. Yas.

W h a t t i i s e was that, the first time? - A. Round about
half-past-12, quarter-to-i.

Was it when you were going to visit your friend? - A.
No, that was after that.

So you visit your friend, you went into nun's, you want
hose, your boyfriend came, you went out again? - A.
Yes, then I came back.

You caae    back nome and that first tioie when you went
out with    your boyfriend, I take it there wasn't very
tnuch difference in Leppings Lane? - A. uo.
                                                                     48
                                                            ij • L*• Lfct.




    Q. Thera were people there .... - A. Just like an ordinary
       raatcii day.

    0. Because you are used to snatches, aren't you? — A. Yes.
B
    Q. And then you went back noiae again, right? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you go out again?  You have told me you did — what
       time did you go out with your boyfriend the second
       time? - A. When we went out again it was about halr-
       past-2 and we called to see ay amm.  I was taking ay
       brother out.

    Q. So back to ausa's and in fact I think in your statement
       you said you went to give «nuni sone money, is that
       right?   - A. Yes.

    Q. Was this at  2 or at 2.30, because this is quite
       important, as far as you can re{aeraber? - A. It was
       just, I think it ws just after 2 o'clock when we want
       back up to the shop.

    0. To laua's? - A. Yes.

    Q.   And your boyfriend     went with you? - A. Yes.

    Q.    So the pair of you     went up to the newsagent at just
         after 2 o'clock you think, and what was the situation
         like then? - A. It was busy but it wasn't over-crowded.
         It was   just like   an    ordinary  natch day at that tinie.

    Q. People   were eating chips and   talking and generally
       speaking being quite reasonable? - A. Yes.

    0. To pre-esnpt you, just have a look at theTpaoTOgraph,
       232, the long shot.   U7as that about how it was at that
       time? - A. Yes, it was like that.

    Q.    That isn't at just after 2, but that sort ofthing? -
         A. Yes, it was like that.

    Q. Then I take it you went back ho.ne again? - A. Yes,          to
       fetch iay brother.

    Q. So then you left the house again, is that right? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. You were quite busy taat day, weren't you?  So this
       time it was you, your boyfriend and your brother? - A.
       Yes.

    0. Uhat time was that, when you left? - A.      -ie   left at just
       gone quarter-to-3.




H
Are you sura about the tiae? - A. Yas.   I was taking my
brother to a friend's.

I see, so you are pretty confidant .... - A. He wanted
to go round because out of their garden you could see
the football ground itself, so he wanted to go to sea.

I see, so this was a convenient way of watching the
snatch froa this house? - A. Yes.

That's all right, no harsi - if you have got a house
that overlooks a football ground, the best of luck.
This house, in fact, it is in Vera Road, isn't it? - A.
Yes.

So you set off back to the top of Lappings Lane,   the
three of you? - A. Yes.

And you turned left, is that right, to go towards /ere
Road? - A. Yes.

Now what did you see this time? - A. By this tine it
was really busy and we had to wait to get out of the
junction at the top of the road.  We couldn't get in
with the crowd because it was that busy.

How long would you say that you had to wait? - A. i/e
took about five rainutas getting off the top of our road
to get towards Vere Road.

were you actually stuck behind the barrier, or did you
come .... - A. lio, we caae out frosi behind the barriar,
but we couldn't single in the crowd because it was too
busy.

And you were wanting just to get to Vera Road? - A.
Yes.

But that was, in fact, going the same way as the crowd?
- A. Yes.

Did you, apart from the fact that taera were a load of
people there, was that unusual in your experience? - A.
Yes, it was, because by that time it is usually empty
and there is usually just an odd few people running to
gat into the ground.

Apart from the fact tnat you said, “Oh siy goodness me,
tnere are a lot of people here", anything else Chat you
noticed? - A. Yes, there seemed to be a lot of Police
Officars all at onca stood at the top of our road.
There saeaed to be quite a number stood together..

At the top of your road? - A. Yas.
                                                   J£»•   T* •   Lj «*#i'i




Q. On foot or on horse? - A. They were on foot, yes.

Q. On foot? - A. Yes.

Q. Diet- you notice whether they were doing anything or not?
   - A. They were just stood really, looking on crowd.    I
   think they were directing fans on where to go and where
   not to go.

Q. They weren't actively intervening, running in, they
   were standing? - A. No, just standing.

0. You then eventually got nearer to the newsagent,       I
   think? - A. Yes.

Q. First of all, and when you got there did you look
   towards the turnstiles? - A. Yes, we did, but it was
   that busy, you know ....                    -

Q. You couldn't see the turnstiles? - A. You couldn't see
   the turnstiles.

Q.    Normally you can see the turnstiles, can you? - A. Yes,
     because by that time everybody has usually gone in, but
     this time you couldn't.

Q. was it because there were so many people between you
   and the turnstiles? - A. There was like a contraflow of
   people going towards ....

0.. Sorry? - A. There was a flow of people going towards
    the ground as well as people stood in front of the
    turnstiles, which blocked your view.

Q.    Yes.  You didn't see any Police Officers then, at the
     turnstiles? - A. There were a Police Officer on a horse
     and there were sosae stood at the side of the bridge
     that was over the River Don - you could see those.

Q. Did you hear any Officers trying to cosaniunicata with
   the crowd? - A. You could hear some of the..i shouting
   and telling them to move back and to stop pushing
   forwards.

Q. Did you sea where those shouts ifere coining frosa? - A.
   One of thezn was frora the Police Officer on the horse.

Q. On the horse.    Can we put the acetate up which snows
   the perimeter gates - C254.    Just turn round - every
   time you reply you have to turn back so you can speak
   into tne ffiike - that is a photograph of the turnstile
   area without the perimeter gates.    Can you see those?
   Are you familiar with those gates? - A. Yes.
                                                                      ' 51
A                                                      Ll*.   \-i »      —i




    Q. linen you say this horseman, or the mounted Officer who
       was shouting, was he, as far as you reaeaber, and if
       you don't reiaeinber say, "I don't reraenber", this side
       of the perimeter gates or the far side of the
B      perimeter? - A. He was this side of the gates -but
       further back off the picture.    You couldn't see where
       he was standing.

    Q. I see.  Try 253 - that is the sweet shop on the corner
       of Vera Road, isn't it? - A. That is where he were,
       outside there.

    0. That is where he was?  You were just off the picture
C      there, weren't you? - A. Yes.

    Q. What was he shouting? - A. He was asking everybody to
       move back and to stop pushing.

    Q. i l e re people actually pushing? Was it a legitimate
       shout - that you saw - I don't want to know .... - A.
       They were just all nioving one way.    They were all going
       into the same crowd.
D
    Q. So they were moving forward? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you notice any change in the inove»nent when you
       heard the shouts? - A. wo.




£




F


            /Q. what tiine would this



G




H
                                             [.   LEE




    Q. What time would this be?    How m a n y minutes Jjad past by
       now since you left?    You said you left at about quartec
B      to, do you remember? - A. Yes.      By the tame we g°
       the top of V’ere Road it was about a minute betore v.n^*.e
       o'clock.
         It was very close to kick-off time? - A. Yes, and it was
    Q.
         still crowded.
         I think you then turned round and looked towards Fielding
    Q.
         Lane? - A. And Leppings Lane, yes.

         And there were loads of police officers near...     A.     _es.
    Q.

    Q. But they were behind all this crowd? - A. Yes.
         Then what did you do after that?   Having seen the crowd
    Q.
         and you have said that he was snouting,  Don t        -n
         they were moving forward, what did you do? - A. At.er
         that we had to wait while the police officer moved the
         barriers to let us down the road.

    Q. Down Vere Road? - A.     Yes, and then we went    tothe
       friend's house where     we were going to.

    0.   What I ara interested   in, because I want to   try and
         establish this, is to what extent,    if at all, tne...
         What I am trying to find out is was tne crowd moving
         forward as you were watching them? - A. Yes, everybody
         was joining in.    It was crowded at tne turnsti ss an
         everybody was just joining at the back of tnis crowd
         which was making the crowd get bigger and bigger.

    0. Did you actually see any pushing as opposed to people
       just joining the crowd at the back? - A. Tnere were a  ^
       number of people trying to crawl underneath one anotner s
       legs to get further forward.

    0. Underneath which legs?     The horses'?    - A. Underneath
       other people's legs.

    Q. So they were crawling underneath to try and get a little
       bit further forward?   There weren't any queues, of
       course, just a huge mass of people? - A. Yes.

    0. You probably couldn't see them, but these perimeter
       gates, were you able to see them at tnis time? - A. Tne
       only ones you could see - you could see the tops of those
       on this end.

    0. Could you see whether they were open or— snut? - A. They
       were shut.   They had been shut all day, only opening s.or
       certain things.




H
                                                                  53




                                      E.    H.   LEE



Q.   Well, you can't say that.  I mean, when       you looked were
     they shut at that time? - A. Yes.

Q.   As far as you could see? — A. Yes.

Q.   You saw the one police officer on thehorse        inthat area?
     - A. Yes.

0. Were the people who were joining, were they walking,^
   running, what were they doing? - A. There were a number
   of people running from Middlewood^Road and along L e p p m g s
   Lane who appeared to have been drinking.

0. What makes you say that? - A. Because a lot of them were
   staggering and having to hold one another up as tne they
   were running.

0. I'm sorry? - A. They were holding one another up as tney
   were running.

0. How many people would you say there were? - A. There was
   a group of about 20 coming along Leppings Lane and I
   would say about the same coming from Middlewood Road.

Q. So it was a relatively small number who were in that
   condition? - A. Yes.

Q. Who were running down? - A. Yes.

0. The bulk of the people were walking,          is that right?   - A.
   Yes.

0. Did they appear perfectly normal to you as far as^ you
   could see? - A. Some of them did and then again tnere
   were others that didn't.

Q. It was a mix? - A. yes.

0. They were all very excited, .of course, because they were
   hoping to win? - A. Yes.

0. Were they chanting and cheering?        - A. There were chants.

0. But you would expect, that? - A. Yes.

0. As you walked down Vere Road,    I know you nave already
   said it was very difficult to    see tne turnstiles, but
   could you see people near the    front at all?   Did you
   catch a glimpse of anybody? -    A. You could see to a
   point.

0. What did they look like to you? - A. They were getting
   squashed at "the front of the thing because the crowd were
   like pushing forward by tciis time.
                                                                    54




                                           E.   M.   LEE

   ✓
0. This is eighteen months on, and, of course, you know that
    something terrible happened inside, but what I^am        ^
    interested in is what did you think at three minutes, or
    two m inures or one minute to tnree?   Did you t n m * a
    that time that they looked as if tney were squasned or
    are you saying this with hindsight? - A. You could tell
    they were getting squashed because the crowd w a s just
    pushing in one way.    They could not move anywnere else.

0. Then you went down the road, to Vere Road, where you were
   able to overlook the match? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you watch as well? - A. So.   The back garden looks
   on to the stand where the Liverpool fans were and last
   year when they were there they came over and tney were
   waving and talking and telling you the score and
   everything and my brother wanted to go for tnat reason.

Q.    Did you watch at all? - A. No.

Q.     When did you find out that something was happening inside
      the ground? - A. There was a man who came on to tne stand
      at the back.

0. On to where? - A. On to the back of the stand, because
   there is like a walk-way which you can see from tne
   garden.   He came over...

0. This is the West Stand we are talking about? - A. Yes.
   He came over and said that people were getting crusned at
   the front and then he disappeared again and tnen ne
   back and gave us a 'phone number and asi<ed us it we could
   ring his mum and tell his mum that he was all right.

0. So you knew from him that something...             - A. Yss, before
   it came on the television.

0. Do you know approximately what time that was?   Wnen I
   say "approximately", perhaps I ought to say:  do you know
   what time that was? - A. That was about five past three.

Q. I want to be sure about this.    In your original
   statement you said, "After about two minutes a Lad
   appeared on the balcony"? - A. Yes.-  'well,wnen ne came
   back with the 'phone number it was about five past tnree
   and then it came on the television.

 Q.    He came on television?   - A. No.

 0.   It came on television?    - A. The report came       on the
      television.
                                       E.   M.   LEE



0. This is what I want to try and find out.    Did you near
   the match start?    Did you hear the roar of the match
   starting?   A. Yes.

0.   How many minutes after that did   this man or lad come and
     say they were being squashed atthe front. - A. Between
     two and four minutes he came.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. PA Y N E :

0. In the time you have lived, or lived at F i e l d i n g Road, in
   all that time did you ever see sucii^ a large crowd
   arriving in the last quarter of an hour before the matcn
   was due to start? - A. No, never.

Q. Anything like this before at all? - A. No.

                   Cross-Examined by MR.     K ING:

0. Can I just deal with the time?   At about quarter to
   three I think it was when you saw there was an awful lot
   of people in the area by the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

0. I wasn't quite clear where you where exactly when you
   were watching this.   Was it the top of Vere Road. - A.
   There is a tyre shop and we were stood outside triere.

0. At that stage you could see there were police officers
   first of all at the end of the roads which would stop
   people going down the side roads? - A. Yes.

0.   You also said there   were a lot of police at the top of
     the road just stood   looking at the crowd, just standing.
     That wasthe note I    had.   Is tnat right? - A. Yes.

Q.   So the people who were coming along Leppings Lane to join
     the turnstiles, they weren't being stopped coming on _ ^
     Leppings Lane, there was nothing to stop them continuing;
     - A. No.

0. If we look at the model, one can see the ara where the
   turnstiles are for those who are going to go and stand at
   the match.   You see there, it is a relatively narrow
   area? - A. Yes.

          THE CORONER:   For the shorthand note, can we say
     you are pointing at the turnstiles A to G.

           MR. KING:   Yes:

 0. The turnstile A to G area. - A. Yes.

 Q. That leads to the turnstiles? - A. Yes.
                                                          DO




                                    E.   M.   LEE



Q. In order to get into that area you have to go tnrough
   perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

Q. At the time when you were looking, when there w e r e people
   still coming along Leppings Lane towards the ground, was
   that area absolutely jammed packed? - A. Yes.

0. Did it look as if it could really take no more people?
   A. Yes.

0. At the time you were looking, what was there to stop
   anybody coming along Leppings Lane to get to the
   perimeter gates, anything? - A. Mottling.

                        MRS. M cBRIEN:

0. Miss Lee, have you ever before seen such congestion of
   fans just outside the main perimeter gates at Leppings
   Lane? - A. No, not that bad.

0. In the past have you been able to walk along Leppings
   Lane on a match day when the fans are arriving.    •
   we have.

0. Normally does the traffic move along Leppings Lane as the
   fans arrive? - A. It depends on who they are playing and
   how big a side they are.

0. You have mentioned that people were being crushed at the
   turnstile area.  Did you see any officers trying to
   rescue these people? - A. Officers were shou-ing an
   telling the other fans to move back and move awav.

0. You didn't actually see somebody moving soraeoae wno was
   being hurt or had been hurt, away?   A . 'n o .

         THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed._ May I
   say that when I read your statement, I was bearing m
   mind your a<*e, I was very impressed with your statement
   and I have been equally impressed with the wav you nave
   given your evidence.    Thank you very much indeed.  ./eLL
   done.
        I think it would be sensible to rise now.     Ue will
   start at two o'clock.

                     (Luncheon adjournment)
                                                            57




                                                  n_ ft. L. WATTS


     THE CORONER:    If I could just say that we have
transferred Mr. Lindley and Ex PC Michael Tissington    _
hopefully until tomorrow. The first Witness I am going to
call is David Watts and in this particular case can I just
check that Peter Marjoram, Julie Shelley, Gary Taylor, are
they in Court? No. Good, because I want them out in this
particular instance.
            M R . DAVID GEORGE LAURENCE WATTS - Sworn

                        Ry THE CORONER:

Q. You are David George Laurence Watts? - A. That is
   right.

Q.
     Nottingham? - A. That is correct

Q. You are a football supporter? - A. Yes.
Q. The team you support is Nottingham Forest? - A. That
   is right.
Q. Because they were playing in the semi finals you
   sought a stand ticket? - A. Yes-
Q. For the semi final here on the 15th April in
   Sheffield and you were going to be in the Kop, or
   where were you going to be? - A. I was m the South
   Stand.
Q. The South Stand, did you say? - A. Yes.

Q. On the 15th April you set off by car with three of
   your friends, that is right, is it not? - A. That is
   right.
 Q. You left|             about 11.30 in the morning and
    everything went very smoothly and you got to
    Sheffield at about one? - A. That is right.

 Q . I n fact, it was not you who was driving. Was it your
      friend who was driving? _ A. That is right.

 0. You parked your car somewhere in the centre of
    Sheffield, is that right? ~ A. We parked at Hatfield
    Garage, quite a way from the ground, and we took a
    taxi.
 Q. You then got a taxi and you went to a public house by
    the river somewhere in Sheffield? - A. Yes.
                                                                 d   8




                                                   n. G- L. WATTS


         Is it called the Freemasons Arms, is that the one?
    Q.
         A. Yes.
B
    Q. Had you been there before? - A. No.
    Q- How come you chose that one? - A. The taxi driver
       thought it would be a quiet pub.

    Q. So that is why you went? - A. Yes.
         You said, "Where shall we go?" and he said that? - A.
    Q.
         He was going to pick us up again after the match.

    Q. It was all arranged? - A. Yes.

    Q. After the match or before the match? - A. He took      us
       and he said he would pick us up.

    Q. To take you to the match? - A. No, tobring us away.
       We were going to walk back to the Freemasons Arms and
D      he would take us back to the Hatfield Garage.

    Q- Then you were going? — A. Back to Nottingham*

    Q. But you were intending to watch the match? " A . Oh
       yes, but it was within walking distance of the
       Freemasons Arms.
         I am with you. It had the convenience of being close
    Q.
         by and yet he thought it might be quiet? - A. Yes.

     Q. Was he right as a matter of interest?     Was it fairly
        quiet the pub? - A. No, it was busy-

     Q. You got there at about a quarter to     two,      would that
        be right? - A. That is right.

     Q- You did not actually stay there very long, only about
        twenty minutes or thereabouts? “ A. Yes, that is
        right.

     Q. Can you remember how much you drank personally?        A.
        One pint.

     Q- Was that the first one you had that     day?      " A . Ithink
        so. I might have had a half before      we left
        Nottingham.
     Q. Whilst you were in that pub, you say it was busy.
        Was it busy with supporters? - A. Yes.




H
                                                         d   9




                                           D . G . L . WATTS
  /




Q. What group, Nottingham or Liverpool? - A. Liverpool-

0. How did you know that? - A. A 4 o t of them were
   wearing Liverpool colours. They had got the scarves
   with Liverpool o n . I sat down. Two of us sat down
   and two went to the bar to get drinks. An elderly
   couple came in and my friend allowed the lady to Slt
   down and she moved up to let her husband sit down and
   I got pushed behind a table. I was talking to a
   young lad sitting next to me who was a Liverpool
   supporter.
Q. He told you that? - A. He told me that they had come
   over.
Q. In fact, how many were there in his group or was he
   on his own? - A. He said that twenty of them had come
   over -
Q. Were they all in the pub so far as you knew? — A.
   Yes.
0. Was that the only group in the pub or were there
   others? - A. No, the room that we were in was full
   and so far as I know all Liverpool supporters.

0. How many people would you guess were in that room
   just as an aside? " A. 75 to 100 I would have
   thought, uncomfortably full.
0. The group you were talking with, did you speak with
   all of them or did you just speak to the one young
   man? - A. I spoke to the boy who sat next to me and I
   spoke to his companion on the other side. I did not
   speak to anybody else.
 Q. What sort of age would you say the two lads were who
    you spoke to? - A. Late teens, early twenties.

 Q. Youngish men? - A. Yes.
 0. How did they appear to you in their demeanour or
    their behaviour if you prefer? - A. They were jolly,
    friendly.
 Q. They were drinking pints presumably as you were? - A.
    Yes.
 0. When the conversation started did he ask you where
    you came from? - A. Yes, he did. He thought I was
    Sheffield. He thought I was local.
                                         P. G. L. WATTS


You told him where you came from I take it? - A. Yes.

Can you tell me what happened after that? What was
the next bit of conversation? — A. He asked me if I
had got a ticket which I told him I had and he said
that they had not got tickets. There was a shortage
of tickets for the Liverpool supporters.

He must have realised you were a Nottingham
supporter? - A. Yes.
It did not worry him? - A. No, but he advised me not
to advertise the fact. We were not in colours.

You did not feel in any way menaced or threatened or
anything like that? ~ A. No, not at all.
It is important to establish that. You told him you
had a ticket and he said that he had not got one? -
A. That is right.
What else happened then? - A. I asked him how he was
going to get into the ground and he said that they
were going to stay in the pub until quarter to three
and      they were going to go down to the ground to
get in. I asked him how and he said, "They won't
stop us. They haven't done yet".
Did you pursue that line of questioning? ~ A. No.

When he said that you thought, “That is it.   I am not
saying any more"? - A. Yes.
That was the one young man you spoke to? - A. The one
that was sitting next to me, yes.
Was he speaking for himself or was he speaking for
the group so far as you could tell? - A. For the
group.
A few minutes later you got up? - A. That is right.

You left? - A. Yes.
 They were still there? - A. They were still staying
 there.
 You walked to the ground from there? - A. Yes, we
 walked through a park and when we came out of the
 park we were mainly in amongst Forest supporters
 then.
                                             n. G. L. WATTS
/




    All I am interested in is how long it took you to
    walk from that pub to the ground? - A. To the ground?

    Yes. - A . I would have thought about'a quarter of an
    hour, something like that, twenty minutes.

    It was that sort of distance? - A. A nice steady
    walk.
    Of course, perhaps I could just ask you this as we
    have got you here, you clearly were in the ground
    when the match started? “ A. I would say we were in
    the ground before half past two.
    You were in the North Stand I think you said? - A.
    The South Stand.
    I beg your pardon, you did say the South Stand. Were
    you nearer the Leppings Lane end or nearer the other
    end? - A. I would say we were a third of the way from
    the Kop at the other end.
    There was no reason why you should, of course, have
    been looking around but did you by any chance look
    over towards Leppings Lane? - A. No. We were talking
    amongst ourselves and I did not notice until the
    trouble started and they were coming over.  I did not
    realise anything was wrong.
    Was it when the match stopped when you first noticed
    it? - A. No, just slightly prior to the match being
    stopped. You could see them being pulled up into the
    stands above.
    That is when you looked? - A. Yes.

    Prior to that you had not paid any attention. You
    were talking? - A. Talking to people we knew, yes.

    Can you by chance recollect - I have to put this to
    you “ Beardsley hitting the crossbar at one point?
    It was at your end, of course, the Forest end? - A.
    Yes.
     Do you recollect that? - A. Yes.
     Was it around that time you noticed or was it before
     or after or can you not say? If you cannot say then
     please say so? - A. I would say about the time, maybe
     just before.
                                          D. G. L. WATTS


     THE CORONER:  Any questions? No. You got off very
lightly there. Thank you very much indeed.




                              /MR. PETER MARJORAM.
                                                                   63

                                           P.K. MARJORAM



                        PETER KEVAH MARJORAM Sworn
     /


                             By THE C O R O N E R ;
                                                                        That
Q. Now you are Peter Kevan Marjoram,             is that right?   A.
   is correct.
q   # o             f              Dughtibridge in Sheffield? - A.
         Yes.
Q. And you happen to be a director of a company I believe?
   - A. Yes.
Q. It is right, isn't it, that at about 1.30 p.m. on Saturday,
   15th of April, you finished work at your place o-  or
   which is back in Oughtibridge? - A. Yes.

Q. One of the employees and you went off to pick up some
   furniture from a neighbour.  That is right, isn t it.
   - A. Yes.
Q. And having collected this .you and y our colleague travelled
         along Halifax Road to an address somewhere m        ^ongley.
         - A. Yes.
Q. My geography of Sheffield ought to be a bit better.
   Does it mean that you were travelling along Halifax Road
   away from Hillsborough Football Ground or towards it.
   - A. Mo, from Oughtibridge to where I was going along
   Halifax Road was towards the ground.

    Q. And you were I think in a Nissan pick-up trucK?            A. Yes.

    Q. You reached a junction on the road, is it the big cross­
       road or is it the small crossroad, it is Doe Royd Lane,
       I think? - A. It is a minor road.

    Q. And there was a pelican crossing and people were crossing?
       - A. There was.

    Q. What time was that about? - A. I left Oughtibridge
       approximately 1.30 so it would probably be about
       10-minutes-to-2.

    Q. How close is this crossing to the ground? - A. About a
       mile.
    Q. And it is a crossing with Halifax Road,          is tnat righu?
       - A. Yes.
    0. The pelican was red because two ladies were crossing,
       two elderly ladies.   Is that right? - A. As I approached
     — it it changed to red.

    Q. Yes, and they were hoping to cross.  I think a car pulled
       up alongside you, is that right? - A. Yes.
                                   P.K. m a r j o r a m


Q.   In fact you were a little bit worried because it       ._
     appeared to you to be coning up rather fast? - A. That ib
     correct.

Q.   But he managed to stop? - A. Yes.

Q.   And that annoyed you no doubt that that had happened?
     A. It did not annoy me particularly.  I thought. I
     about to witness an accident.

Q. Was it a Sheffield car as far as you know? - A. I have
   no idea.
Q. Did you see the occupants in it? - A. Yes, I could see
   three of them clearly.

Q. Were they wearing colours, were they supporters? ~ A.
   NO, they were dressed fairly smartly.

Q. And they appeared to you to be drinking, apart from
   the driver? - A. Well I could see that they held cans
   of beer, yes.

Q. But there was nothing really, they could just as easily
   have been Sheffield people, Nottingham Forest people,
   Liverpool people, who knows who they were? - A. Well
   when they drew away there were red and white scarves in
   the back window.

Q. I see.  So that was the only clue but initially you did
   not notice anything? - A. Not as they pulled up at the
   side.

Q. There was I think a few words exchanged through the
   window I believe,  is that right, not that it is
   terribly relevant, in fact, we will forget that. They
   drew up and you carried on with your journey when the
   lights changed? - A. Well there were no words exchanged
   from me, no.

 Q. You then proceeded to go to a public house called the
    Sicey Hotel Public House in Shiregreen? - A. Yes.

 Q. How far is that from the ground? - A. That is probably
    somewhere between two and three miles.

 Q. And you dropped your friend off there.          Is that right,
    or your employee? - A. Yes.

 Q. Did you go into that pub at all? - A. No,' I dropped
    him off there outside.

 Q. But did you see any people there just in passing? - A.
    Yes, there was a lot"of supporters there outside the
    pub.
                                                               oD


                                       P.K. MARJORAM



Q. Did you make out which teams they supported?  Tnere *a
   no reason why you should have done, I am just interest           .
   - A. Well I knew that they were Liverpool supporters,
      yes.

0. They were supporters but you could not tell which-team
   they were? - A. No, I could tell which ones tney were.

Q. Which ones were they? - A. They were Liverpool.

0. And these were outside the pub as opposed to being inside
   - A. There were a lot of them stood outside, yes.

Q. And then you set off and you went to the Pheasant Public
   House which is in Oughtibridge.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

0. This was in order to have a drink yourself, I suppose?
   It is Jaw Bone Hill.  Is that right? - A. It is known
   locally as Jaw Bone Hill.

Q. That's not its proper name? - A. No, I think it is
   Oughtibridge Lane.

Q. I see.  You got out of your car, you went into the pub,
   right, and again in this pub were there some people you
   knew, your locals? — A. Well I went to mee t my Quantity
   Surveyor and Site Manager.

Q. is that Mr. Ferguson? - A. Yes.

Q. Were there supporters in this particular pub as well?
   - a . Yes, there were.

Q. And did you distinguish which team they supported? -
   A. They were outside/inside.  The ones outside I didn't
   pay attention to but having got inside I know which team
   they supported.

 Q. And      which one was that? ~ A. That    was Liverpool.

 Q. About how many supporters would you say were in the pub
    at that time, this would be about 2.35 I think, wouldn't
    it? - A. It was about 2.35.  At that time there were
    probably inside about a dozen.

 Q.    How many? - A. About a dozen.

 Q.    Is it a big pub or a small pub? - A. A small pub.

 Q. And you went in and you bought yourselves a pint and
    then were you standing at the bar or what did you do?
    - A. As I walked in my two employees and two other
    fellows were stood at the entrance to the pub just
    inside the door at the ba~r.
                                   P . K . ’MARJORAM


Q. And what happened? - A. Well I did not know that they
   were talking together and I went to speak to my two     _
   colleagues and from comments behind me I Knew^ tnat the two
   chaps were Liverpudlians.  We had a joke to tnat effec .

Q. You had a joke with them? - A. Yes.   I said:   There is
   no doubting where you lads are from" and there was a bit
   of banter and it was all good humoured.  Do you want me
   to continue?

o. Yes please. - A. So by that time it got to about
   quarter-to-3 and I said to them that they were leaving
   it a bit late,    how were they going to get to the ground
   from Oughtibridge it being quarter-to-3 and they said:
   "Do n ’t worry about us, we know where-we can get in, 1
   is not a problem" and they had another quick drink and
   left about 10-to.

0. Did they give you any clue how they were going to get in?
   - A. No, that is the thing that has lodged in my mina
   because I have been to football matches there years
   ago and it puzzled me as to how they could get a quick
   entrance at that time of day with a large crowd.

Q. They didn't refer to any gates being opened or shut or
   anything of that sort that you remember now? - A. No,
   I can't recall exactly because I didn't pay that much
   attention to it but they indicated they knew a way o-
   getting in or they were confident to get in quickly.

Q. They neither admitted or denied that they had tickets.
   That is right, isn't it? You never asked? -.A. It was
   never discussed.

Q. So they might well have had tickets? - A. They may have
   had tickets.

 Q. But   you have no knowledge of that? - A. No.

 Q. And I think it is right, is it not, that they were well
    dressed people? - A. Yes.

 Q. And they behaved perfectly properly? - A. Yes.

 Q. And by no stretch of the imagination could you describe
    them as being rowdies.  Would that be right? - A. No,
    good humoured.

 Q. At the time when this statement was made did it strike
    you as strange, or did it strike you as strange in
    retrospect when you heard what had happened at the
    stadium? - A. It struck me as strange at the time.  I
    had been out of England for some years and it is a
    long time since I went to the Wednesday ground and Y01-1
    know in my own mind I was thinking of a way they could
    have got in quickly.  When I used to go we had ticKets.
                                  P.K. MARJORAM



 A friend of mine his father was a shareholder and we u s e d .
/to go in the stand there, the old stand as we knew it,
 and I was just trying to figure out in my mind whether
 that may be was the way they were going or something.

In fact the impression you got is that they knew how to
get in, they weren't actually suggesting they were going
to get in without a ticket but they thought that they
knew how to manipulate the system, if you like, or knew
a special entrance or something of that sort but nothing
improper? - A. Nothing was inferred to be improper.
They just seemed confident at that time they could get
in very quickly.

In fact your friend Mr. Ferguson says that as well and
you would agree with him, wouldn't you on that? - A.
Well he commented to me and said did I remember what tney
said and I said exactly.  I had been thinking about it
once we began to hear what had happened.


               Cross-Examined by MR. H A L E ;

Could I just say if they had had tickets and were going
to the ground from Oughtibridge at that time, would
they have been likely to get their car parked and get
there in time for the kick-off? - A. No, in fact I
think that subject was mentioned because they asked
us where they should park and I suggested they could
park near the Texaco filling station but from there it
was a good ten minutes' walk at least.

 So they would have been very unlikely to have reached
 there by kick-off time even if they had had tickets?
 - A. It was very difficult.


              Cross-Examined by MR. M A N N I N G :

 You said there were twelve people or thereabouts inside
 the public house at about 2.35 when you arrived there?
 - A. Yes.

 Can you give us some impression of how many people there
 were outside that same public house? - A. -At least as
 many.

 Are you able to say at all when any of those people
 outside moved off? - A. No, I am not -able to say.

       MR. MANNING:    Thank you very much.
                                         P.K. MARJORAM


                     Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. I am slightly intrigued by these two "well dressed
   people".  They were going, on your reckoning they w e r ®
   going to get there about 10-past q u a r t e r - p a s t - 3 w e r e n t
   they? - A. I have not really estimated that.                 tne
   road was clear if they left at 10-to it is possible to
   get there by 5-to but as someone just said it is unlikely
   at that time.

Q. And then  they had to park the car and get out? - A. And
   they had to walk at least five minutes.

Q. And they     didn't seem to be in any rush at all? - A. No.            .

Q. An impression you got, very fairly put by the Coroner,
   were that these two well dressed xndxvidua s     k, -
   think that they knew a means of getting in, they naa
    a means of getting into the ground? - A.               Sorry, I did
    not say thej were "well dressed", I said               they weren't
    badly dressed.
Q. I am sorry I thought you agreed with the learned Coroner
   they were "well dressed".  I beg your pardon. - A.
   Reasonably smart.  They weren't ragged people.

Q. No, I am sure they weren't. Just for example they
   might have had two tickets;    they might have tcnovn a gate
   you can go to when you   are late and they might have ^ o w n
   how you could then get in even though the g a m e -had started.
   - A. They might have.

 Q. So to that extent these individuals, whoever they were,
    are unlikely to have been there at lQ-to-3 at the groun ,
    are they? - A. Unlikely.

 Q. Because it was at 10-to-3 you were speaking to them?
    - A. Well they left at 10-to-3.

 Q. Just going back you were telling us about a dozen or so
    people you saw outside.  I understand it was a j.ine day.
    Yes.

 Q. It was a warm day I understand? - A. Yes.

 O. And you probably know from   your own experience on a warm
    fine day it is quite natural and normal for people wno
    are in public houses to come outside and enjoy the
    sunshine? - A. Yes.

             MR. KING:    Thank you very much.


                     Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

  Q. Mr. Marjoram,     you told us that you thought about it
                                                     69


                              P.K.. MARJORAM



•again when you heard what had happened and you thought
by "it" I mean the comment that these gentlemen knew
how to get into the ground.   Is that right?  Do I
understand your evidence correctly? - A. No, it was
after we heard on the radio that someone had opened a   ^
gate.   We heard it on the local radio and it was at thau
time, that was later in the evening and that was wnen
we ....




                     Q. So it was the
                                                                         70

                                                          J . 0 • on »~»LL>l*




    o.   So it was the detail of the gate being opened t.iat lad
         you to reiaeaber what conversation you had had with tne
         Liverpool supporters in that pub, is that rignt? - A.
         Certainly, yes, it was a reference to a gate as an
B        access gate, yes.

              THE CORONER:   Thank you very auch indeed.            Julia
         Dawn Shelley, please.                        f

                  JULIE DAW3 SHELLEY C a l l e d    (Swocn)

         Good afternoon. - A. Good afternoon.

         You look a bit nervous, but you don't have to be. - A.
         1 asa all eight.

         You are Julia Dawn Shelley,     that is rignt, isn't it? -
         A. Yas.

    n.                                    n Sheffield,    is tnat
         risht? - A. Yes.

D        And you are an office worker,     I think? - A. That is
         right, yes.

    0 . And you are the niece of a lady called Hilda fountain?
        - A. Yes.

         And sha is the licensee of the Matilda public house, oil
         Matilda Street in Sheffield, is that right? - A. Znat
         is right, yes.

         Where is ilatilda Street in relation to Hillsborougn
         football ground, can you just help ;ne? - A. Yas, about
         five ailes froa the ground.

    Q.   In which direction - Barnsley direction or iiottia inaa?
         - A. Or what, sorry?

    0.   In which direction, do you kn o w?        It doesn't natter -
         it is not important.

              Hit. iCIWG: Sir, I an vary close to you but I a»a
         having great difficulty hearing everything you are
         saying to the witness.  I a«i sure it is my fault, not
         yours.

              THE COROiiEit:  Jo, I am sura it.is ae.  Than*? you
         for pointing it out.   Please point it out because I get
         very cross if I can't near and I don't want you to get
         cross with me:

     0. Now if your aunt is busy at the puj you sonatinas ^o
        down and nelp, is that eight? - A. Yas, that's rignt.




H
'On 15th April 1939 did your aunt anticipate that it
 would be a busy day? - A. Yes.

And she asked you if you would cosae down and nelp, is
that right? - A. Yes, that's rigat.

And in fact you agreed and you did go? - A. Yas,

And you got there about 11.30 in the niorning or so, and
it was quiet at that point? - A. Yes.

Then about aid-day three or four supporters case in? -
A. Unua.

Could you tell which club they supported? - A. well,
when tney first walked in I did notice one of the.a had
a scarf on.  It was a Liverpool scarf, and they dien't
know they were exactly from Liverpool, or would be
supporting Liverpool, until I started talking to tnan.

when you started to talk to them what did you discover?
- A. That they supported Liverpool.

So you are quite satisfied that those three or four
were Liverpool supporters? - A. Yes.

In fact, three of the.'ti didn't nave any colours on but
one did have a scarf? - A. Yes.

 3ut they all told you they were froa .... - A. Yes,
 that's right.

They all told you they were froia Liverpool as it
happens? - A. Yes.

 And it is right, isn't it, as long as they were    in the
 pub they were well behaved? - A. Yes.

 They were fine? - A. Caused no trouble.

 iio problems• They had so;aetaing to drink I suppose? —
 A. That is right, yes.

 And might have been a little uierry.  Do you know now
 lauch they did have?  Did you serve then? - A. I did,
 yes.   They were drinking steadily froa about 12 o'clock
 until about half-past-2, quarter-to-3.

 So how ;aany pints would that be? - A. It is hard to
 say.  I know it was over ■— - it would be about over
 five or six.

 Of that order anyway? - A. Yes.
                                                                   /1


                                                     J.   D.   SHELLEY




    Q.'lhey spoke perfectly properly to you? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did they tell you anything about how they had come, how
       they had arrived? - A. Yas.
B
    0. Tell ae about that? - A. They casse by train.

    0. Yes, and did they coae just the three or four on their
       own, or did they coiae with others? ~ A. Taey case with
       others on the train.

    Q. Friends were these others, as far as you ascertained? -
       A. rellow supporters.

    Q. Other supporters? - A. Yes.

    0. Did they show you their tickets or say which stand they
       were going to, or anythin® of that sort? - A. They said
       they didn t have any tickets.

    Q.   All four of them? - A. Yes.

D   Q. I see, and what did you say to that? - A. Well, they
       asked ae if I would go with thera and I told taeffi that I
       didn't have a ticket, and I said it had been on the
       radio and on the telly that you couldn't gat in without
       a ticket, and they said, "well, we haven't got tickets.
       We have never had tickets for any gatnes we have been to
       but we have always aanaged to get in'*.

    Q.    I see.  Did you sake any further enquiries about   that?
         - A. Yes, I asked them how they aanaged that    and they
         just said, "Well, we always get in, we know ways".

    Q. Sorry, they said? - A. They said they knew t.iat they
       would get in.  They didn't elaborate on it, tney just
       said they knew ways.

    Q. Of getting in? - A. Yes.

    Q*   I see, and they gave you the iapression that taat was
         their regular practice when they went to snatches? - A.
         Yes, that's right.

    Q. I suppose they were saying to you, "If you co;ae with
       us, you'll get in as well". - A. They would get ne in,
       yes.

    Q. 3ut you didn't,    in fact, go did you? - A. lio.

    0. Let's just clear a little bit of ground and then co.ne
       back to these four.  Did any aore supporters co^ie in? -
       A. A couple of Notts. forest supporters ca.ne in, but no
       more Liverpool supporters.




H
                                                              73

                                                    J. 0. SHELLEY




O.'So really it was actually very quiet in the event? - A.
   Yes, we expected a lot more coding off the train.

0. Yes, and just to make it absolutely clear, there was no
   trouble whatever between the Notts, and the Liverpool
   supporters? - A. No, no trouble.

Q. But there weren't very many     of either club,    but
   everybody was well behaved?     - A. Yes.

0. What tise did they say, "Can you ring up for a taxi to
   take us to the ground?"  - A. They asked ae to ring for
   a taxi about quarter-to-2.

Q. Guarter-to-2? - A. Yes.

Q. And I think you   had a bit of trouble getting through      to
   a taxi place, didn't you? - A. I did, yes.    It was
   engaged for about ten ainutes or so.

Q.    Then when you did      get through    you asked the*a tocoiae
     and what ti*ae did it actually turn upto pick the;n   up?
     - a . It was roughly between half-past-2 and quarter-to-
     3.

Q. I see.  were they getting a bit iiapatient at this stage
   or were they fairly relaxed about it? - A.  They were
   starting to get a bit iiapatient, yes, wondering wnere
   the taxi was.

Q.   3ut eventually it did come? - A. Yes.

0.   And they set off? - A. Yes.

Q. How old were they? - A. I would say in their mid-
   twenties.

Q. That was the last you saw or heard of thaa? - A. Yes.

0. And indeed, you     didn't go to the aatca? - A. u:o.

0.    And as far as you were concerned you had no     reason to
     disbelieve anything they told you? - A. iio,     no reason
     whatsoever.

0. They seeaed very nice lads? - A. Yes.

                  Cross-examined by .-u>. i?AYff£

Q.    This group of four told you tnat without tickets they
     had always got in? - A. Yes.

0.    And they were expecting to do that again? - A. Yes.
                                                                  74
                                                       J. D. SHELLEY




    Q. That day? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did tuay say anything about other Liverpool fans? - A.
       No.  They just said when they caae down on the train
B      that there was other supporters taat didn't have
       tickets, on the train.'

    Q.        THE CORONER:   Can you speak up? - A. They said
         wnen they came down on the train there were soiae that
         had tickets but there was a lot store on the train that
         didn't have tickets to get into the -natch.

    Q.        MR. PAYIiE:  Did they say anything about how those
         without tickets were going to get in? - A. uo.

    ). Thank you.

                      Cross-Exaainad by i-fR. -<H«G

    Q- Where is this public house in relation         to the ground? -
       A. About five miles frosn it.
D   Q. Five miles? - A. Yes.

    Q- So the taxi which arrived at 2.30 to quarter-to-3 had a
       five mile journey to undergo? - A. Yes.

    Q. Have you ever done that journey yourself f rora the pub
       to the ground? - A. Not to the ground, no.

    Q. That sort of distance into Sheffield - could you tell
       us how long it would probably take on a normal day, let
       alone a match day? - A. well on a normal day rougaly
       about 15 minutes.

    Q. So with a raatch day it was going to take a bit longer?
       - A. Yes, a lot longer.

    o. So tnose particular people were unlikely to have
       arrived until after 3 o^clock by the sound of it? - A.
       Yes, I should iaagine so.

     ». So these particular people, if they did go to the ga.ae,
        will have got thera after we know the unfortunate
        events had already taken place? - A. Probably so, yes.

                        Further by THE COUPLER

     i. I suppose it is only fair to say taat tney had hoped to
        gat there a bit earlier, because you actually rang up
        at quarter-to-2 and it took an hour for the taxi
        actually to turn up? - A. Yes.




H
                                                                 75
                                                        G. TAYLOR.




Q. i3ut Mr. King is quite right because they could       not nave
   made it by the tisie of .... - A. Yes.

Q. Thank you very such indeed.    Thanic you for coning.

                 GARRY TAYLOR Called   (Sworn)

                        3y THE COROHER

0. You are Mr. Garry Taylor? - A. Yes.

Q.                               in Sheffield?     -   A. Yes.

Q. Although you are a Sheffield .nan you have actually
   moved around the country? - A. I have lived in various
   parts of the country, yes.

Q. You are a keen football supporter? - A. I was a keen
   football supporter.

Q. Yes, and at one tiae you even were a season ticket^
   holder for Hillsborough, is that right? - A. That is
   rignt.

0. That was before 1989? - A. Way before 1989, yes.

Q. And you just stopped for various reasons which-we don't
   need to go into? - A. Yes.

Q. On Saturday 15th April 1989 you were intending to meet
   a friend of yours, I believe? - A. I was meeting a
   friend of mine to have a gaiae of golf?

0. And this was to be at soaa golf course here in
   Sheffield? - A. That's right.

Q.   And you were intending to meet on the- course at        1 p.m.?
     - A. That is rignt.

0. That was your intention? - A. Iteua.

Q. To get froza your house to the golf course did you nave
   to pass the football ground, tlillsborougn? - A. Yes, I
   have to go down Leppiags Lane past the football ground.

 0. You guessed that there might be a bit of traffic? - A.
    Yes.

 0. And so you decided to leave your home a bit early in
    order to .... - A. That is rignt.

 Q. ‘m a t tine did you actually leave? - A.     I left at
    between 11.30, 11.45.
/How far is it froq your house to the golf course?
 It is about four ssiles.

So you really left yourself more than enough tiae?
Plenty of tisne, yes.




       /0. In fact, you were .
                                                          77




                                    G.   T A Y LO R




0. In fact you were surprised because there was very little
   traffic in the event?   A. There was very little traffic
   and very few people congregating on the pavement, which
   usually happens at a football match.

0. So you had plenty of time on your hands before you could
   meet your friend and you went in to The Sicey? - A. Yes.

0. That is a public house on Sicey Lane in Firth Park,   is
   that right? - A. Yes.

0. How far is that public house from ilillsborougn football
   ground? - A. That is about three and a half miles.

0. Again, that pub - what time did you get into it
   approximately? - A. I would say just before twelve
   o clock.

0. For all practical purposes it was empty? - A. Yes.  There
   were about fifteen people spread about a very large room.

Q. You had about a half pint of lager? - A. Yes.

0. You sat down and as it happens you sat down near to where
   three men were sitting? - A. That's right.

0. Whilst you were sitting there you could hear a
   conversation amongst these three? - A. I could near the
   three people talking.

0. Could you describe them?   I am not asking you to give me
   a description so I can identify them as people, but^did
   you draw any conclusion as to whether they were Sheffield
   people, Nottingham people, Liverpool people, or anything
   else? - A. From their accents I supposed that two ot them
   were Liverpool people and the other one had an East
   Midlands accent but roundabout the Nottingham area.

6. You are quite good at accents? - A. I lived i-n Nottingham
   for a considerable length of time and I also used to
   visit Liverpool about once a month for fifteen years or
   so, so I learned to pick up accents. .

0. They weren't wearing'any colours or anything of taat
   sort? - A.. They w e r e n 't wearing any favours, football
   favours, or anything to indicate that they were football
   supporters.

0. Because the pub was virtually empty you were able to near
   some of their conversation? - A. I heard most Qf tae
   conversation.
                                                              16




                                       G.   TAYLOR



0. Can you now tell me what you heard in that conversation.
   - A. Well, the two Liverpool people were in tneir mid-^
   twenties.    The older man I would say was roundabout tne
   35/36 mark.    He had the Nottingham accent.          He seemed
   to be' the leading light of the group and seemed to be
   forcing opinions on to the other two.      They discussed
   the whys and wherefores of gaining access to tne ground
   without tickets. - The thirty-five years old man witn tne
   Nottingham accent was quite clear that he aad organise.,
   something with other people, whether they were Liverpool
   or what other part of the country they came from, but ne
   was indicating that he arranged to meet this crowd of
   people outside the Leppings_Lane snd.      There was every
   indication that he knew Sheffield quite well, tnat ne
   knew Hillsborough football ground very well and aad
   obviously, from later comments, been mixed up witn this
   sort of thing before.    He stated to the Liverpool people
   that they had no problems.    They would cause as much
   trouble as they possibly could outside tne Leppings Lane
   end, which has a narrow entrance, as you are probably
   aware.    They would attempt to force t h e p o l i c e to open a
   gate to release the-pressure, thereby gaining access to
   the ground and they would immediately rush to get at the
   back end of the Leppings Lane goal, which for 50.4 of the
   game, of course, would be the goal in which the Liverpool
   team was trying to score.

Q. You are absolutely sure about what you have just told me?
   - A. Yes.

0. You see, people can talk in a hypothetical sort of way.
   They can say, "We could do this.   We could do tnat.1
   Was it that sort of talk or was it m o r e deliberate? “ A.
   It was more deliberate.    It had obviously been organised
   before because the fellow did say they had managed to
   achieve the object of having gates opened and gaining
   access without tickets o n previous occasions.

0. Did you gather that it was on previous occasions in
   Sheffield or on previous occasions elsewhere? ” A. This I
   wasn't able to gather because it never came up in tne
   conversation, but they had done it on previous occasions.

0. You have mentioned he said he was going to meet up^with
   people at Leppings Lane end to achieve this objective, so
   to speak.   Did he give any indication of the sort of
   numbers he had in mind, or how many friends he was
   meeting up witn? - A. He didn't do so in so manv words,
   but he said there would be an awful lot of people ready
   to orchestrate some kind of movement to getting this
   pressure on to the gates and round the turnstiles.

0. After a while you got the impression that tnev realised
   you were there, is that right? - A. W e l l , I turned and
  /




                                       G.   TAYLOR



      looked at them.      I could not imagine this sort of thing
      happened.     We have all seen football violence on the
      television.      We have seen it reported in the press.
      Ho w eve r, until you actually hear someone who is
      deliberately orchestrating violence to gain access to a
      ground, you don't put much credence on this.

      I turned to nave a closer look at them, to see wnat sort
      of people would do this sort of thing.  When I did this I
      got a very dirty look.   They were quite hefty^people,
      these, they weren't little men.   They were fairly large
      men.  Although I am a fairly large man one against tnree
      is no good.   I just turned back and pretended that I
      wasn't - and carried on listening to what^tney had to
      say, meanwhile drinking my drink.   I decided then it ^
      wasn't the place for me and I was going to get out of it.

0. Once this had happened, this exchange of looks had taken
   place, shall we say, was there any further reference made
   to the subject matter which you have told me about or did
   the subject matter of the conversation change? * A. Well,,
   one of the fellows with the Liverpool accent seemed a_bit
   doubtful as to whether they were going to achieve tneir
   objective, that is, to get into the ground without^
   tickets.   The older fellow was again reassuring nim
   there would be no problem whatsoever.   Tnere would be
   enough people to create this aggro with the police and
   force them to do something to relieve the pressure around
   that gate.   I then finished my drink and I decided to go
   and wait for my friend on the car park of the golf course
   where I was playing.

0. Then in fact you went off and played your... - A. I
   played my round of golf.

0. Later on you heard about the incident? - A. 'jell, because
   of the traffic congestion I had to go quite a circuitous
   route to my home and I was listening to the radio all the
   time and I suddenly realised what had aappened at
   Hillsborough, of course.    There was quite a lot ot^
   traffic and quite a lot of bewildered people.     In fact
   one man blew his horn at me because I had happened to
   push in front of him   in a queue of traffic.   He was a
   Liverpool supporter.     He got out and started to be
   abusive and I said, "Quite frankly I think this is a
   waste of effort in view of what..." - it was still coining
   over the radio wnat was had happened at Hillsborough.     I
   said that in view of   what had happened there, "I tnink
   you are being a little bit silly.     everybody wants to
   get out of it."

0. What I am trying to find out-is this:   ha"d this
   conversation which you iiave recounted to me struck you as
   unusual or worrying before you knew about tne events at
                                      G.   TAYLOR



     Hillsborough or afterwards? - A. I wouldn't say it
     worried me but it certainly made me think a little about
     it.   In fact I discussed it with my friend when I met
     him before we started to play golf.   I said,  It seems
     as though there is going to be quite a bit of trouble, we
     had better go a circuitous route to our homes. ^ He
     lives fairly close to me.   He agreed and said it was the
     sensible thing to do, to try and not get involved with
     the football traffic.

     I discussed it with him and he suggested after the event,
     after we both knew what had happened at Hillsborougin, ne
     suggested I go to the police.   I waited three or four
     days and then went to...

0. The West Midlands.     Yes.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. H A L E ;

0. When you had heard what had happened, did that sound
   familiar to you? - A. That, plus what I saw on
   television, led me to believe that the conve rsa tio n_I had
   heard was in fact the commencement of an orchestration to
   cause trouble.

0. From what you had heard would it be likely that any of
   those people had relatives in the front of the pen who
   would have been killed? - A. This I would not like to
   say.

0. Did it look as though they were going to come in through
   the rear? - A. They said they were going to force their
   way...   If they got in the ground they were going^to
   force their way in the tunnel to get to the nack of tne
   goal, as close to the touch line as possible.

0.   If any of those men did get to the front, tney   would ;iave
     had to push their way to the front? - A. Yes.

0. They would not have been there well in advance before tne
   game started? - A. I would not have thought so, having
   had experience of being in that part of the ground
   myself.

          THE C0R0UER:    I think, Hr. Hale, be careful because
     this witness can't actually say that.    .   ;ie can saV ^-s
     what he heard.    We are moving into conjecture.

          HR. HALE:   I am content to accept his previous
     answer that he thought they were going to come in from
     the back.   I am much obliged.
                                          G.   TAYLOR

B
                    Cross-Examined by HR. P A Y N E ;

    Q. Mr. Taylor, it is claar that you went to^ the police
       because you realised the importance of wnat you
       overhead in relation to what had actually happened. - A.
       Not so, really.   I didn't think that what I had neard
       had an awful lot of bearing.   I t w a s only after seeing
       it repeatedly on television and discussing it witn
       friends that I realised that this had been an attempt oy
       people to orchestrate something that would gat them entry
       into the ground.

    0. That is what then led you to go t o t h e police? - A. This
       led me to go to Hammerton Road police station and tney
       actually rang through and a police constable from      ^
       Birmingham actually came over and took me down to aase a
       statement in the city centre.
D
    Q. Are you sure, Mr. Taylor, that in addition to tne P^an i.o
       force the police to open the gate which you heard o e m g
       discussed, this leading man of the group of three also
       said they would rush straight to the part Ot tne terrace
       behind the goal? - A. Yes.

                     Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G ;

    0. From what you saw on the television, you were putting
       together what you saw on the television witn what you
       heard in the public house?   A. Yes.

    0. Tell me this, and see if your recollection of what you
       saw on the television tallies with what I am about to put
       to you.    Did you notice on the television, what you
       heard on the television, that at about twenty to tnree
       when there was a great build-up of people outside tne
       ground, when maybe the people you are talking abouu we^a
       arriving, that there were huge empty spaces on the
       terraces where the Liverpool fans with tickets wet.s
       supposed to be.    Did you notice that? - A. I noticed
       that, yes.

    0. Did you notice, therefore, that with all those empty
       spaces, the overwhelming likelihood was that people
       outside the ground trying to get in were people witn
       tickets, not people without? - A. I would say that an
       awful lot of them were with tickets, yes, but from wnat
       this gentleman said it appears...

     0. I understand that.     One of the dangers...

             THE CORONER:    . Yes, Mr. Payne, what is it?



H
                                                            82




                                       G.   TAYLOR



          HR. PAYNE:   The witness was trying to answer the
     question and Mr. King was interrupting him.   Tnat is
     what I was objecting to.

          MR. K I N G : Sir, I am sure my learned friend can_
     look after his own witnesses.     I don't understand this
     to be his witness.

          MR. PAYNE:     This isn't my witness.

          MR. KING:    Sir, as I understand it, you are the^
     court.    The impression I get from my learned friend is
     if I am going to ask a question he is going to leap to
     his feet.    I don't regard him as my opponent but I
     regard the function of all Counsel here in an inquest is
     simply to ask questions and perhaps have directions from
     the Coroner.

          THE CORONER:     Yes, press on.

Q.         MR. KING:     I am not criticising you at all for
     putting together two matters, but what is important
     before we draw conclusions simply from your piece of
     evidence is to know what, for example, you were able to
     s.ee from the television and I was merely putting to you
     these matters.      You may not have heard this on the
     television but I am asking you:     did you realise from the
     television that the number of people who in fact entered
     through Gate C, which was the gate which was opened,
     together— wi-Lh- all the other people who had got in tnrough
     the turnstiles A to G totalled more or less - no raora^and
     no less - than the total amount of tickets sold for that
     part of the ground?      Did you know that? ~ A. I didn t
     know that, no.

                 Cross-Examined by MRS. McS RIE N:

Q. Mr. Taylor, what time did you over hear the conversation
   in the public house? - A. Between about 11.55 and
   12.15/12.20.

0. Did you think that something was going to go drastically
   wrong that day had their plan succeeded? - A. No.   In
   hindsight I felt I would probably have been better
   ringing the police there and then from the public nouse,
   but only in hindsight.

0. That is what I was going to ask you.   Did you think of
   'phoning the police when you neard of such a terrible
   thing was going to happen? - A. Well, I didn't realise a
   terrible tning was going to happen.   I myself have been
   to football grounds where terrible crushes have occurred
   but they seem to sort themselves out.   I never envisaged
                                                           83




                                       G.   TAYLOR



   that a Lot   of people were going to losetneir lives   as       a
   result of any action by anybody.

0. If people without tickets forced their way by one means
   or another into the football stadium, then tne capacity
   would be exceeded, wouldn't it? - A. There was no
   guarantee they would be successful.   They were
   discussing that they had done this previously.    I mean,
   I had no indication that they were going to be^ successful
   in their attempts to get into the ground and thereby
   cause whatever accidents or deaths, or whatever.    It waa
   only in hindsight that I realised that I possibly could
   have done better good by ringing the police.

0. But you did hear them saying they had been successful on
   other occasions in the past? - A. Well, yes.   I mean, I
   am successful at golf sometimes but at other times I ma<<e
   a complete hash of it.

0. But we are  talking about something which could cause       a
   calamity for other people, innocent people?

        THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, the witness has said he
   didn't ring the police.   He has told y o u w h a t ne heard.
   He has told you very honestly that with hindsight it
   might have been a better thing to do.  What you are
   actually doing is criticising this witness.

           MRS. McBRIEN:   No, I don't mean to do that.

        THE CORONER:   He has given you truthful and proper
   answers and it is quits wrong tnat you should criticise
   him now when we know what happened.

           MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes,   I do understand.

           THE CORONER:    I am sure you would not want to do
   that.

           MRS. McBRIEN:   No, not at all.

        MR. HALE:  Excuse me, sir, it may be too late now
   but what the witness was saying when )ie was interrupted
   sounded very interesting and I wondered if he could
   recollect it and just complete what ne was saying.

           THE CORONER:    At what point?

        MR. HALE:   When he was interrupted by my learned
   friend Mr. King and Mr. Payne rose to nis feet.

           THE CORONER:    Can you remember wnat the question
   was?
                                 G. TAYLOR


     MR. HALE:   I am afraid I can't, unless Mr. Payne
can help me or the witness can remember, but I dearly
wanted to hear it at the time.

     THE COROWER:    Mr. Payne, can you recollect?

     HR. PAYNE:     It may be the shorthand note has it.
I know that Mr.   Taylor was about to say something and ne
was interrupted   and then by the time the discussion nad
taken place, of   course, he had lost his t r a m of tnough
and we had lost   the point.   That is wnat I was objecting
to.
  (The relevant question and answer was read by tne
            shorthand writer at this point;
                                                 G. TAYLOR


                      ffnrthar bv THE CORONER:

0.     THE CORONER:   I do not suppose you can remember this
     exchange either can you? - A. All I was going to say
     is that it does not matter to me how many people had
     tickets. There were a certain number of people there
     without tickets. This has been reported in the
     Press.
Q. You do not actually know that. All you can say is
   that you overheard somebody say that they did not
   have tickets and you knew they were going to get xn
   without? - A. And when that gate was opened, so far
   as I could see, the problems arose because even
   people with tickets were going through that gate
   because they did not want to queue to go through the
   turnstile.
       MR. KING:      There is something arising from that, sir

       THE CORONER:     Yes.
              Piir-t-hAi- Cross-Examined bv MR. KING:

Q. You have read reports in the press about people
   without tickets, is that right? - A. Yes, and from my
   own experience I know full well that a lot ofpeople
   do turn up at grounds without tickets-

Q. Of course. I am not blaming you for this but have
   you read a lot of newspaper reports about the
   Hillsborough disaster? I suspect you have? - A. I .
   have read a considerable amount, yes, in the national
   press.
       THE CORONER:      Mr. Hale, is there anything else?

       MR. HALE:      I am quite happy with that, sir.

Q.       THE CORONER:   What we want to be sure about was
     what you actually heard at the time. It is not
     possibly a reconstruction out of television reports
     and things like that? - A. Yes, it is obviously not
     verbatim because I cannot remember exactly but the
     general gist of the conversation was as I have
     quoted.
      THE CORONER:    Mr. King, I know you put to this
 Witness   the issueof how many people got in and out and I
 did not   challengethe issue of how many people got in and
 out and   I did notchallenge or interrupt you at that time
                                                G . TAYLOR


That is something we will in due course be dealing w ith
because it is actually a very interesting point.  X do not
think it makes any difference to the answers of this
Witness but I just want to say it does not necessarily
follow that I have accepted it is evidence-  In fact, it
does not follow that it is evidence.

     MR. KING:   Not at all, sir.
       THE CORONER:    I do not think you intended to do that.

   MR. KING:   My only point in putting that, if I can put
it in opposition, is again one jumps to conclusions. One
jumps from what is seen some time before or heard some time
before to a conclusion.  I am merely pointing out the
dangers of that reasoning because it can be quite false
sometimes.
                      Further bv THE CORONER:

0.        THE CORONER:   If I can just summarise what you
     have told me; what you said was that you went into a
     pub whatever it was called? - A. The South Sea.

Q. You sat down and you heard three people talking. Two
   of      appeared to you to have Liverpool accents and
   one a Midlander who seemed to be taking the lead and
   he was in effect telling his younger colleagues that
   he had a group of friends who were intending to
   create some sort of diversion or problem at the
   Leppings Lane with a view to forcing somebody to open
   a gate so that they could go in and that they would
        rush down the tunnel because they wanted to view
   the match from the back? - A. Yes.
Q . You also understood him to say that he did not have
    any ticket to get in? - A. No.
Q. He did not anticipate having any problems because
   this is what they had done before? - A. Yes.

 0. The youngsters, if I can put it like that, at least
    one of them was a little bit doubtful that this would
    work? - A. Yes.
 Q. But he was confident this could be achieved? ~ A.
    Yes.
 Q. You are not saying he did achieve it or anything like
    it? - A. No, I do not even know whether he went to
    the match. I am just saying that he was there.
                                             a . TAYLOR


0. That is what you heard and the way in which you heard
   it was that it did not sound like wishful thinking.
   It sounded like what was involved? - A. He had a
   definite plan. He had already arranged for people to
   be there to meet them.
     THE CORONER:   Is that clear and do we want to ask any
more questions arising out of that? Mr. Taylor, I.am very
grateful to you.  Thank you very much indeed.

                    (Short Adjournment)

              MTrffAEL JOHN TISSINGTON (Sworn),

                      Wy THE CORONER:

Q. You are Michael John Tissington? - A. That is
   correct.
0. In 1989 you were in fact a Detective Sergeant I think
   and your collar number, I believe, was 182 at that
   time? - A. That is correct.
Q. Since then you have in fact retired? - A. I have.

Q. You have joined the lay population, so to speak? - A.
   Yes.
0. What I want to do is take you back to 1989, if I maY
   You reported for duty at about 8.30 in the morning at
   Rotherham because that was your station I believe?
   A. That is correct, yes.

Q. You were not a Sheffield man at that time? - A. Yes,
   I am.
 Q. You were not based in Sheffield at that time? - A.
    Not at that time.
 Q. You had a serial of Officers, is that right? - A.
    That is correct.
 Q. Just so that we know, although you are an ex Police
    Officer, you are the first Officer, ex or otherwise,
    whom we are hearing at this Inquest. That does not
    matter but I might have to ask you one or two things
    so that the Jury can understand. A serial is a term
    that is used for a group of between eight and ten
    Officers, is that right? ~ A. Yes, that is correct.
                                          M. J- TISSINGTON


Am I right in saying he is in charge. The Sergeant
is in charge of the serial? - A. That is correct.

There are so many serials under the care of an
Inspector and then so many Inspectors under the care
of a Chief Inspector? - A. Yes, it is a pyramid.

Although it is quite possible for a serial to be made
up of a Sergeant plus Police Constables only, it is
actually possible to have more than one Sergeant in a
serial? - A. Yes.
One would be designated as in charge, so to speak? -
A. Yes.
It is your task to keep them in order, tell them what
to do, when they can go and have their meals, is that
right or not? - A. Yes, roughly.
Subject to your   orders whicli come down? ~   A. Yes.

You have the serial and I do not think we    needgo
through all the names but there were about seven or
eight in your serial? — A. Correct, sir.

The Inspector to whom you reported was Steve Ellis?
A. Yes, that is  right, Steve Ellis.
You attended at Hillsborough Stadium initially some
time during the morning, is that right? — A. Yes.

There was a general briefing to everybody. There
were quite a lot of you, were there not? - A. I
should imagine the majority of Officers were at that
briefing.
We are talking about hundreds of Officers? ~ A.
Hundreds, quite a lot.
We will not go into that briefing. Your task was to
look after crowds away from the stadium, is that
right? - A. Yes, we were half a mile, three-quarters
of a mile away.
Where were you actually? - A. The best way to
describe it is that we were at Wardsend Road which
was facing the Wadsley Bridge railway station.

Wardsend Road is actually off the plan we have got at
-the moment. We have another one which is about to
                                                          89




                                            M. J. TISSINGTON .


  become available but we will have to just bear with
  it for the moment. Wardsend Road is a road off
  Halifax Road, is it not? - A. It is a small road, I —
  believe it is a cul-de-sac, off Halifax Road.

Q. Your job was the control of vehicles coming in? What
   was it? Can you just tell us what it was? - A.
   Specifically it was to park minibuses on Wardsend
   Road. They were being directed to us.

Q. This what you told your Officers to do? - A. Yes.

Q. Then you waited for the buses to come along? — A.
   Yes.
Q. What time did you get to Wardsend Road? - A. It would
   be about half past ten, eleven o'clock.

Q. At that time there was not anything happening of any
   moment? - A. No, very quiet.
Q . I think you popped into one of the local pubs. I do
    not know its name, can you say? - A. Yes, it was the
    Railway Hotel. I did not actually pop in. I was
    approached by the landlord.
0. What did he want? Did he want you to be there in
   case of any problems? - A. Briefly stated, he had had
   some slight damage the previous year and although he
   was closing the front door and he had boarded the
   windows he intended to leave the rear door open for
   his regular customers and anybody he thought would
   not cause any trouble and would we just in general
   keep an eye on the place and I agreed to that.

Q. In fact I think he was keen that if, what I might
   describe as, older people wanted a drink he did not
   mind you pointing them in the right direction? - A. I
   do recall him asking if there were anybody who wanted
   a drink and they were of the older type, would we
   inform them that the licensed premises were in fact
   open.
Q. That they could get in? ~ A. Yes, I do recall that
   actually.
 Q. The minibuses or coaches started arriving about 11.30
    or thereabouts, would that be right? — A. Yes. Not
    in the numbers I expected actually. There was a lull
    and a mini-coach or a van would arrive.
                                          M- J. TISSINGTON .


I think a lot of the people who came out were fairly
young, in their twenties? - A. Yes.

But the important point was that   they were, so far as
you could see, all happy and did   not appear to be
drinking and were in fact joking   with you? - A. No
problems whatsoever. The banter    was, you know, quite
good.
You were quite content and happy with whom you saw
and what you saw. It is important that these were
youngish people, is that right? - A. The majority
were the younger element. There were obviously
people of my age there and varying ages but mainly,
yes, younger people.
These buses or minibuses continued to arrive? - A.
Yes. There were in fact, if I may point out, two
types that we are talking about. There seemed to be
the actual organised minibus with a specific driver
of that company and the majority of those drivers
remained with the vehicle and then there would be
others where they had improvised a van, had put seats
in, they would arrive. There were two types.

Presumably the ones with drivers were more
comfortable because they were specially designed for
this? - A. They were the actual minibus designed for
carrying passengers.
Did you notice any difference between the people who
came out of one minibus as opposed to another
minibus? - A. Yes, there did not appear to be any
drink in evidence in the minibuses with drivers, none
at all, as if that was company rules. I do not know,
but that is the impression I got.

The ones that we will call the private ones, was
there evidence of drink? - A. Yes, some were quite
well stocked.
You mean the vans were? - A. Yes.

 Not the people? - A. No, no.
 Nevertheless you had no particular problems with any
 of these groups? - A. None whatsoever.

 I think in fact you did direct some of the older
 people towards this pub? - A. They could see it was
 boarded up and they were asking where they could get
                                                            91




                                                M. .T. TISSINGTON


     something - not always for drink but for refreshments
     because the landlord had put tea and coffee on as
     well - and I directed them. I did in fact go in to
     make sure everything was all right.
Q. Having discharged their loads, did most of the fans
   go down towards the ground? - A. Yes, they did.

Q    They set off? - A. You know, the usual questions, ”Is
     the ground far away?” You could virtually see the
     floodlights. You could see the ground and off they
     went on their merry way.
Q. What did they do with the drink? You said that some
   of the vans had drink in them. What did they do?
   Did they just leave it? - A. They just left it, apart
   from one van which was rather unusual.

Q. What happened there? - A. They got about four little
   round tables, which were'obviously licensed premises
   tables, and about four or five stools out in the car
   park.
Q. Out of the back of the van? - A. Yes.
Q. What did you say to them when you saw that? - A. I
   asked them, quite jovially, there was no problem.
   They were sat there. They had got sandwiches as
   well. They said, "We understood the public houses
   were going to be closed and so we brought our own
   mobile pub".
Q. You laughed and... - A. One particular      youth was
   spoken to but the others jumped on him      straight away
   and said, "Quieten down". He was told       to quieten
   down and he did. There was no problem       at all.

Q. At what time are we talking? What time are we
   talking about? - A. We are talking lunchtime.

Q. Twelve or one o'clock? - A. Yes.
Q. Beyond one o'clock? - A. There were still vans
   a r r i v i n g but we were surprised that we were not
   inundated as we thought we were going to be.

    Q. In fact I think I am right in saying that you
       actually started allowing private cars to park
       because you were not using up the space? _ A. I could
       see that Halifax Road was rather busy because we had
       directed that no cars could turn in. It was for
                                          M. J. TISSINGTON


minibuses and there was all this space. So I went
over to the Control Room and told them I could not
foresee many more minibuses and would it be in order
to allow cars to come in?
About what time is this? — A. This is getting round
for two o'clock.
You thought by then everybody had arrived? - A. Yes,
that is right.
Just on that point, did a load of minibuses arrive or
were you actually correct? - A. Yes.

You were right, were you? — A. I think I totalled the
minibuses to about seventeen if I remember correctly.

Whilst you were on site, so to speak, with your seven
or eight Officers you were all more or less in this
same area? - A. Yes.
I think you received visits from a couple of senior
Officers? - A. Yes.
Who were they? - A. First of all Chief Superintendent
Nesbitt who was touring the area in a Range Rover.
He spoke to us. He came. Later o n, Superintendent
Marshall on foot. He came and asked us to do some
specific things.

To do some? - A. Specific things.

What did he ask you to do? - A. There were two things
he asked. Would we check the minibuses to make sure
there were no weapons or anything that could cause
any problems at the ground and, secondly, would we
check for tickets and restrain anybody from going
down to the ground if they had not got a ticket.




                             /Q.    How were you going.
                                   M -T. TISSINGTON


How were you going to achieve that? - A. I don't really
toow   ?t nevlr arose because we did in fact get everyone.
In fact we checked them before they got     all aot^tickets
buses.  That was the easiest way.  They had all got tickets
that we checked.

So all the ones you checked had tickets? - A. Yes,             they
had all got tickets.
They were well behaved? - A.      No   problem with them at all.

And had tickets.  And except for that one who was not
really much of a problem in the end? - A. No.

And that is one individual you are talking about in fact?.
- A. Yes.
Can you remember the special train arriving?             A.   -es,
quite well.
Did you see it or did you just see the crowd? - A. 'I was
actually at the end of Wardsend Road and you could see
the train actually over the road.

 I see. - A. And there were two mounted O f f i c e r s ,     other
 O f f e r s on foot and I think a couple of Police dog vans.

 If you don't remember the time don't guess it but do you
 know what time it was? - A. I don't sir, certainly in
 good t im e .

 And there were several hundred ....        A. Oh yes.

 And aaain as far as you could see no           problems with  that?
 - A . f d J d n ' t see any problems.  The two mounted Offxcers
 were in front.        They more or less waited while everyone
 was off the train; brought them down and they all marchea
 off in a column.

. And it is right, did you see anybody     carrying cans    of
  beer-5 - A. Yes,, that is the one thing that strucK me
  that’they weren't just carrying one can they w e r e _carrying
  half dozen packs or these big plastic bottles coming down
  the road.
. Were these people who had come out of your mini-buses or
  were they a different lot? - A. I can't say thau but
  don't think so because the majority of the mini-bus
  people just went straight to the ground.  They were
  early.  I am talking now when  I went on toHalifax Road
  later on, much later on.

. What time about? - A. That       is between half-past-2 and
  about quarter-to-3 because       we left then.
                                 M-.-r. TISSINGTON


so the people who came in the raini:b^ se^: n°|h^ U i!?tY°ou
don't know w h a t h a p pened to tnem, b u t w t e n Y  Y
at Wardsend Road up to say half-past-1/2 o
you thought "That is it" they did not carry cans,
were well behaved; they were no trouble . . .
whatsoever.
And in fact were good fun? - A. Good humour, good fun.
in fact we commented that it was a typical you know
good Liverpudlian h u m o u r .

But when you had finished with your partner you were re-
l e p l o j K on Halifax Road. Is that what you are « y i n g ?
- A. No, I kept going on to Halifax Road and ther„ was
quite a build-up of traffic there.

vehicles? - A. Vehicular traffic and quite a few people
still going down to the ground for that time.

And that was about what time? - A. That                  halx-past 2
and we were leaving there at quarter-to,      10-to 4.

 so between that time that is when you saw peop 1®.               '•
 A. That is when, you know.  It is not
 I am saying this.  It struck me at the time that I could
 not understand people going to a semi-.inal so late
 these cans of beer.

 How long does it take to walk from where *°u Y°r®' ?j||,
 Wardsend Road and Halifax Road area down to the ground.
 -    Normally it would take ten minutes.

 It may take a bit longer? - A. May be if you are dodging
 in between people.

, just to get this right:  were you able to
  which club these people were supporting.      .
  you could tell by the accents and the maioj-iuy of
  Liverpool people were coming in that way.    i co^     would
  specifically say they were all Liverpool, fa:ns, u
  be wrong but the majority, because they_had b e e n directed
  in this way which was a natural way in irom the M6-.

. So you are not saying that every single one of them was
  but your impression was that the majority were? - A.
  Yes, the majority I know were Liverpool.

. Just again to make this absolutely clear, although these
  lads and lassies for all I know, were carrying these
       and i S f dowS the road, as     as y o u yourself were
  concerned you had no problems with them? - A. We
  have any problems with them at all.

. But you were a bit surprised that (a) they left it a
  bit late and (b) that they were drinking wnen they
  w e r e going to a match? - A. Well I had not seen this tne
                                                              9 ‘d

A                                     M .J .   TISSINGTON


         year before.  This is what I think struck me so much.  I
         hid been in a similar position the year before and I
         not seen this, I had not witnessed this sort of tnxng.

    Q. Were you  in the same location? - A. No, I was actually
B      on Leppings Lane the year b e f o r e . .

    Q. I see, nearer the ground? - A. Yes, directing most of the
       Liverpool fans in.

    Q. What is it that you had not seen the year before, t*1®
       carrying of the cans or the ....  A. I had not seen the
       people carrying cans in so many numbers.  You know
       everyone probably walks through with one can.  I am not
       saying I would or you would or the majority of the people
       in this robm would.  To see young people why they have
       got to have half-a-dozen cans struck me as being why?

    Q. One of the things that has puzzled I think people is^
       why did you not stop them and take all these cans ofj.
       them? - A. Well I think that would have been impractical,
       you could not have done that.  I think that would nave
       been an invitation to trouble and at that stage we were
D      having no trouble whatsoever.  I think that would have
       been

    Q.   In fact, you may be the wrong person to answer this and
         if you are say so, would you have had any powers to     ^
         remove them in that location where you were? - A. I don't
         think we have and I have got to confess I am not terribly
         conversant with the licensing lav/s.

    Q. It was I think part of the arrangement or the order,
       whatever the correct term is, Operational Order, that
       you would go and have a meal I think in Claywheels Lane?
     — - a . Yes.

    Q. And that was scheduled for what time about? - A. Roughly
       3 o'clock or if our duties permitted to obtain a meal
       as soon as possible and then remain just on standby in
       fact at Claywheels Lane.

    Q. And then you were going to be redeployed presumably at:
       the same sort of location when the match was over if
       it had all gone well? - A. Yes.

     Q. Your particular pass did not include attending within
        the ground, you were going to have a meal, relax ....
        A. No, we were not ordered to go to the ground at all
        at that stage.

     Q. And in fact you and your serials set off from your
        position at Wardsend Road at about what time? — A. It
        would be quarter-to-3 , 10-minutes-to-3.




H
                                    M.J. TISSINGTON



Towards Claywheels Lane? ~ A. Yes.

How long would that be? - A. That is just at the bottom
of the hill.  It is a very short distance away.

And as you were going down you think you heard a radio
message didn't you about the match.  Can you remember
that? - A. I don't know in which order.  There was a
radio message.  In actual fact it was the voice of a
chap I knew was giving the message out.

What is his name? - A. Goddard.  They were jj?k *n 9
the South Yorkshire Transport Inspectors.  That was tn
first message to ask them to stop any transport,
transport going up Leppings Lane as it was so congested
I heard that clearly and then I heard a message, 1 a o n t
know how, I was equipped with a radio, that the match
had been stopped.

    Had been stopped or postponed? - A. No, I can't say
    whether they said postponed, but I remember remarking
    that they had stopped the match for some reason.

    Did you hear any messages to suggest that the kick-off
    had been delayed? - A. That may have been the same
    message.  I could not answer that.

    But at the moment you can't remember whether you heard
    that or not? - A. No, not emphatically sir no, s o m e J u n g
    to the effect that either (a) or one of those three
    that you just said, postponed, stopped, delayed.

    Did you hear any more messages? - A. Yes, they came
    over the radio and asked for all available Officers
    to go to the Leppings Lane, end as there was some crowd
    trouble.---
. Did you look at your watch by chance? - A. I didn't.
  It would be 3 o'clock or minutes after, around .that
  time, I d o n 't k n o w .

.    But you can't say precisely? - A. No, I can't.

. I don't know where you were when you were going down.
  Could you hear crowd noises or was it too tar? - A.
  in actual fact we. were just turning into Claywheels
  Lane which is 25 yards from the bottom of Leppings Lane,

. it is off the roundabout? - A. Yes, the roundabout.
  That is when the message came over "Would all a vailable
  Officers g o " .

. And in fact you took your serial and headed up towards
  Leppings Lane entrance? — A. I did in fact meet anotner
  Inspector who had got about three, four serials wi-n nim
  When we turned to go to Leppings Lane he was coming tne
  other way.- He had obviously not heard the transmission.
                                                              97

                                      M.J. TISSINGTON



      He asked me where we were going and I told him and he said:.
      "“That is not our brief, we have got to go and get a meal".
      I said:   "Well you had better check because they are asking
      for all available Officers'* and he did in fact check and
      we went up together.
B
    Q. That was I think Inspector Charles? - A. That is right,
       yes.

    Q. So there were six Serials,   in fact, quite a few Officers?
       - A. Quite a few Officers.

    Q. And you approached the Leppings Lane entrance I think.
       Would that be right? - A. Not exactly, we got to, I can't
       recall the last road on the left before the ground.

    Q. Vere Road actually? - A. Vere Road sir.  We stopped there,
       lined the Serials up.   Someone went ahead to find out
       what they wanted from us.  There was a lot of people
       about and the next  thing I recall is either Inspector
       Charles or another Inspector, Meeke, saying:  "They want
       us in the ground" and we more or less ran up to the
       ground actually.
D
    Q. You say there were a lot of people around.   Are you talking
       about a lot of Police Officers or were there a lot of
       supporters? - A . A lot of supporters there.

    Q. And what were they doing just as a matter of interest,
       were they trying to get in, were they coming out or were
       they just standing? - A. Mainly just standing but milling
       around because it was quite unusual, there was like a
       tunnel formed for us by other Police Officers to get through
       the first gates so that we weren't prevented from going
       in and we went straight through the big blue gate into
       the enclosure.

    Q. Are we talking about the outer perimeter gates.  Can
       you put I think 353 I think that is the overhead, or one
       of them anyway.  Are we talking about those gates? - A.^
       No, we are talking on the photograph further to the rignt.

    Q. Well we will have the other one, hang on, this is 254,
       that is the next one.  Do you find having these overheads
       useful, we have used them once or twice, what about you,
       ladies and gentlemen, I think they are quite helprul?
       Are we talking about this? - A. That is the gate.

    Q. Point, the second one .... Those were open and there was
       like a tunnel of Police Officers leading straight in
       through the other blue gates.     I can't recall whether
       it was that gate or t h a t . I can't recall which.  I am
       sure it was that one where we went directly to the
       enclosure.

                                     Q. Do you want
                                                                           yb
                                                         J.   T IS S IiiG r O i?




    0   ./Do you want to go and look at the model,      then we will
          cone back? - A. Yes.

          (The witness used the model to illustrate his evidence)
B   Q. It is Gate C - can you put 259 up - so just so -that we
       nave got tnat tight, you entered tnrough tne outer
       perimeter gates, through the centre gates opposite
       turnstiles A-G, and then througn a gate at tne side
       which is in fact Gate C? - A. Yes.

    0. T-nen you worked your way towards the tunnel entrance in
       the concourse area? - A. Lio, we stopped immediately in
       front of tae tunnel.

    Q. 3ut you hadn t         -A.   ',ie had not   2 one under the
       tunnel, no.

    0. Can we put 263 up, just to aake absolutely sura?    In
       fact, I know we have got it right hut     sUignt as well,
       That is C253 - that is it, isn t it? - A. L~.aediatel/
       in front of that,  we were inmad lately in front.
D   0. And having stopped there what happened then? - A. I
       believe there was actually a couple of supporters lying
       on the ground being attended to, and then a couple more
       were brought up the tunnel, and at this stage I just,
       we just assumed it was, you know, a fainting incident,
       and what we, in fact, did, I think by that tisne we got
       split up, and I was with about 15 Officers and we
       formed a circle round these people - taere were people
       billing about by this tine - in order tnat tney could
       receive treatment.  They were receiving treatment fror:
       Police Officers, and we just formed a circle round thei
       so that tney had got roosa to work, but then more people
       were brougnt out.

          And then you began to realise that something was
          happening? - A. Oh, yes.  I thought tnis was >30 re than
          a fainting situation.

    0. Did you go down the tunnel at all? - A. Yes, whilst I
       was actually stood nearest the entrance to the tunnel
       young Officer came running out of the tunnel, and ne
       was more or less screaking,  Get 3 o.ne .aan in nere,
       need everybody inside tne ground” , and all those tnat
       formed a circle we went under the tunnel.

    0. Througn tne tunnel, you aeaa? - A. Through the tunnel,
       onto the back of the terrace, and pushed our way - we
       could see that it was tur.noil at the front - pusned our
       way to the front.
                                                          99

                                               j. IIS3IHGT0H




Q . y«aat I aia interested in, first of all, can you reaeaber
     wnich side you went down? - A. Yes.

0. Did you go .... - A . I reae&ber this because initially
   I said I was with Inspector Charles.     There were soae
   railings there, I went to tne right of the railings and
   Inspector Charles went to the left, and I went to tne
   rigat with about tan chaps, maybe m o r e I don t know at
   this stage, and I went to the rignt and went to tae
   front, we pushed our way to the front of tne crowd.

0. You can't say what tiae tnat was at all? - A. :io, I
   can* t.

0. Was the aatch still being played? - A. .<o, I recall I
   ara certain there were still soae players on taa pi tea,
   but certainly there was no match being played.   ihere
   was quite a large crowd actually on the pitca.

Q. Yes, but you seeia to recollect that tnere ware soae
   players because I recollect soaebody in a tracksuit
   dragging somebody away, saying, "Come away", or “Couse
   off the pitch".

Q.   What I am interested in, and if you can't remember taen
     please say so, when you entered tne   tunnel  — not the
     tunnel, wnen you exited tae tunnel onto tne terrace,
     immediately upon entering onto the terrace were there
     supporters at that location? - A. On, yes.

0.   Can you remember which way they were facing?   It is a
     vary difficult question because you probably dian't
     apply your radnd to taat at taa tiae. - A. I couldn't
     answer you that, sir, in all honesty.

Q. Were there --- how difficult was it tor you to jet
   through the tunnel?   I aa talking aoout^ tne tunnel. -
   A. Surprisingly easy.   A lot of the supporters, in
   fact, had tended to raove back.  There were still
   supporters there because in fact I carried several
   people out with the assistance of supporters as^ «ell as
   Police Officers, and so supporters were there, but tney
   had in fact - I wouldn't say moved back all together
   but wa didn't hava to fight our way tarougn.    I nean we
   saoved people out of the way, yas, to get there.

 Q. But you didn't have the impression that tae supporters
    at the rear of tne enclosure were trying to coaa out
    through tne tunnel? - A. Oh, tne tunnel, we took
    several people.  I must have carried ....

 0. rfo, taat is not the question,   what I an interested in
    is not the ones that you carried out.     I will cone to
    that briefly in a :no;.iant. what I a a interested in is
                                                !i. J . IISSIJCTOti




   'the ones, if I can put it like tais, vmo were standing
    up.   what were the/ doing?  Were they stationary, were
     they trying to go forward, were they trying to go
    sideways, or were they cosing back through tne tunnel?
~ - -- A. A lot were going through the tunnel.  A lot were
    going through the tunnel - sonts were even being dragged
     into the stand.

0. Yes, I realise that, but what was the volume of people
   coaling back up through the tunnel? - A. There was quite
   a few going back up the tunnel, even before we went
   onto the terrace spectators were running up the tunnel
   back into that enclosure.

Q. Yes, where you had originally taken your .... - A. Yes.

Q. Did you notice whetaer anybody was moving --- at the
   back of the terrace there is a gate which leads into
   enclosure 2, I will tell you that.  You were in
   enclosure 3 - did you notice whether anybody was trying
   to aova sideways out of that gate? - A. Ho, I didn t.

Q. 8ut you did see people being pulled up to txie stands
   above you? - A. Yes.   You had got to be there at taat
   tiuse to appreciate everything was happening at once.

Q. I know it is very difficult, and to sit here, it is
   difficult for you ana for everybody, in fact.   I
   appreciate that.  Anyway having got onto the terrace
   you, in fact, brought between eight and ten people
   back? - A. We started taking them back tarouga tae
   tunnel but then the tunnel becaae corapleted blocked.
   That exit to us was completely blocked.

Q. What blocked it? - A. Supporters and people trying to
   get out of that terrace.            It was completely blocked.
   l i e c o u l d n *t get any aiore of tne injured people tarouga
   there.

0. where was it blocked - in tae middle, at tais end? - A.
   Wall, 1 can't say, but froa the terrace end there was
   no way we could get through it, no way.   At first taere
   was no problera, we were running through with people,
   giving theta heart massage, kiss of life, ana it was no
   problem at first.   I think I went eight, tan tines, I
   forget, with different --- you know, with supporters,
   witii other Officers and it was no problem at first and
   then suddenly, I don't know whether the rest of tae
   supporters suddenly, as people aoved back, saw what was
   in front of theta and taen aoved oack.  The aajority
   were very good - you didn't aave to tell anybody twice
   wnat to do.
                                                                        101

                                                  ii.   j   .   riSbii^iQ ii




    Q. You said you took about eight or tan people bac.<, you
       can't remember exactly now iaany? - A • o «

    Q. Having taken somebody bactt did you just take tnefii, drop
B      thea,   leave thera with somebody else, or did_you
       actually work 0 0 them? - A. At first we were working on
       tneia,  then it was farbetter, there was quits a few
       Officers then in the enclosure, to leave them with tne:.i


    v* And    back? - A. And go back and get sonebody else
       out.

    Q. Yes.   H o n , this is a vary difficult question but_vnat
       period of tiae do you reckon was spent by you tailing
       these eight or ten people, however .aanv it was,
       backwards and forwards, but given what you have just
       told ae? - A. I haven't a clue, sir.      It was a case 01
       —    I haven't a clue.

    Q. Okay.  The next thing that happened was that you
       decided you couldn't get back through tnis tunnel
       because for some reason it was blocked.  Just one aora
       question - did you notice whether the blockage, if I
       can call it that, was due to people      lying on t*ie floor
       or just people ...? - A. Not in tne      entrance to it, no.
       Not in the actual --- I mean I couldn't say naif-way
       down the tunnel but the immediate entrance from the
       terrace to the tunnel became blocked to us.

    0. And the people were standing up? - A. Oh, yes.               They
       were trying to get out.

    0. You don't know why it was that they couldn't .nake
       progress? - A. ISo.

    Q. So you then aiaed to go the other way I take it? - A.
       ‘
       .Jell, there was a Superintendent, .Tty bast recollection
       of this man was that he virtually nung nijaself on tae
       ranee with a uiegaphone ana was saying, «  «T7
                                                 "Forrn a cnaxn,
       we nave got to get these people and we nave got to do
       it in soae semblance of order", because I could see
       that there were people alive at the bottom of tnis pile
       and we couldn't get them out.   There were arms moving
       and legs, and we couldn't get to tne:a, so we naa to
       start at the top.   We had to do it and I remember this
       Superintendent — I don't know whether nis nane was
       Greenwood or Murray, one of those two - I nave never
       worked with them.

        Yes, out it was a Superintendent? - A. A
                                                   ti:-
                                                      3>ass
                                                        _ _ _ tnen
        Superintendent, with a megaphone,, saying,
        out.  Gat thern through this gate anc get tnem oa the
                                !«
        pitch, and foro a chain




H
                                                               102
                                                    J. TISSIiiGTON




    O.'This was the small gats   at the front? - A. Tiia small
       gate at the front, just   to the right, I thiruc, of the
       goal, as I recollect, and then some Officers started
       immediately where the aain concentration o t victims
B      ware, were tearing at the fence.    I d o n ’t know, I snow
       Chief Superintendent Hesbit, he was one .ot .tnaa, and
       they ware literally tearing the fence down with tneir
       hands.

    Q. Tha fence was, in fact, torn d o w n . _ we know that
       because we have got it on video evidence and tnere is
       no question about it.   Can you remember whetner the
       □egaphone conversations occurred betore tne fence was
       torn down or afterwards? - A. I can't. To answer tnat
           it all seeaed to be at the same time, aappening at
       the sa.ue time.

    0. I appreciate that it is very difficult, particularly in
       a situation such as that, so don't —   if you can't
       remember I would rather you say you can't. - A. i-Io, I
       can't.

D   Q. I think you saw Chief Superintendent Nesbit tnere as
       well, didn't you? - A. He was mainly working on the
       fence with ....

    Q. That is your recollection of that? - A. Yes, he \»as
       actually on the pitch,  tfe were still on the terrace
       and this other Superintendent was directing getting
       victims out.

    0. And you passed bodies forward as best as you could? -
       A. We did it in a cnain.

    Q.    Was the cnain within the terrace or on the outside of
         the terrace, can you remember? - A. Well, I was
         involved in a chain within the terrace.   I don't know
         what was happening on the outside.

    Q. And the idea was to pick people up, pass thera down tne
       chain, through the gate and then .... - A. Through the
       gate and eventually we did it through the fence, but
        first of all it was through the gate wnere this
      . Superintendent was. I don't think - if he  had not took
       a hold of that particular situation I don't know wuera
       we would have gone, but he too < commanc ot it.  we
        formed a chain - I know it probably took a little
        longer, but that was the only way we could do it.



                       /Q. I believe at sone point ...




H
                                  M.   TISSIN G TO N




I believe at some point you actually s.aw the Assistant
Chief Constable as well? - A. That was some time...     We
had been...  All the victims had been removed.

This was later.    You don't have to tell me about that.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.   You w i 11_remember that I
had outlined a plan of campaign, if you like, as to tae
evidence.   The reason why Mr. Tissington is nere is
because I was interested in his evidence as to wnat
happened outside, but I thought it was an opportune
moment to give him the opportunity to say what had
happened.   Having introduced it you can, of course, ask
him questions because he was there.    However, the m a m
objective of my calling him was because I wanted m m to
deal with Wardsend Lane and the parking and chings like
that, but if you want to explore some of the things    e
has said then do so, but you will realise, of course,
from having seen the list of potential witnesses tnat
there are quite a lot who will be able to talk about
various matters.

      I      am not trying to inhibit you,       I am just trying to
 give you some guidance.

      It is twenty past four.  We are supposed to finish
 at four.  Would it be best if we deferred cross-
 examination until tomorrow?   I think it would be better
 because if we start, I don't know how long it will ta.^e.

      Would you be good enough to be here in the morning?
 We will start with you.   Mr. Tissington, it would be
 improper for you to discuss the matter tonight.  I am
 sure you will be aware of that.   Mr. Tissington, we are
 not starting until 10.30 tomorrow because we have got
 legal submissions at the beginning.   I nope we will nave
 finished by then.

               (In the absence of the jury)

      THE CORONER:   Is there anything that any of you
 wants to raise with me tonight?   Very well, we can all
 go.   Mine-thirty tomorrow.

(The Inquests were adjourned until the following m o r nin g)
