HER MAJESTY *S COROWER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
              (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.
                   On

           23rd January, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J.L. Harphan, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Steffield SI 2DX
                    INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




ARTHUR BUTLER

   By THE CORONER
   Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE
   Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS
   Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING
   Further by THE CORONER
   Further Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING
                           ERRATA

Day 30


Page 61, line 7, "people" should read "Police"
           THIRTY SIXTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS
            WEDNESDAY, 23rd JANUARY 1991

            ARTHUR BUTLER Called (Sworn)

                   By THE CORONER

Good morning. - A. Good morning, sir.

You are Arthur Butler, I believe, aren't you? - A. I
am, sir.

You are Principal District Surveyor, Sheffield City
Council, is that right? - A. Yes.

You are based in this building, is   it? - A. In the
extension to this building, sir.

Mr . Butler, I wonder if I could ask you to lean forward
and get your head to within two or three inches of the
microphone, otnerwise we cannot hear you. - A. I do
apologise, sir.

It is not your fault.  Most people think it is right to
sit back but these, as has been explained to me, are
directional and you have to get close.  Now, how long
have you actually been with the City Council, Mr.
Butler? - A. I started in November of 1985.

I think you then started as Principal District
Surveyor? - A. I was appointed to that post, sir.

Your involvement with the stadium at Hillsborough, and
indeed any work in Sheffield, your personal
involvement, dates from post-1985? - A. Yes, sir.

But of course you have access to records and so on
wnicft you nave been able to look up, and no doubt did
do over a period of time, if you wanted to find out
what nad occurred on previous occasions? - A. Yes, sir.

We, of course, are concerned with the disaster whicn
occurred at the Hillsborough Stadium and in particular,
as far as you are concerned, we are trying to look into
the question of the Safety Certificate and the various
activities surrounding that, as far as it is relevant
to the Inquest. - A. I understand.

Am I right in thinking that your first involvement with
the Stadium and the Safety at Sports Grounds Act
matters occurred in about mid-March 1986? - A. Yes,
                                                         2
                                               A. BUTLER

You, I think, attended a meeting at that time when the
transfer of responsibilities from South Yorkshire
County Council to the City Council took place? - A.
That is right, sir.

That is because South Yorkshire County Council was
being abolished? - A. The demise was due at the end of
that month.

You may not have any recollections of that meeting, but
does anything stand out in your mind which was said
which alerted you, or which made you think that some
activity on your part was required, or would be
required immediately the Council took over
responsibility? - A. Not necessarily, sir.  The
division which I represented then had been involved
with the Safety at Sports Grounds issue since the Act
came into force.

In fact, you have anticipated my next question which is
that although the City was taking over responsibility
for enforcement, your department had already been
involved with aspects for several years prior to that?
- A. Yes, indeed.

I think one of the people who attended a lot of the
meetings was somebody called Mr. Sheriff, is that
right? - A. He did indeed, sir.

Would I be right in thinking that the way the matter
was dealt with until sometime after July '86 was by
having what is known as an Officers' Working Party? -
A. Yes, sir.

The Officers' Working Party, could you just tell me
briefly what it consisted of? - A. It was originally
set up by the County Council structure, as I
understand, in that the County then sought advice from
the Police, the Fire Authority and the Building
Authority, who were the Sheffield City Council.

Wnat was the purpose which the County initially was
seeking?  What is it that they were after from the
Police, Fire and Building Authorities? - A. An input of
professional advice for looking to the reasonable
safety of sports grounds.

Was that because an Act of Parliament had been passed
in 1975 which provided that certain sports grounds
could be designated and would have to have a
certificate if they were going to be allowed to
continue operation? - A. Yes, sir.   This was pursuant
to the Safety at Sports Grounds Act.
I think I am right in saying, and perhaps you will
confirm this, that the procedure was that if somebody
had a sports ground which had been designated, which I
think meant that you had to have more than 10,000
spectators or thereabouts, tney had .to apply to the
local autnority for a Safety Certificate? - A. Yes,
sir.

It was then the responsibility of the local authority
to issue that certificate, having satisfied themselves
on (a) the suitability of the applicant and (b) the
safety aspects or any conditions which they wished to
impose, would that be right? - A. Indeed, this was the
authority that was designated by the Act which in this
case was, pre-86, the County Council.

VJhat I am trying to find out from you at this stage is
- I realise you weren't there in '79 but you are
familiar with the Act and you are familiar with tne
department - what you envisaged would be the activity
or input of your department to the decision and
formulation to license or to grant the certificate to
the applicant, who we know to be Sheffield Wednesday? -
A. The documents then told me that it was an input of
professional information regarding the structural
stability of the structures around the ground.

when you say structures, do you mean the hardware,
bricks and mortar? - A. The buildings and the barriers.

You mean the crush barriers? - A. The crush barriers.

Does that also include things like radial fences and
front fences or not? - A. For their structure and
stability, yes, sir.

For their structure and stability you say.  And was the
objective of your department to satisfy tnemselves that
these items which you have mentioned were reasonably
safe and met a minimum standard? - A. That was the
objective, sir.

Is it right that in about 1979 the County Council did
issue a Safety Certificate? - A. As far as I see from
the documentation, sir.

You, of course, were not there and so you cannot say
whether or not - or perhaps you can - do you know
whether these structures, barriers and so on, were
inspected and that a decision was taken by your
predecessor in title or tne responsible officer that
the criteria had been met with regard to'these matters?
- A. There are various references in documentation
                                                A. BUTLER

which suggest that the ground was assessed for its
reasonable safety.

Tne Act provided for inspections, didn't it, by the
licensing authority subsequently, is that right? - A.
Yes, sir.

And in   fact the method adopted by the County Council
was to   nave biannual inspections? - A. Yes, indeed.

Twice a year, in other words - not once every two
years, but twice in one year, that is right, isn't it?
- A. Yes, sir.

They set up what we have already referred to as the
Officers' Working Party, that is right, isn't it? - A.
Yes, sir.

wnich you have described.  Was it the intention that
tnis Officers' Working Party should visit the site -
well, you tell me what the purpose of these inspections
was? - A. As far as the inspections, then that was a
visit to the site in order to check on the matters
wnich would affect reasonable safety at that time.

Was it intended as a check to see whether tne holder of
the certificate had complied with the requirements of
the certificate, or to have an input to him if
something was noticed which was thought needed
remedying or correcting? - A. As far as our own input,
then I take it that that was to check whether any
material fact needed to be remedied.

Inese inspections, in fact, took place over several
years, didn't they, prior to your joining the Council,
and you know that from your records? - A. Yes, sir.

Would I be right in saying that various matters were
from time to time picked up by the inspections? - A.
Yes, indeed.

would it be rignt to say tnat these, on the whole, were
of a relatively minor nature or not? - A. Many issues
according to documentation were of a minor nature.  It
depends upon the interpretation of that.

Let me put the question to you another way.  Was
anything picked up and is there any record in the
documentation that you are aware of, which led the
County Council either to commence prosecution or to
apply a pronibition notice, which I think you were
entitled to do? - A. No, sir.
                                               A. BUTLER

Perhaps we could deal with the prohibition notice.
That is a notice to say that you- may not continue using
the ground until certain matters have been put right,
would that be right? - A. That is right, yes.

The Officers' working Party - you have said who were
tne members of it - it did not, as a matter of course,
have representatives of the Club or the Club engineers
on it, did it? - A. The constituents of the Working
Party did not include the Club or their engineers.
However, there is reference in many of the meetings
that tne Club or their representatives were present at
tnose meetings.




           /Q. So what you are saying
                            6                     A. BUTLER


  So what you are saying these meetings...   Were they
  usually on the site or off-site? - A. They have been in
_ both as far as I am aware.

 If the club were represented at some of those meetings
 would that indicate there was a considerable degree of
 co-operation between the parties? - A. Yes, definitely.

 Did the Officers' Working Party have an executive
 authority in the sense that they could authorise
 activities or approve changes? - A. I am not sure of that
 legal fact, sir.

 Now you are, of course, aware there was a document known
 as the Green Guide? - A. Yes, sir.

There is a third edition now, but there were two editions
at the relevant time, is that correct? - A. It depends
which was the relevant time, sir.

Between 1979 and 1989? -A. Yes, sir.

The Green Guide specified certain criteria which it
recommended should apply in stadia which were designated,
is that right? - A. It does give guidance to those
matters, yes, sir.

Does it also contain references to what should be done in
relation to existing structures? - A. Yes, it does, sir.

In what way does it deal with the application of its
guidelines to existing structures? - A. It suggests that
flexibility should be used.

What does that mean to a professional like you? - A. It
means that you should not necessarily have to comply with
the individual requirements, but to consider as to why
those requirements were within that guidance and to
achieve a reasonable degree of safety.

You use the words "reasonable degree of safety", is that
a term which is used in that Guide?   There is reasonable
safety, there is absolute safety and there is no safety.
Why use the words "reasonable safety"? - A. That term is
within the Guide in that it suggests that ultimate degree
of safety, or words to that effect, cannot be assured.

Are you saying that that is a fact of life which is
recognised by the Guide, that it is not possible to
ensure absolute safety? - A. Yes.

Even if you were building a brand new stadium with the
Guide in front of you would you still take that view that
                          7                     A.. .BUTLER


it is not possible to have absolute safety? - A. I would,
sir.

You would say that? -A. Yes, sir.

Do you know that when the Safety Certificate was first
issued in 1979 the Leppings Lane terrace was an open
expanse, with no radial fences? - A. That's right.

It did have I believe at that time already the pitch
perimeter fence.   Are you aware of that? - A. As I
understand by interpretation of certain documentation.

I think implied from your answers already, you are not
directly concerned with the number of people who would be
allowed to go on to the terracing, is that right? - A.
The Division as I understand it was not at that time.

I'm sorry? - A. The Division of the building surveyors
was not dealing with that situation directly at the time
you are concerned with.

It might have been mentioned as part of the discussions,
but your understanding is that it was somebody else who
was responsible for deciding how many people could get on
to the terracing? - A. As far as I understand it, sir.

And how they could get off? - A. Yes.

You also know that the Certificate itself provides that
if any substantial changes are made, application should
be made for variation to the Authority?    Is that
correct? - A. As I understand the wording.

Do you know whether in fact in 1981 changes were made to
the terracing by the erection of radial fences? - A. The
documents then advise me, sir.

From those documents can you say what the reasoning was
for the installation of those radial fences? - A. It was,
as I understand it, to segregate fans of different clubs
at that stage.




                 Q. Did it have anything
                                A. BUTLER



Did it have anything to do with an incident which had
occurred at the match in 1981? - A. There is a vague
reference to that within documentation but not one which
I have been able to tell what was the specific problem.

The radial fences themselves presumably fell within the
departmental purview in the sense they were structures.
Is that right? - A. Yes sir.

What then was your input, when I say "your" I mean your
departmental input to that decision? - A. As far as I
am aware then to check the structural stability of the
structures which were to be erected.

Are you saying that it did not involve a consideration
as to whether or not the erection of them would affect
the safety of the spectators within, or on the terracing
as a whole? - A. Although I believe that there may have
been such an input there is nothing in documentation to
advise me so.

Do you know whether there is anything in the documentation
to show that the application was made for the Safety
Certificate to be amended? - A. I don't believe it was
sir.

You don't? - A. No.

But it is clear is it from the documentation that whether
or not there was any formal application the County Council
in the sense through the Officers' Working Party was well
aware what was going on? - A. Yes, indeed.

Are you aware whether between 1981 and 1986 when you
yourself became involved, whether anybody raised the issue
of the need for amendment to the Safety Certificate? -
A. Not as I am aware sir.

Did anybody raise the issue that the erection or con­
struction of these fences could constitute a danger to
the people within or on the terraces? - A. Knowing many
of the professional Officers that have been concerned
with this on the Working Party then I sun quite certain
that had they have considered it a danger then they
would not have allowed their erection.

And it follows from that that no intimation was given
to the Club, or indeed anybody else, that they were
considered to be in breach of their obligation under
the Safety Certificates, obligations or duties? - A. I
can't find any reference to that sir.

Is there any reference in your records about gates at the
rear of these radial fences? - A. Yes sir.
                                A. BUTLJ5R



Can you help me what those were intended for as far as you
know from your records? - A. As far as my interpretation
df my records then to enable the spectators to pass from
one area to another whilst the two areas, the two adjacent
areas would be allocated for the same group of supporters
and to be shut when the two adjacent dreas were allocated
either for spectators of different teams or indeed where
one of the areas was to be a sterile area.

Do you know whether they were intended to be used as means
of escape as well? - A. I am not sure of the individual
references to that subject.

When I asked you whether anybody had raised any objection
I did not mean simply the Building Surveyor   Department,
I meantwhether you were aware whether anyone had raised
any objection to this construction? - A. That was how I
understood the question.

That is fine. Time passed on and the City Council took
over responsibility of enforcement I think on the 1st of
April 1986. That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes sir.

You had attended this meeting which you have already
described and then I think you attended an Officers'
Working Party inspection on site. Is that right? - A. Yes
sir.

That was in fact your first contact, so to speak, real
contact with the ground. Would that be right? - A. It
was either the first or second.

And you went yourself on that occasion, did you, would
that be right or was it your representative? - A. I was
at that meeting.

When was that. Can you just remind me? - A. I believe
the inspection that you are referring to was the
7th August 1986.




                   Q. At that meeting
                                               A. BUTLER

'At that meeting was there any discussion regarding
 the barriers which obviously falls within your
 province, does it not? - A. Yes, there was, sir.

 Can you tell me what the nature of those discussions
 were? - A. The Police suggested that barriers should
 be removed in order to achieve a better degree of
 safety.

Was this, in fact, a particular barrier near the top
end of Pen 3? - A. It was indeed, sir.

Was the problem that people were congregating against
that barrier? - A. As I recollect from that
discussion when spectators were coming out of the
tunnel entrance then they came to this particular
barrier and then stopped and so were causing an
obstruction to other people free flowing from that
tunnel mouth.

You say this was a suggestion in the interests of
safety so far as you remember? - A. Yes, sir.

Was it discussed by the Officers' Working Party at
the time? - A. Yes, indeed.

What aspects of safety were considered at that
time? - A. There were many matters. The fact of
whether it would be better to remove that barrier or
to leave it in place was the major question, being
that the Police had made that request for its
removal. Then they also stated, yes, it was causing
that particular problem of obstruction, being I
considered various issues in relation to that, being
that its removal would alleviate the problem of
spectators backing up actually into the tunnel, that
even if there was a localised incoming crush then
that would be seen on the terracing area rather than
actually being within the tunnel, being that it was
understood that there would be a Police presence
actually on the terracing and that they would
endeavour to keep the tunnel mouth clear so that it
could be used as a means of egress without the
barrier being there. I also saw that the Police
Control Box was relatively near to that area and
assumed that had there have been a problem subsequent
to its removal then it would be relatively easy to
see that. The means of escape from that particular
area was obviously good because of the existence of
the tunnel. Those were the issues which were
considered both in thought and I voiced those issues
at the time, that we were considering the issue.
                                              A. BUTLER

/The upshot of it was that it was agreed at that
 meeting that that barrier could be removed, is that
 right? - A. Yes, I believe so.

Subsequent to that event and prior to 15th April 1989
did you receive any reports or did it occur at any
inspection that any problems had arisen as a result
of that removal? - A. No, sir. I never received any
such reports.

Would I be right in thinking that this particular
request did not originate with the Club or the
engineers but that it emanated from the Officers'
Working Party or one its members? - A. Yes.

In fact, it was discussed with the Club through its
representative, who I think was there, but it was a
decision of the Officers' Working Party to presumably
instruct the Club to undertake the removal? - A. Yes,
indeed.

That is right, is it not? - A. Yes, sir.

You have mentioned a lot of points which were
considered. Did you consider whether the removal of
the barrier could create increased pressures on crush
barriers further down? - A. Yes, by the removal of
any part of the structure then you look at the
effects that it is likely to have.

On balance you felt that it was satisfactory and in
the interests of safety to remove it, is that what
you are saying? - A. At the time I considered on
balance of safety then it was safer to actually
remove the lengths of barrier than it was to keep
tli6m....

Where they were? - A. Where they were.

I just want to stick with the barriers for the moment
because these felt clearly within your departmental
responsibility in the sense of supervision. That is
right, is it not? - A. Yes.

The barriers had to be tested I think 20 per cent
every year or thereabouts every year, that is right,
is it not? - A. Yes.

There were various criteria laid down which can be
argued about at length but they were laid down in the
Green Guide as to how they should be tested? - A.
Yes, sir.
                                              A. BUTLER


Do you know whether the tests were carried out in the
presence of the Local Authority by the structural
engineers? - A. On some occasions then I believe that
there were.

Were you ever present yourself? - A. I did not attend
any of those tests.

I am not saying that you should have done. I am just
asking you? - A. Prior to this actual tragedy, sir.

In addition to Officers or Council people being
present I think a report of the testing had to be
submitted to the Licensing Authority? - A. Yes, sir.

Presumably a copy of that came to your Department,
would that be right? - A. It did, sir.

Are you saying then that these reports were submitted
to you? - A. They were indeed.

Were you aware of the method employed by Dr. Eastwood
and his company as to how the barriers were tested? -
A. I was not personally aware at that time but my
colleagues were very au fait with this.

I am sorry I could not hear you? - A. They were au
fait with that test method so far as I understand.




               /Q. Did they at any point
                                               A. iJUTLER

Did tney at any point raise any objection as to the
method which was employed by Dr. Eastwood? - A. Not
that I am able to find at all.

Pardon? - A. Not that I am able to find from
documentation.

If you had not been satisfied - it is a hypothetical
question - but if you had not been satisfied with the
method of testing would you have seen it as part of
your responsibility to say this is unsatisfactory, do
it again? - A. Yes, definitely.

Or use a different technique or what have you, but you
would have intervened if you or your colleagues had
felt that the method was fundamentally flawed? - A.
Yes, sir.

At the time when all this was happening, with regard to
the barriers or removal of the barriers, the Bradford
fire disaster had occurred shortly prior to that, is
that correct? - A. That is quite right.

And people's minds were concentrated on how to get
people out of stadia? - A. Very much so.

I know this was not part of your direct responsibility,
but can you remember whether at this meeting any
discussions took place regarding means of escape, or do
you know what was the primary means of escape from that
terrace? - A. Through the tunnel and through the gates
at the head of the radial barriers.

Tne radial fences.    Was any consideration given to
putting more gates into the radial fences, either half­
way down or lower down or at any other place, as far as
you can remember? - A. At that particular meeting no, I
d o n ’t believe so. There is a reference in the
documentation to gates in other positions witnin tne
radial fences.

And what happened with regard to those recommendations
- not recommendations - requests, or suggestions? - A.
Documents described discussions on that particular
subject and it must have been considered that it was
satisfactory without them.

Okay.  You, of course, were now - your department had
always been involved with this but the City Council
were now more directly involved because by this time
they were the licensing authority as well, weren't
they? - A. That is so.
                                                                14
                                                       A. BUTLER

    0. Did you at any point after you took up your position
     , consider the fact that the - I will start this question
       again, forgive me - when did you first realise that the
       terms of the Safety Certificate had been granted on the
       basis that the terrace was one expanse, whereas now it
B      was divided into sections by radial fences with gates
       at the back? - A. Probably after the event of the 15th
       April.

    0. The 15th April? - A. Yes.

    0. So you yourself were not in a position to apply your
       mind to whether or not a variation to the certificate
       was called for or whether anything else was needed,
       until after that event? - A. We had considered and were
       in discussion regarding the re-wording of safety
       conditions but that was a fairly lengthy process.

    0. was this intended, as far as you were concerned, simply
       to tidy up the drafting, or was it actually intended to
       make any substantial changes with regard to structure
       and barriers ana things of that nature? - A. It was to
       deal with the wording of the certificate.
D   0.   But it would be right to say that you at that stage did
         not feel that the wording was so adverse that action
         was required by your department to enforce the
         conditions in any way? - A. The enforcement would be
         done by the Administration and Legal Department and
         obviously not necessarily by us.

    0.   How would they find out that enforcement was required?
         - A. It would be under any of the professional officers
         on the Officers' Working Party or the Advisory Group,
         as it became ....

    0. It became known      . - A. Then that would make their
       comments known.

    0. So the Admin, and Legal Department, or the City if you
       liice, had to rely upon this group to tell it if
       anything needed to be done? - A. Yes, sir.

    0. I just want to turn to one other matter which interests
       me.   I am moving away from the barriers for a moment.
       Trie design or the geography of the Leppings Lane
       entrance, funnel shape, bottleneck, hourglass, call it
       what you will, was that within your departmental
       responsibility? - A. I am not necessarily certain, sir.

    0. Pardon? - A. I am not certain.

    0. You would obviously look at tne walls and see whether
       they were sound, the perimeter walls and turnstiles,
                                               A. BUTLER

but would you have considered that the functional
aspect of the structure was something which fell within
the Building Surveyors Department? - A. Not in that
way, sir, no.

Wno would have done within the Officers' Working Party
of Advisory Group, or was there no one who had the
responsibility for that? - A. As I say regarding the
first question on this issue, then I am not certain of
the direct responsibility.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne?   Hr. Maxwell, I will
come back to you at tne end.   I have not forgotten you.

            Cross-Examined by HR. PAYNE

Mr. Butler, I want to just establish exactly what your
responsibilities were, if I may, beginning please with
the time in 1986 when your department took over
responsibility for the Safety Certificate.  Did that
taking over of responsibility involve anyone in your
department obtaining a copy of the Safety Certificate?
- A. It was the Council which took over the
responsibility for the certification function, not the
individual department, sir.

The Council took over responsibility? - A. From the
County Council on their demise.  I believe that is the
reference that you were making.

Right, but was it your department, did anyone in your
department obtain a copy of the Safety Certificate? -
A. I believe we had a copy of the Safety Certificate
from when it had originally been issued.

But at that time it was not the responsibility of your
department, when it was originally issued, is that it?
- A. We were acting as a building authority input to
the County structure before the demise of the County
Council, and tnen keeping a similar role to advise our
own Administration and Legal Department after the City
Council became responsible for the certification
function.

What does the certification function mean? - A. That a
Council was responsible for the Safety at Sports
Grounds Act.

Do you mean responsible to make sure that the
conditions set out in the certificate made under the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act were properly complied
witn? - A. As far as I understand it, yes, sir.
                                              A. BUTLER

That is the question which I am asking you.  Are you
the head of the department which took .... - A. No,
sir.

What? - A. No, sir.

I am trying to find out what your position is here.
What we know is that in March in 1986 responsibility
for the certification process, certification, was
transferred to your Council? - A. Yes, sir.




                /Q. Who in your Council
                                                                     17

                                                              A. BUTLER

           Who in your Council then b e c a m e .responsible to see that
           the conditions on the Certificate were complied with? -A.
           As far as I understand the situation that responsibility
    B      for that legislation was put to the Administration and
           Legal Department of the Council.

           They were responsible to make decisions about whether the
           conditions in the Safety Certificate were being met? - A.
           As I understand it, yes, sir.

           You have been asked by the Coroner where they got their
           information from and was your Department one of the
           places from which they got their information? - A. Yes,,
           sir.

           If some condition of the Safety Certificate was not being
           complied with, would it be your Department's
           responsibility with regard to the structure of the ground
           to tell the Administration and Legal Department?   Is
           that what it is? - A. I was as any other individual who
           may raise those issues, sir.

           No doubt others also could draw anything to the
           attention, but within the Sheffield City Council was it
           the responsibility of your Department then to tell
           Administration and Legal Department if the conditions of
           the Certificate as to the structure of the ground were
           not being complied with? - A. Yes.

           So that is the responsibility of the Department.   Where
           are you in the Department with regard to that
           responsibility? - A. I head the Site Supervision Unit of
           the Building Surveyors Division.

           In order to be able to tell Legal and Administration
           Department whether the conditions in the Certificate as
           to the structure of the ground were being complied with,
           you personally would need to have a copy of the
           Certificate, would you?   - A. Put in that way, yes.

        Q- Did you   have one? - A. I did not personally have one.

        Q. Did you delegate the job to somebody else in your
           Department? - A. No, sir.

          Do you know if anyone in your Department actually had a
          copy of the Safety Certificate? - A. There was a copy
          within the Department.

        Q. Do you know who had it?    - A. I believe I do, sir.

        Q- Can you say who it was?   - A. I believe this was held in
           the files, in our central files, sir.




H
                                                   A. BUTLER

Have we reached this position that although your
Department was responsible to tell Legal and
Administration if the conditions were being complied
with, no-one in your Department was actually given that
job? - A. The situation was one of looking to reasonable
safety, as well as the reference that you make, sir, just
to advising regarding the wording of a Safety
Certificate.

Is the Safety Certificate an important document? - A. It
is.

I want to get to the stage where I can ask you to look at
a copy of the Safety Certificate but I can't get there
unless I first find out that you actually had a copy and
ever looked at it.   Are we going to be stumped at that
point, that you never had a copy and never looked at it?
- A. Not before this event, sir.

As far as you know did anybody in your Department ever
look at it before the event? - A. Yes, sir.

Who, by name?

     THE CORONER:   Do we need to know the nime,
Mr. Payne?

     MR. PAYNE:   I am trying to find out whose
responsibility it was.

     THE CORONER:   The reason why I have asked this
gentleman to come as opposed to anybody else is because
he was heading up the Department and in that sense I have
taken the view takes responsibility for the Department.
He has told the Certificate was in the files:

That is right, isn't it?   That is what you have said? -
A. Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:   If we knew the name, what gain would
we have apart from having another name?

     MR. PAYNE:    Well, I don't want to contest the
point.    I want just to get on as best I can and
demonstrate what the situation was.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, indeed.   If I felt you had to
have that name for you to deal with it, I wouldn't stop
you, but I think you can do it without the name.

     MR. PAYNE:   Mr. Butler, after the disaster you have
told the Coroner you did then look at the Certificate? -
A. Yes, sir.
                                                  A. BUTLER

You discovered then that it contained some rules about
the crowd capacity of separate areas of spectator
accommodation in the ground? - A. It is some while since
I actually looked at that same document, sir.

I am going to ask you to refresh your memory now by
looking at it and a copy will be given to you now.

     MR. PAYNE:  Sir, there are copies and it might be
convenient if they were given out at this stage.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.   We will give this a "C" number
in a moment.

     MR. BEECHEY:    It is C.381, sir.

     MR. PAYNE:    Is this a copy of the Safety
Certificate, C.381? - A. Yes, sir.

When you looked at it after the disaster did you see it
was headed "South Yorkshire County Council"? - A. Yes,
sir.

"Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, General Safety
Certificate"? - A. Yes, sir.

"Address of premises for which this Certificate is
issued.   The Hillsborough Stadium, Penistone Road,
Sheffield"? - A. Yes.

"Occupier of the premises and Holder of this Certificate.
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd." - A. Yes.

"Use of the premises in respect of which this Certificate
is issued.   Football matches. Religious Conventions." -
A. Yes.

There then follows the Certificate which says:

     "1. This Certificate is issued by South Yorkshire
     County Council in respect of the premises described
     above, being a Sports Stadium designated by Order
     under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act,
     1975 as a stadium requiring a Safety Certificate.

     2. The terms and conditions set out in the Schedules
     attached hereto are hereby imposed.

     3. The terms and conditions hereby imposed are those
     which the South Yorkshire County Council consider
     necessary or expedient to secure reasonable safety
     at the Stadium when it is in use for an activity in
     respect of which this Certificate is issued."
                                                              20
                                                       A. BUTLER

     Paragraph 6:

          "This Certificate commences on the twenty first day
          of December, One thousand nine hundred and seventy
          nine for an indefinite period/'

     It is dated the 21st December 1979 and it is signed by
     Mr. Mallett, "Chief Executive on behalf of and duly
     authorised by the South Yorkshire County Council."

     Did you notice that when you read it? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you know that this Certificate, or the conditions in
   the Certificate, have the force of law in the sense that
   if they are not complied with then this can constitute a
   criminal offence?   Did you know that? - A. I knew it
   would constitute an offence.

Q. What would? - A. The non-compliance of it.

Q. So it is an important document backed up by an Act of
   Parliament? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Go over to the next page which has got Schedule 1,
   "Interpretation" and then over the next page, Schedule 2,
   "General Terms and Conditions".   This is our page
   numbered 3 in the bottom right hand corner and at the top
   it is headed "Schedule 2".   If you just look down the
   conditions to number 3, do you see it says:

         "The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium
         and to the several areas of spectator accommodation
         within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
         specified in Part 1 of Schedule 3."

     Did you see that? - A.   Yes.

          MR. PAYNE:   May I just interpose to say that the
     words "See 159" are my writing, which I put on a copy
     which has been used to photocopy this copy, so that can
     be disregarded.

          THE CORONER:   Yes.

Q.        MR. PAYNE:   Now the figures specified in Part 1 of
     Schedule 3 we will find at page 10.   This is headed
     "Schedule 3. Part 1. Crowd Capacity."     Did you see
     that? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                 A. BUTLER

Then it says:

     "The number of spectators admitted to the stadium
     and to the various areas of spectator accommodation
     within the stadium shall not exceed the following
     figures:

     Spion Kop                 16,850
     South Stand Upper          5,567
     South Stand Lower          3,310
     West Stand                 4,465
     West Terrace               7,200
     North West Terrace         2,900
     North Stand                9,882"

When you read that did you appreciate that the figures
for the West Terrace and North West Terrace are the^ ones
which together apply to the whole of the Leppings Lane
end terrace? - A. Yes, sir.

Making altogether 10,100 for the whole width of the
terrace? - A. For the whole of the terrace area at that
end, yes.

I wonder if Sergeant Griffiths would be kind enough to
put up C.274?   Did you appreciate that when the
Certificate was issued in 1979 the West terrace with a
crowd capacity limit of 7,200 applied to what is
described now as pens 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6? - A. Yes, sir.




                Q. The North West
                                                    22


                                   A. SUTLER



Q. And the north-west terrace applied to the corner where
   it is described on our drawing C274 as "lighting tower",
   that corner, north-west terrace 2,900? - A. As I understand
   it sir that is to the upper area of that terrace.

Q. Marked without the lines on our sketch you mean? -A.     Yes
   sir.

Q. The upper area is 2,900 and the lower area is part of the
   west terrace 7,200? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Now you have told the Coroner that at the time thatthis
   Certificate was issued you have discovered from looking
   at the records that the whole of the terrace was open
   undivided by the fences. Is that right? - A. Would you
   repeat the question again?

Q. Yes, you have discovered from looking at the papers that
   the situation in 1979 was very different from what it
   was when you took over in 1986, because in 1979 none
   of these radial fences was in position and you have
   discovered that, you have told the Coroner, from your
   looking at the records? - A. It was so different, yes
   sir.

Q. You are a surveyor aren't you, Mr. Butler? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And the responsibility of your Department is for the
   structures of the ground, the physical layout of the ground?
   - A. For the Department that I am a member of, yes sir.

Q. If you had been involved in the issue of this Safety
   Certificate in 1979 and had had to consider it at that
   time and you had realised that the safe capacity of the
   West Terrace had been worked out to be 7,200 as is set
   out in this schedule, if you had known that by what means
   would you have envisaged that the number of 7,200 would
   be controlled to make sure that it was not exceeded?
   - A. This is a hypothetical question on the basis of what
   would I have considered at that particular time.

Q. That is right. - A. At that particular time I believe
   that I would have looked to the numbers passing through
   turnstiles.

Q. And how would that have worked to control the capacity
   on the terrace? - A. You are suggesting that the use
   of policing and stewarding would have aided the safe
   distribution of those spectators.

Q. No, I am asking you as a surveyor. Once it has been
   worked out that the safe capacity of this terrace is a
   particular number then how as a practical matter are
   you going to make sure that the number is not exceeded?
                                  A. BUTLER



- A . By a turnstile count and by the safe distribution
of those spectators by policing and effective stewarding.

Did you find out, perhaps I will put the question this
other way, when your Department took over responsibility
for the Certificate did you find out that the turnstiles,
each turnstile had a separate counter? - A. The Department
was never responsible for the Safety Certificate.

Yes, why are you saying that at this point? - A. That was
part of your question and I did want to rectify the records
sir. It was the Council that had the responsibility for
the Safety Certificate.

The Council did? - A. Not the individual department.

I appreciate that you say that you did not see this
Certificate and no one in your Department applied their
mind to, if I understand you correctly before the disaster.

      MR. MAXWELL:    No,   he didn't say that.

      MR. PAYNE:     Oh, he didn't say that.

Well did anyone - this is why I stopped last time - did
anyone in your Department apply   their mind ....

      MR. MAXWELL:     Well how can he answer that?

      MR. PAYNE:     You are the head of the Department?
- A. No.
Your Counsel is objecting to you answering this question.
I want to find out if anyone in your Department applied
their mind to this sort of exercise of looking at the
safe capacity of the terrace. What is the answer to that?
- A. I am aware that representatives of the Division and
members of the Working Party would have applied their minds
to the reasonable safety of those terraces when they
discussed the various alterations that were to be done
on those terraces.
Does that mean that somebody in your Department did have
that job? - A. To look to the reasonable safety of
spectators and to be a member of the Working Party, yes
sir.
No, you are moving away from the question of the Certificate.
Did someone have the job to make sure that the Certificate
would work?
      THE CORONER: I wonder whether, Mr. Payne, we are
slightly at cross-purposes here because what Mr. Butler
is saying is that he was the Head of the Division of one
                                  A. BUTLER



of the Council Departments which was responsible for
structural matters such as is the gauge of the metal thick
enough and are the walls sound, but his Department is not
responsible for determining the number of people on the
terrace and it is not his Department that issues the
Safety Certificate. It is the Council operating through
a different Department, perhaps, Chief Executive Department,
Admin, and Legal, rather than his and I think this is where
the problem arises.
      MR. PAYNEj     May I just ask about that?

      THE CORONER:     Yes.
      MR. PAYNE: You have mentioned the Legal and Admini­
stration Department. Apart from that Department and your
Department is there any other Department within the City
Council which would have any responsibility to see that
the conditions of the Certificate were complied with?
- A. The Department of Health and Consumer Services became
a party to the Advisory Group when it was changed from
the Working Party to the Advisory Group sir.

Did that Department have a responsibility to see that
the conditions of the Safety Certificate were complied
with? - A. They had the responsibility of a safety input
to the Advisory Group.
You mentioned at one point during your evidence something
called a Prohibition Notice. What was that? - A. I believe
that the Coroner referred to this not necessarily to
myself.
No, he asked you whether you were responsible for it and
you said: "Yes".
      THE CORONER: No, what I asked him was - as far as
I remember - was was he aware, did he have any knowledge
whether any Prohibition Notice had been issued or served,
not necessarily by him but by the Council and his answer
was no, as far as he knew nothing of that nature had
happened.
That is correct Mr. Butler, is it not, I have given your
answer correctly have I? - A. Your recollection is
similar to my own sir.
      MR. PAYNE: Well what is a Prohibition Notice?
- A. A notice prohibiting the use of the ground.

In what circumstances? - A. Being that it is warranted
to serve that notice.
Sorry? - A. It would be warranted to serve that notice.
                                                          25


                                    A. BUTLER


Q. I don't follow that. In what circumstances would such
   a Prohibition Notice be issued, what for? - A. If the
   ground was considered to be unsafe for spectators to be
   there sir.

Q. And that would be issued - after the Sheffield City Council
   took over responsibility - that would be issued by? - A.
   The Sheffield City Council sir.

Q. Now who within   the Sheffield City Council would have the
   responsibility   to issue the Prohibition Notice? - A. This
   would have to    be a matter which would go to elected
   members of the   Council.
Q. And who would initiate the procedure? - A. How do you mean
   by the initiation sir?
Q. The Councillors presumably would need to be told by an
   Officer in the City Council that there was something unsafe
   about the ground. Now who within the Council would tell
   them that? - A. No, not necessarily. Any individual who
   had a concern, whether it be the Police, the Fire Authority,
   the Club, their consultants or any other member of that
   team or otherwise could advise the Council through its
   Administration and Legal Department that there was a
   dangerous situation.
Q. Did anyone as far as you know within the Council have
   the particular responsibility to direct their mind to the
   question whether the conditions in the Certificate were
   being complied with? - A. Yes, coming to think of the
   evidence sir then I believe that I may have misled you and
   must obviously make this issue at the time.
         I did in answer to questions which I don't know
   whether they were from yourself or from the Coroner,
   state that it looked at the revised wording of the Safety
   Certificate which was an ongoing process just before
   the event and at that time I must have seen a copy of
   the Safety Certificate in order to have compared the
   wordings.
Q. When was that? - A. This was somewhere between '87 and
   •89.

Q. So at some time you yourself had on your desk a copy of
   the Safety Certificate, did you? - A. I must have done
   sir, yes.

Q. Were you looking at the wording of it? - A. For the
   revisions which were suggested.

Q. Did you look at Condition 3, one of the first ones we
   looked at which limits the number of spectators? - A. I
   assume at the time I must have read the schedule.

                                        Q. Did you look
                                                     A. BUTLER

Q . Did you look at that table that we have been looking
    at in Schedule 3? - A. Yes.

Q. Are you saying now that you did, in fact, do this
   before the disaster? - A. I am saying that I must
   have done in that I do recollect that the Safety
   Certificate was being redrafted at that time.

Q. Was the schedule, the table, was that being redrafted
   at the time of the disaster of the safe crowd
   capacity? - A. I believe it was purely the wording of
   the individual paragraphs of the schedule that were
   to be redrafted.

Q. What about the numbers in the table? - A. I have no
   recollection of the suggestion of those being
   redrafted at that time, sir.

Q. Why was it you who was doing this job of looking at
   the wording in the Safety Certificate? - A. I believe
   that all members of the Advisory Group at that time
   were asked the same, to look at the same information.

Q. What was your particular function in the Advisory
   Group? - A. Either by myself or with other members of
   the staff to represent the building surveyor on the
   Advisory Group.

     THE CORONER:   I do not like interrupting you in the
middle of the cross-examination but I think we ought to
pause for a little break for the Jury. I hope it will not
disturb your train of thought. We are going to just have a
little pause and have coffee.

Q. Mr. Butler,     you are on Oath and so you must not
   discuss the     evidence with anybody else whilst we are
   having this     break and then we will carry on after the
   break? - A.     Yes, sir.

                        (Short Adjournments
Q.        MR.   PAYNE: Mr. Butler, in continuing to
     question   you I do not want to ask you to deal with
     anything   which is outside the responsibility of
     yourself   or your Department, do you follow? - A. Yes,
     sir.

Q. If I do do that then you tell me that it is outside
   your responsibility. Do you understand that? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. In that case I will be grateful for your assistance
   to try and find out whose responsibility it is but
   when we come to any problem like that then we know
                                              A. BUTLER

what to do. Can you tell the Jury why it was that
you went to the meeting in 1986, on the 7th August
1986? Why did you personally go and in what
capacity? - A. I went to represent the Building
Surveyors' Division on an annual inspection of that
ground.

What was the purpose of the annual inspection? - A.
To inspect the ground, sir.

For what purpose? - A. For the purposes, I believe at
that time it was the biannual inspection which was
carried out by the Officers' Working Group.

What was the purpose of the meeting? - A. To inspect
the ground for its reasonable safety.

Apart from you was there anyone else there from
Sheffield City Council? - A. The Chief Licensing
Officer was present.

Who was that? - A. And a colleague of mine as well.

Who was the Chief Licensing Officer? - A. Mr. Bownes.

Who was your colleague? - A. Hr. Swann.

At the time of that inspection the layout of the
Leppings Lane end was the same as it remained until
the time of the disaster, was it? - A. As far as I am
aware, yes, sir.

So you must... - A. I am sorry, technically incorrect
in that barrier 144 or certain sections of it were
removed after that inspection.

As far as the radial fences and the division up of
the terrace into pens is concerned, was that in the
condition then that it remained in until the time of
the disaster? - A. Yes, sir.

Do you know if any of the Officers from Sheffield
City Council at that meeting had with them a copy of
the Safety Certificate? - A. I don't know that, sir.

Did you yourself know in your capacity as being
responsible for the structure of the existence at
that time of the Green Guide? - A. Yes, sir.

Did you have a copy of it? - A. Yes, sir.

This meeting you are speaking about was in August
1986 and a new edition of the Green Guide had come
out in August 1986. Do you know if you had a copy of
                                                   A. BUTLER

     the new edition? Would it help you to look at a
     copy? You will be handed one now as it might remind
     you? - A. I believe the new version of the Green
     Guide was issued after that inspection.

Q. I understand that copies of the Green Guide are
   available and I wonder if a copy can be given you.

       MR. PAYNE: If it is convenient perhaps the Jury can
have a copy as well, sir?

     THE CORONER:  Yes, and it will be given a number as
well. It is the 1986 Green Guide we are talking about,
isn't it?

       MR. PAYNE:     1986, sir.

Q. Mr. Butler, while that is being given out, the
   paragraphs I am going to ask you to look at next are
   12 and 101 and so it might be helpful for you just to
   look them up while we have got a moment. - A. Yes.

       MR. BEECHEY:    It will be C.382, sir.

Q.       MR. PAYNE: Mr. Butler, before you come to the
     particular paragraphs, will you just lead the Jury
     into what this document is. Do you see it is
     entitled "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds"? Yes? -
     A. Yes, sir.

Q. At page one it has "Home Office/Scottish Office".
   Yes? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. At the contents page which I am holding up now one
   can see in the top left hand c o m e r of the facing
   page it says, "Crown copyright 1986"? Do you see
   that? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. This is the 1986 edition. There had prior to this
   been another Guide in broadly similar terms but there
   are some differences. Is that right, Mr. Butler? -
   A. That is true.

Q. After the contents it comes at page five to
   "Introduction" and I am certainly not going to read
   through it all but I want to put it in context,
   certainly to bring out the point you have already
   made, that it is intended as a guide and not as a set
   of inflexible rules. Under "Introduction" does it
   begin, "Scope and status of the Guide" and paragraph
   one says:

          "This booklet provides guidance to ground
          management, local authorities and
                                              A. BUTLER

      technical specialists such as engineers
      on measures for improving spectator
      safety at existing sports ground. It is
      a voluntary code and has no legal force.”

Do you see that, Mr. Butler? - A. Yes, sir.

I am going to continue into the Guide in a moment.
Can I ask you this, Mr. Butler; can you remember when
it was that you yourself first received and looked at
a copy of the 1986 Guide that you are holding in your
hand? - A. After it was published, sir.

Would that be the same year? - A. I am endeavouring
to find the date when it actually was published,
being that this states the year but I do believe the
publication date of this document was after the
inspection which you have previously questioned me
on, sir.

I appreciate that suddenly having this question
sprung on you that you cannot be expected to give an
exact date but I want you to give a clue, if you can,
to the Jury about when it was that you first got hold
of a copy of it. Is it that year, the next year or
the year after, that sort of timetable? That is all
I am asking? - A. I would have been in possession of
the document very soon after it was published.

Can you go on to page 6, paragraph 4, "General
principles of the Guide"? Can you see that? - A. I
am sorry, would you repeat that?

Page 6, paragraph 4. I just want to read this to
bring out the point you have made so that when I ask
you questions later about particular paragraphs they
can be seen in the context of what this Guide is
purporting to be. Paragraph 4:

     "The problem of crowd safety at sports
     grounds is complex and cannot be solved
     simply by ensuring that each component of
     a ground, such as stairways, passages or
     sections of terracing, is satisfactory in
     itself. The inter-relation of these and
     the other components is essential; none
     of them can be considered in isolation
     without consideration of its effect on
     the others, and they should all be
     compatible and combine to form a balanced
     unit."
                                                A. BUTLER

At paragraph 5 it says:

      "The Guide is intended to cover grounds
      where sporting events of all kinds are
      held and where the gathering of large
      crowds is likely to present a safety
      problem. However, much of the guidance
      has particular application to football
      stadia and this should be borne in mind
      when applying the Guide to grounds used
      for other sports..."

I will pass from that and go on to page 7 and I want
to read paragraph 8 on page 7:

      "It should be borne in mind, that when
      using the Guide to assess whether
      existing circumstances provide adequately
      for the safety of spectators, the
      criterion to be aimed for is that of a
      reasonable degree of safety. It would be
      unreasonable, even if it were practical,
      to seek the absolute safety of everyone
      attending a ground."

Then paragraph 11 with the subheading "Using the
Guide":

      "The principles referred to in paragraphs
      4-10 above should be kept in mind by both
      ground management and, where applicable,
      by the local authority when applying the
      Guide to an individual ground. The Guide
      is an aid to, not a substitute for,
      professional judgement and common sense."

Did you do that? Did your Authority, so far as you
are aware, Mr. Butler, keep the principles in mind
when applying this Guide to the ground? - A. I
believe that all members of the Officers' Working
Party used this same guidance, whether it be the
Police, the Fire Authority or the Local Authority.

Did you yourself apply your mind to the application
of the guidance in this document to the structural
layout of the Hillsborough Football Ground? - A. Yes,
sir.

Look at paragraph 12 then:

      "Although some of the safety standards
      are likely to apply to all sports ground,
      however many spectators are present, it
      is nonetheless important to relate the
                                              A. BUTLER

      Guide to the needs of the individual
      ground. It should be borne in mind that
      in most circumstances, the required
      safety standard to be attained will often
      relate to the maximum number of
      spectators who are liable to be admitted
      to the ground (or parts of it). For
      example, a large football stadium with a
      maximum spectator capacity of tens of
      thousands is liable to pose significant
      crowd pressure risks. To accommodate
      safely a maximum crowd at such a ground
      might entail substantial remedial work;
      alternatively, consideration might be
      given to accepting a much smaller number
      of spectators who, properly dispersed,
      could be accommodated safely without
      having to incur costly repairs or
      alterations. The first step, therefore,
      is to assess, using the Guide's criteria,
      how many people can be safely
      accommodated in the different sections of
      the ground given the existing condition
      of the ground (ie determine a safe
      spectator capacity). This should be done
      with a proper, detailed plan, preferably
      drawn to scale (1:200) of the ground (see
      Chapter 16)."

So far as you are aware, Mr. Butler, after Sheffield
City Council took over responsibility for the Safety
Certificate, was anything done to comply with
paragraph 12? - A. In what respect, sir?

To follow the first step which is, according to this,
about six lines up:

      "...The first step, therefore, is to
      assess, using the Guide's criteria, how
      many people can be safely accommodated in
      the different sections of the ground
      given the existing condition of the
      ground (ie determine a safe spectator
      capacity)..."

which should be done with a proper plan? - A. I am
not quite sure of the context of your question in
that I do take it that you are referring to the
Leppings Lane terracing area of Sheffield Wednesday's
ground only.

No, I am asking you generally at the moment. I will
come to the Leppings Lane end but so far as you are
aware after Sheffield City Council took over
                                              A. BUTLER

responsibility in 1986 was anything done to comply
with the first step by the Council so far as you
know? - A. Yes, the Safety at Sports Grounds
considerations were ongoing to the different ground
within the City Council's area.

So what was done? - A. Without extensive records then
I wouldn't be able to answer that question, sir.

I am only asking you within your own knowledge. So
far as you are aware was anything done by Sheffield
City Council to assess how many people can be safely
accommodated in the different sections of the ground?
- A. There was one example of that where at the same
time as the 1986 inspection that the Spion Kop end of
the ground was being extended and as such the
capacity figures had to be calculated for that
extension.

Was that done? - A. Yes.

Have you still got the Safety Certificate in front of
you, C.381? - A.

  THE CORONER:   He has got it, Mr. Payne.




                               /MR. PAYNE.
                                                          33

                                                    A. BUTLER

Q*        MR. PAYNE:   Have you got C381, the Safety
     Certificate, page 10?

          THE CORONER:    Yes, he has got it.

Q»        MR. PAYNE:  The first entry in the table is Spion
     Kop, 16,850. Do you see that, Mr. Butler? - A. Yes, I
     see it, sir.

Q. When the size of the Kop was increased do you know what
   the new number was? - A. I don't know, sir.

Q. I think I can remind you that it was 23,000. Does that
   ring a bell with you? - A. I would have to take your
   word for it, sir.

Q. We will hear evidence about that. When this point was
   considered by Sheffield City Council do you know
   whether anybody did anything to take steps to amend the
   Safety Certificate? - A. Being that that was discussed
   with elected members of the capacity of the new
   extension, then that there would be a following
   administration process in order to notify the Club of
   that decision, which I am not aware of and would not
   have been done through my department.

Q. What about amendment of the Safety Certificate? Do you
   know whether any steps were taken to amend the
   Certificate? - A. I am not sure of that fact, sir.

Q. Was it amended? - A. I believe    that the Certificate
   itself was not. As to whether     there were any addenda
   that were put to it, then that    I have just been
   provided with this copy of the    Safety Certificate this
   morning.

Q. Have you ever seen    any amendment to the Safety
   Certificate - I am    only following this up because you
   mentioned the Kop.    - A. I have not seen an amendment to
   it. As to whether     there were some addenda, then I am
   not sure, sir.

          MR. MAXWELL:   Sir, I rise to object to a line of
     questioning that seems to me to be totally irrelevant.
     95 people did not die because of some failure to amend
     a safety certificate in respect of the Spion Kop end,
     and I am asking that the line of questioning should be
     kept to that which is relevant, having regard to the
     rules which apply here, and the rules are that the
     proceedings and evidence at an Inquest shall be
     directed solely to ascertaining the following matters,
     namely, and as far as is relevant to this Inquest now,
     how, when and.where the deceased came by his death.
     This is not, in my respectful submission, of any
                                                     A. BUTLER

     relevance to the issue that this Jury have to deal
     with.

          MR. PAYNE:   I accept that intervention. It is
     quite right and I should not have followed up the point
     about the Kop. I apologise.

          THE CORONER:   I agree with Mr. Maxwell.   Perhaps
     I should have stopped you.

Q.        MR. PAYNE:   In this question about the safe
     capacity then, confining your answers under paragraph
     12 to the Leppings Lane end, Mr. Butler, do you know
     whether any steps were taken at all after the Council
     took responsibility to assess how many people could
     safely be accommodated in the different sections of the
     Leppings Lane terrace? - A. I am not aware of any, sir.

Q. If that had been done by anybody, is that something
   which would have come to the attention of your
   department? - A. I would have assumed so, yes.

Q. If it had been done, by which department would it have
   been done? - A. The administration process would have
   been dealt with by the Administration and Legal
   Department.

Q. Would the Administration and Legal Department have
   assessed how many people can be safely accommodated in
   different sections of the ground? - A. They would have
   sought advice on that.

Q. From whom? - A. From all members of the Working Party
   of the Advisory Group.

Q. Which department in the City Council would have been
   responsible for the job of assessing how many people
   can be safely accommodated? - A. That would have come
   to the Department of Land and Planning within the
   Building and Surveyors Division.

Q. Is that your department? - A. As within the Council,
   yes, sir,

Q. Can you look at the other paragraph in the Green Guide
   which deals with this capacity point, which is 101? Do
   you see that this says:

         "A ground should be divided into sections to
         prevent potentially hazardous migrations by
         spectators. Each section of the ground has its
         own limit of safe capacity (see Chapter 16) ...."

- which works out how youwork out the capacity -
                                              A. BUTLER


     ".... and a major migration can cause dangerous
     overcrowding. Each section of the ground, for
     example, each end or side, should be self-
     contained with its own entrances, exits and
     toilet/refreshment facilities. For soccer grounds
     in particular there should be no access from one
     such major section to another, except in an
     emergency."

And it goes on about greyhound racing. Did you
consider the application of that paragraph to the
layout of the Leppings Lane end at the Hillsborough
Stadium, Mr. Butler? - A. At what time, sir.

After you had been appointed in 1986 - Sheffield City
Council had been appointed as responsible for the
Safety Certificate. - A. Are you referring to at the
time of the 1986 inspection?

Then and after that? - A. Up to what date, sir.

To the date of the disaster? - A. Not directly, since
there had been recent works carried out on that terrace
in 1985, where both colleagues of mine and all other
members of the Working Party had been present to
discuss the effectiveness and the installation of those
works, and particularly the need for those works was
primarily from the Police.

Does that mean that your colleagues automatically did
what the Police asked without reference to the Green
Guide? - A. I did not infer that and certainly did not
mean that in any answer that I have given to you, sir.

Did anybody in the City Council, as far as you know,
consider the application of this paragraph, 101, to the
new layout on the terrace? - A. I believe that all
members of the Working Party would have considered that
at the time that those details were put in front of the
Working Party.

And all members of the Working Party include a
representative of the Fire Service, is that right? - A.
The Police, Fire, Local Authority, and at that time the
County Council.

When you became involved yourself were you aware of any
report or comment by any of those people or
representatives that the new layout required a new
assessment of safe capacity? - A. No, sir, and nobody
reported to me either at that time or subsequent to it,
up to and indeed after the time of the disaster, that
the numbers which were specified were actually more
than what could safely be sustained within those areas.
                                              A. BUTLER

As far as you are aware, Mr. Butler, did the City
Council appreciate before the disaster that the
introduction of the fences had changed the limits of
safe crowd capacity? - A. They appreciated that the
works had been installed and that the works had been
done, ostensibly to increase the safety on that
terracing, being that it was there to stop lateral
surging. I believe that there was two or three reasons
which were given within the documentation at the time,
also to aid in Police control of insurgents, and that
the majority of that was suggested, indeed, by the
Police, for their aid.

What, to stop rival factions of spectators fighting
with each other on the terrace? - A. I can only go by
the words which were within the documentation, sir.

But when you took over in 1986 that is what you
understood to be the reason for the new fences, is it?
- A. No. I have stated that it was also to reduce the
risk of lateral surge.

Yes.    Can you open the folder at C274?

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, while we are doing that,
may I ask you where we are driving?

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, this is an invitation to make a
speech, which I will readily respond to.

     THE CORONER:   No, no. I don't mean it in that
way. What I am asking you is this. I hesitate to
interrupt you or your line of questioning but at the
moment I am in some difficulty in seeing what your
objective is.

     MR. KING:   Sir, at the risk of intervening, if my
learned friend feels that in order to answer you he may
breach the rule as to making a speech to the Jury, and
I can understand the difficulty he may be in, could
this discussion take place in the absence of the Jury?
       THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. KING:   I only say that because I know not
what my learned friend wants to say.

     MR. PAYNE:   The rule is that no one is allowed to
address the Coroner or the Jury on questions of fact,
so by sending the Jury out we are not going to change
the position, because we are still not allowed to
address you on fact.
                                              A. BUTLER

     Sir, within the rules, in.answer to your question,
where this is driving at is that, as Mr. Butler has
already said, representatives from a large number of
responsible authorities were closely involved in the
new layout of the terraces, which they all thought were
being introduced in the interests of safety, and none
of them was aware that they were introducing something
which could lead to a disaster.




            /THE CORONER:   Yes, that
                                                  A. BUTLER


     THE CORONER:    Yes, that is deductions, isn't it?
You may be entirely right and that is where we are
getting into the speech danger at this stage, or you may
be wrong, but the point is that I think all the witness
can say, and he can say whether the point had been
considered by him, but what the consequences...    He can
say, '!We didn't alter the Certificate , he can say that,
but the next question is "What is the effect of that?" I
don't know whether he can answer and whether he should.

     MR. PAYNE: Ultimately it will be for the jury to
determine how the disaster occurred and this is a factor
which they, in our submission, will be entitled to take
into account.
     THE CORONER:   Yes. I think that is right.   I am
not saying the jury can t take it into account.   What I
am saying is that what the jury hears from this witness
is that he was involved with the structure of the ground,
that his job was to have a safety input to the local
authority, whatever that might mean, that he took over in
1986, that he didn't recommend the revision and that
neither he, and as far as he knows, nobody else made any
recommendations to anybody that the alterations required
a re-think.
     MR. PAYNE:     Yes.
     THE CORONER:   The jury has to think about that as
to what implication that has in relation to how the
deceased came by their deaths.   I agree with that.
     MR. PAYNE:     Yes.   Sir, shall I move on to a
different topic?

     THE CORONER:     I think so.
     MR. PAYNE:   With regard to the structure of the
ground, Mr. Butler, there are three other aspects of the
Green Guide that I would like you to look at.   The first
is paragraph 96.   Does this provide:
     "The aim should be to ensure that every spectator on
     the terraces is within 12 metres of a gangway or
     exit, so that spectators can move quickly on to exit
     routes at the end of an event or in the event of
     emergency.   This may be achieved by a pattern of
     gangways (not less than 1.1 metres wide) linked to
     the exit system."
Were you aware of that provision of the Green Guide
before the disaster? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                A. BUTLER


In the "C" bundle can you look at 276?   The value of
this plan is that it has got a scale on it in the top
left hand part of the plan, apart from what it in fact
shows.   Do you see on the scale the top line is metres?
Do you see that? - A. Yes, sir.

It goes from 0 to 2.5 to 5 metres? - A. Yes, sir.

Where is the exit from pen 3? - A. Which do you mean by
"the exit"?
Well, what do you call the exit from pen 3, when you took .
over responsibility in 1986? - A. There are three ways
out of pen 3.
Yes, which do you regard as the exits? - A. The tunnel,
the gate at the head of the radial fence and gate 3.

Look at paragraph 66 in the Green Guide:
     "Where exit gates have to be secured against outside
     intruders they should be fitted with panic-type
     bolts, but all exit gates, unless secured in an open
     position, should be manned at all times while the
     ground is used by the public and be capable of being
     opened immediately from inside by anyone in an
     emergency."
Can gate 3 be opened from inside? - A. I beg your pardon,
sir, but I believe we are talking at cross purposes on
this.   The paragraph which you have referred to, sir, is
paragraph 66, is it not?

That is right. - A. Therefore that says, "Where exit
gates have to be secured against outside intruders..."

Yes. - A. I am not sure as to what you are referring to
as "outside intruders..."

It starts off by referring to securing gates against
outside intruders, but it goes on:

     "...all exit gates, unless secured in an open
     position, should be manned at all times while the
     ground is used by the public and be capable of being
     opened immediately from inside by anyone in an
     emergency."
What it is saying is that exit gates must be capable of
being opened from the inside, isn't it? - A. This, as far
as I am aware and understand it, refers to the exit gates
from the ground.   You have referred to a specific area
of the ground, sir, and I don't believe that this
                                                             40
                                                   A. BUTLER


   particular section was intended to fit the situation to
   which you were endeavouring to do, sir.

Q. Mr. Butler, I accept your answer.    May I go back toyour
   description of gate 3?   Are you saying that gate 3
   should be treated as an exit? - A. No, with respect, sir,
   you asked me as to which were the exits from that pen 3,
   and that a gate is an exit by definition.
Q. Go back to paragraph 96 in the Green Guide:
        "The aim should be to ensure that every spectator on
        the terraces is within 12 metres of a gangway or
        exit, so that spectators can move quickly on to exit
        routes at the end of an event or in the event of
        emergency.   This may be achieved by a pattern of
        gangways (not less than 1.1 metres wide) linked to
        the exit system."
   Are you saying from the point of view of Sheffield City
   Council, they treated gate 3 as part of the exit system?
   - A. No, sir.   I cannot answer that one from that point
   of view, you purely asked in your question as to where
   were the exits from that pen and which I answered, sir.

Q. While you have got paragraph 96 open in front of you, go
   back to the plan 276.   I asked you in the context of
   Green Guide paragraph 96 about the 12 metre rule and you
   said there were three exits - tunnel, radial fence and
   gate 3.   Are you saying that gate 3 should be treated as
   an exit for the purpose of Green Guide paragraph 96? - A.
   This would be outside my responsibility, sir, to
   determine, sir.

Q. That is outside your responsibility? - A. To determine
   the means of escape, which is such that you are
   suggesting, sir.

Q. Can we leave it in this way: it is quite clear that if
   gate 3 is not to be treated as part of the exit system,
   then they people at the front in pens 3 and 4 are more
   than 12 metres from a gangway or exit, are they not? - A.
   If it was not.

Q. I ought to finally ask you this question: before the
   disaster do you know whether anybody in Sheffield City
   Council applied their mind to the application of the 12
   metre rule? - A. This was, I believe, a similar wording
   within the previous Guide.   Probably if that could be
   checked.

Q. Yes, I think you will find that is right. - A. I
   understand that a consideration was taken by the Officer
   Working Party of the satisfaction of this terrace at the
      V                                         A. BUTLER


time that the ground was being considered for its first
certification.
After Sheffield City Council took over responsibility, do
you know whether anybody in Sheffield City Council
applied their mind to the 12 metre rule? - A. There was
the same acceptance of the standards, being that the
wording of the document had not changed.

Do you mean "no"? - A. I don't believe that was a
substitute answer to the one I gave, sir.

After Sheffield City Council took over responsibility -
this is the second topic now under the Green Guide -
after Sheffield City Council took over responsibility for
the Safety Certificate, do you know whether anyone
applied their mind to the systems of means of escape in
the case of an emergency in the Leppings Lane end? - A. I
would assume that the party with that responsibility
would have done so.
Who was that? - A. I believe that would rest with the
Fire Authority, sir.

The Fire Authority? - A. Yes.




          Q. Did you become aware
                                                      42



                                     A. BUTLER



Q. Did   you become aware of any consideration being given to
   the   application of the rules about means of escape to the
   new   layout of the radial fences? - A. Sir, the new layout
   was   discussed, agreed and installed before I first saw it.

Q. But at the time that you took over and after that, is the
   answer no then again? So far as you know nobody gave
   particular attention to means of escape after Sheffield
   City Council took over responsibility for the Safety
   Certificate? - A. I am sorry sir, I do not know the answer
   to that question.
Q. If anybody had whose responsibility would that have been
   within Sheffield City Council? - A. I don't know as to
   which way you mean the word "responsibility" sir?

Q. Look at some particular paragraphs in the Green Guide to
   see if that will help, starting at 62. Did that provide
   that:
           "All doors on an exit route should always be
           capable of opening outwards so that crowds
           can escape in an emergency."

   Does that have any application to Leppings Lane end? - A.
   It is applicable to that end.
Q. Can you look at 265. Do you recognise those doors? Do
   you know where they are, Mr. Butler? - A. Yes I do sir.

Q. Do you know which way they open? - A. They are shown to
   be opened inwards to the tunnel.

Q. Are they capable of opening outwards do you know? - A.
   The doors on the photograph appear to have been sprained.
   However it looks by the corbelling at the head of the pier
   that they may not be capable of opening outwards.

Q. Do you know whether any consideration was given to this
   by Sheffield City Council after it assumed responsibility
   for the Safety Certificate? - A. I don't know of that sir.

Q. Does it appear to you that the doors do not comply with
   62?
         THE CORONER: Mr. Payne, that may be so. We will
   let the witness answer this question but the doors, these
   doors played no part except insofar as one might argue
   they should have been shut.
         MR. PAYNE: As I understand it one of the points that
   is being made against the Police is that they ought either
   to have shut the doors or given consideration to shutting,then
   Now had they done so the doors are not capable of opening
   outwards.
                                                      43


                                    A. BOTLER



           THE CORONER: Yes, that is why I agree .. I am aware
     of that but I think once he has said what he has got to
     say to your answer I think we will ....

Q.         MR. PAYNE: Very well. Do you actually know,
     Mr. Butler, or is this complete surprise to you I should
     be asking you because I don't want to pursue you about it
     if you have never thought about it before? - A. I have not
     considered this issue and I am not sure as to whether the
     doors are capable of being held in that open position and
     therefore there is a difference between a door which would
     be free swinging and one which was capable of being held
     open.

Q. Which Department within Sheffield City Council was
   responsible for giving consideration to this paragraph?
   - A. I don't believe this would have been a consideration
   within the Sheffield City Council otherwise than to
   receive information from an Advisory Group member.

Q. Go down to 66 again. Now you read that a moment ago and
   you gave your comments about it so I don't want to spend
   time unnecessarily on it. I will go on to 67. Does that
   say:

           "Facilities should be provided to enable
           people to leave the ground at any time."

     Then it gives some examples. Who would be responsible
     within the Sheffield City Council to consider whether
     that provision was applied? - A. I am not necessarily
     certain of this one from a legal purpose. However, from
     a sensible purpose if the provisions were not adequate
     for serving this purpose then I would have expected that
     the Police presence at a ground would have referred this
     situation back to the Advisory Group.

Q. What do you think it means by "facilities". Do you think
   that refers to the structure and layout of the ground?
   When it says: "Facilities should be provided to enable
   people to leave the ground at any time"? - A. It does
   give an example of that by talking about reversible
   turnstiles.

Q. So it is talking about the physical structure of the ground
   should provide facilities to enable people to leave the
   ground at any time. I don't want to labour the point:
   do you know whether anybody in Sheffield City Council
   gave consideration to that provision after Sheffield City
   Council assumed responsibility? - A. I don't believe that
   any implicit consideration was given to it more than any
   other paragraph of the Guide.
                                                     44


                                   A. BUTLER



Q. Now go on to 178 in the Green Guide would you please. I
   will ask you about this because this seems to fall within
   your Department but correct me if this is wrong? - A. As
   far as means of escape is concerned, sir that was strictly
   within the remit of the Fire Authority and this section is
   headed up as "Means of escape".

Q. If you just look it says:
         "'Means of escape' is the structural means
         whereby a saferoute is provided for people
         to travel from any point in a structure to a
         place of safety without outside assistance."

   Does that not come within the remit of Sheffield City
   Council Surveyor's Department? - A. No sir.

Q. So if I ask you the same question as I have with the others,
   after Sheffield City     Council assumed responsibilityfor
   the Safety Certificate in 1986, do you know whether anybody
   in the Council, to put it another way, did anybody as far
   as you know give consideration to the application of this
   provision to the ground? - A. The means of escape aspect
   would have been considered at that time by members of the
   Advisory Group.
Q. Can you just look in the bundle at photograph 269. Don't
   lose 178 in the Green Guide. Now this is one of the
   gates from the outside looking in. Do you see that
   Mr. Butler? - A. It is indeed sir.
Q. One of the perimeter gates.   Do you see the latch mechanism?
   - A. Yes.
Q. Now this can in fact only be opened, and it is only
   designed to be opened from the pitch side, isn't it? -
   A. It is indeed sir.
Q. And it is designed not to be opened from the inside, isn't
   it? - A. It is.
Q. So it can't be described as a "means of escape" can it?
   - A. I think I have already answered that question by
   saying that it was outside the remit of my own section
   to determine that.
Q. Well in the meetings - you have not been asked this and I
   perhaps ought to have asked you this before - apart from
   the first meeting that you went to, which you have given
   the date of in August 1986, did you attend other meetings
   of representatives-of the responsible Authorities? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you tell the jury how often? - A. Without looking at
   records then no sir.
                               A. BUTLER



Give an estimate then which nobody will hold you to exactly?
- A. I am sorry sir, I may be so way out it is a long time
ago now.
We won't mind. Is it once a year or twice a year, that
sort of thing? - A. There was meetings of the Advisory
Group in order to consider the different grounds within
the City Council. This could be spread over the three
grounds which by the time of the disaster were actually
designated grounds.
But did the meetings take place at least once a year?
- A. They were more often than that sir.
So between the date of taking over responsibility and the
date of the disaster there had been several meetings of
the Officer Working Party, or its equivalent, which you
had attended? - A. Yes sir.
At which the same list of people that you had mentioned
before attended as well, did they, or same list of
representatives? - A. There would be the same constituent
bodies, not necessarily the same representatives sir.

Now at any of those meetings, as far as you are aware,
did anybody raise the question whether these gates
provided a means of escape in the sense of Green Guide 178,
i.e. "a means for people to travel from any point in a
structure to a place of safety without outside assistance".
Did that topic ever come up in considering these gates?
- A. I believe there is three questions in one sir on that.
The first is when the gates were considered then the answer
is yes. As to whether it would be advisable*, for people
to use them from the inside of the pens without assistance
then that may have been considered but certainly would
have been unacceptable for the purpose that the gates
were put there.




                          Q. They were intended
                                                        A. BUTLER

Q . They were intended to keep the crowd in, were they
    not? - A. Under normal circumstances.

     MR. PAYNE: Sir, I have got one more topic which I
think may take about ten minutes or so. quarter of an hour.

        THE WITNESS:     Can I just expand upon that?

Q. Certainly? - A. The third point which I was meaning
   that had been involved in your first question was
   that it was discussed as to the suitability of the
   gate fastenings and indeed the modification which you
   see within the photograph was one that was seen as
   requiring minimal effort for the safety of
   individuals had they to be used.

Q. May I just conclude then before the adjournment by
   asking you this question; from your point of view as
   a surveyor responsible for looking at particular
   structures such as this ground with a view to safety
   as you have been explaining, would you say it is a
   prerequisite for any exit to be a means of escape
   that it must be capable of being opened by the people
   who want to escape? - A. Not necessarily so, sir,
   being that there is somebody there for that purpose
   who can afford that function.

        THE CORONER: Mr. Butler, we   have not finished
*obviously but you doneed a break, I need a break, and we
 all need a break. We will stop until ten past two. Then
 we will carry on. May I just look at the rest of you for
 the moment because it is a new topic? Can you give me any
 estimate as to how long you think you are going to be with
 M r . Butler because I need to think about what we are doing
 with the people tomorrow? Does anybody want to hazard a
 guess.

        MR. ISAACS:    Not long, sir.

        MR. MANNING:     Not long, sir.

     THE CORONER:   How about you, Mr. King?        I am not
going to hold you to it.

     MR. KING: Sir, until I have heard what everybody asks
in questioning up tome it is very difficult. At the
moment I do not anticipate too long.

        THE CORONER:     You might be a little longer.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:     I will be a little longer but not
long.

     THE CORONER:   I am not going to go any further
because I have got the picture. Ladies and gentlemen, an
                                                 A. BUTLER

hour. It is exceedingly unlikely we are going to get to
Mr. Bownes, is it not?

       MR. ISAACS:   Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Bownes, we are going to need you
tomorrow. If you want to go off this afternoon that is
fine so far as I am concerned but we definitely need you
tomorrow.

                      LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT

Q.       MR. PAYNE: Mr. Butler, the last topic on the
     examination of the Green Guide, although I regret
     there are in fact some other points I want to deal
     with after this, is to ask you please to look at the
     Green Guide, page 35. Do you see that this is
     Chapter 9 entitled "Crush barriers and handrails"?
     Do you see that? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Is this a chapter which you considered when you were
   given a copy of the Green Guide after the Council
   became responsible in 1986? - A. I looked at the
   documents, sir.

Q. Including this chapter then? - A. Yes, sir.
Q. Do you see that it is headed:

          "Many of the hazards arising from crowd
          pressure on terraces can be eliminated by
          provision of well constructed, correctly
          position and properly mounted crush
          barriers."

     Is that right, Mr. Butler? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Is the positioning and mounting of crush barriers
   something within the responsibility of your
   Department? - A. Yes, for the purposes of the Safety
   Certificate. The Club obviously have a
   responsibility as far as the structure on their
   premises as well.

Q. At these meetings of the Officers' Working Party that
   you have been speaking about, this is something at
   the time of your inspections at the ground you would
   particularly direct your attention to in your concern
   about the safety of the ground, is it? - A. Would
   look at this in regard to many other items which were
   to be looked at during that inspection.

Q. As far as these items are concerned, look down at 112
   under the heading of "Spacing of crush barriers", do
   you see that? - A. Yes.
                                              A. BUTLER



Which says:

      "The maximum spacing of crush barriers
      will be dependent on the gradient of the
      terrace or viewing slope. Paragraphs
      113-119 below give recommendations for
      the spacing and strength of crush
      barriers."

Then at 113 it says:
      "Ideally, crush barriers should be
      provided along the full width of a
      terrace, with gaps only at the radial
      gangways.”

That clearly was not done, was it, and so the layout
was not ideal under 113? Was it? - A. With respect,
sir, before my involvement there had been a minuted
decision that this terrace would not be provided with
radial gangways and, therefore, this paragraph does
not apply to it because as such there were no radial
gangways.

Let us just see if we understand that answer. Can
you look in the folder at C.276? What do you mean
there are no gangways? - A. I didn't say that, sir.

Sorry, no radial gangways? - A. There are no radial
gangways within these pens that you refer to by
definition.

So what is the point or comment you are making please
about 113 then? - A. Far be it from me to advise you,
sir, but I believe that since the wording says that
ideally, crush barriers should be provided along the
full width of the terrace with gaps, only at radial
gangways, it presupposes that there going to be
radial gangways.

So that rules out the idea of having crush barriers
along the full width of the terrace, is that your
point? - A. From my viewpoint, sir, if you don't have
radial gangways then you rely upon the spacing
between the crush barriers in order to gain access
and egress from a particular place. Then if you had
a full width run of barrier you would have to
obviously go under those barriers in order to get
from one position to another.

Quite. So the ideal in 113 is obviously going to be
difficult to attain. That is your point, is it? - A.
I did say, sir, that there was a minuted decision not
to radial gangways on this particular terrace and,
                                                          49

                                                    A. BUTLER

   therefore, this paragraph did not apply to it.
Q. Does 115, over the page, apply:

        "Where there are gaps in the line of crush
        barriers these should be at least 1.1 metres and
        not more than 1.4 metres in width.”

   What is your opinion about that, Mr. Butler? - A. My
   understanding is that the majority of the words within
   this section actually presuppose the existence of
   radial gangways.

Q. Do you mean 115 only works where there are radial
   gangways, is that your point? - A. I did not
   necessarily say that, sir. I said that the majority of
   the words applied and presupposed that there would be
   radial gangways. As such, this matter was discussed,
   it was minuted, before my involvement in this area. It
   was agreed between all the parties that the gaps
   between those barriers should be the widths that they
   actually were on the site, and not necessarily using
   these words as being the requirement for their width.

Q. When Sheffield City Council took over responsibility
   and you attended these meetings, did you know what the
   widths, in fact, were? - A. The fact that I could see
   the widths physically on the site, sir, being that the
   work had already been done.

Q. Did you give any consideration to this paragraph, 115?
   - A. Not necessarily, sir, because I took the view that
   my professional colleagues had discussed this matter
   previously when agreeing to the alterations being done.

Q. If consideration was to be given to this rule 115,
   which department in the Sheffield City Council would be
   responsible to see that it was complied with? - A. I am
   sorry, sir, you were talking about consideration and
   compliance. I did not see the connection between the
   two.

Q. I don't want to beat about the bush. I really do need
   to find out whose responsibility it was. I didn't
   think we would have difficulty on this. Is this
   something to do with the structure of the ground, gaps
   in lines of crush barriers, is that part of the
   structure of the ground in your view, Mr. Butler? - A.
   It is, yes, sir.

Q. Does that fall within the ambit of responsibility of
   your department? - A. To provide advice upon that
   subject.
                                                         - 50
                                                     A. BUTLER

    Q. Good. Now then, when we came to the removal of a
       barrier, did you give consideration to the result of
       the removal that it would change the gap, the width of
       the gap, in a line of crush barriers? Did you consider
       that? - A. I considered the effect that that would have
       upon the whole terrace.

    Q. But you haven't answered my question: did you give
       consideration to the provisions of Chapter 9, and in
       particular this paragraph 115, about the width of gaps?
       Did you consider that when the point came up about the
       removal of a barrier? - A. Which particular gaps are
       you referring to, sir?

    Q. Gaps in the line of crush barriers, which should be at
       least 1.1 metres and not more than 1.4 metres? - A. I
       am sorry, I am having difficulty in understanding the
       answer that you are wanting. The gaps between which
       particular barriers, sir?

    Q. I am only asking you the broad question at the moment
       about when the idea came up to remove a barrier, did it
       ring a bell in your mind that this could have an effect
       on whether 115 was complied with? Did that pass
       through your mind at all, that is all I am asking? - A.
       I considered the effect of the removal of that barrier,
       or those rails of that barrier, upon the other barriers
       and the layout of those barriers on that terrace. As
       far as considering whether it would effect 115, I
       didn't know the paragraph numbers off by heart, sir.

    Q. No, but what about the substance of it, never mind
       about the number? - A. As I say, it was the
       consideration of the total effect that that would have.
    Q. It sounds like no to me, Mr. Butler, that you did not
       consider the effect that this would have on whether or
       not 115 was complied with? - A. I am sorry, sir, I did
       not use the word "no".
F
    Q. Well, the Jury have heard what you have said. Now, I
       am going to ask you to deal with the removal of this
       barrier.

           MR. PAYNE:   In order to be able to see which one
      we are talking about, sir, I have taken the liberty - I
      think it is your Officer who has been kind enough to
      help - to obtain some photocopies of one of the annexes
      in the Taylor Report, simply for the purpose of
      illustrating whereabouts the barrier was, because
      otherwise the Jury have not got any illustration of
      where the barrier was before it was removed.




H
                                                A. BUTLER

     THE CORONER:   I think for that purpose, yes.
That is a good diagram, I agree.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, thank you very much. May these
copies be distributed? Give one to Mr. Butler first,
please.

     THE CORONER:     It is 144 we are looking at.
     MR. BEECHEY:     C383.

     MR. PAYNE:   This document, Mr. Butler - just
spend a minute looking at it - you can see the layout
of the terrace with the dividing radial fences, can
you? - A. Yes, sir.

And see the tunnel where it comes under the West Stand?
- A. Yes, sir.

And see the stud walls where the tunnel comes out onto
the terrace? - A. Yes, sir.

Immediately in front of that do you see written the
words "Barrier No. 144"? - A. Yes.

Do you see that part of that is a dotted line and part
of it is a complete line? Do you see that? - A. Yes.

Is this the barrier which was removed at the request of
the Police to stop the build-up of the fans at the
entrance to the tunnel? - A. The parts which are
dotted.

I ought to be able to help you about this but I am
afraid I can't. Do we know exactly when this was?

     THE CORONER:     It must have been after August '86.

     MR. PAYNE:   Yes, it is after August '86. Was it
sometime shortly after Sheffield City Council took
responsibility?

     THE CORONER:   Can I help you, Mr. Payne?
Sheffield City Council because the licensing authority
on 1st April, 1986, so this meeting was about five
months after that.

     MR. PAYNE:     Yes, August:

So it was at that August meeting that you discussed
this subject was it, Mr. Butler? - A. Yes, sir.

When the Police made this request did anyone from the
Sheffield City Council or the Fire Service or the Club
                                                A. BUTLER

or anyone else, as far as you know, say, "Well, we had
better have a look at the Green Guide, paragraph 115,
to see what effect this is going to have on the
guidance about layout of barriers". Did anyone say
anything   like that? - A. Being that it was some years
ago now,   then it is very difficult to say as to whether
anybody else raised such an issue, save to say that
nobody raised an objection to that barrier being
removed.

Now, keep that open in front of you and look at 276,
which I think you have still got open. The use of this
again is   that it has got the scale of it in the top
left-hand corner, do you see that, and we see the 5
metre scale, do you see that? - A. Yes.

Look at the place where barrier 144 has been removed.
Do you see that on 276? - A. Yes.

Look at the rearmost barrier, the one with three spans,
the one nearest to the West Stand. Do you see that? -
A. Which particular one, sir? In pen 3 or pen 4?
In pen 3. - A. Yes.

And look at the right-hand end of that barrier as we
look at   it. Do you see that? - A. Yes, sir.

Look at   the gap between that right    hand end and the
central radial fence between pens 3 and 4. Do you see
that? - A. I see the space, sir.

As near as makes no difference that is 6 metres, and
you can read it off from the scale, can't you? Do you
want to measure it or does that seem right to you? - A.
It seems approximate.

It is certainly a good deal more than 1.4 metres, isn't
it? - A. But the section, I am not sure as to what the
line of   thought is but it says thegaps in the line of
crush barriers, being that you are       now talkingof a
gap, sir, between a crush barrier and a radial fence.

So is your answer that 115 has no application to this
point? - A. Being that this is a guide, and it states
that it is there as a guide, it is not necessarily
meant to cover all circumstances.

Suppose you were in a meeting now in August 1986, and
the Police now, with all the knowledge that you have
now got, were saying, "We want barrier 144 removed
because it causes this awkward build-up of fans at the
entrance to the tunnel. We want this taken away", and
suppose as they were saying that you happened to have
                                              A. BUTLER

with you, open in front of you, a copy of the Green
Guide, open at paragraph 115, which refers to the gaps
- d o you see that? Now, suppose you were in that
situation, would you just keep quiet and say nothing? -
A. Being that we are using the information which we
have now, compared with the information that was
available then, there probably would be a lot more
questions to be asked, including as to why the matter
could not be controlled.

And the Police would say, "The reason is that the fans
like to assemble near the entrance to the tunnel and
that causes the big build-up, and we can't do anything
about it because they don't want to move, they have
come to watch the match and that is there favourite
spot, and it is not realistic for us to be able to move
them"? - A. This is a hypothetical situation, sir, such
that it would have to be dealt with in practical terms,
rather than just a hypothetical exercise.




             /Q. But as the surveyor
                                                A. BUTLER


As the surveyor representing the Sheffield City Council
with responsibility for the Safety Certificate, with
paragraph 115 open in front of you, would you say
anything about that, about the gaps, the effect on the
removal of this barrier on the gap which would be left?
Would you say anything about that? - A. I would want to
consider a lot more than just this one particular section
which you are dealing with.
Now that is the lateral gap.   Now I want to look at the
gap in the other direction which was left by removal of
this barrier.   If you look in the Green Guide at 116 we
will see how this has to be worked out.   Do you see 116?
- A. Yes, sir.

It says:
     "Column A in Table 1 opposite provides the maximum
     distances between barriers conforming to the greater
     strength requirements of crush barriers as described
     above; column B provides the maximum distances
     between barriers conforming to the lesser strength
     requirements.   Interpolation may be made between
     these figures."

Before the disaster, Mr. Butler, as the surveyor
responsible, did you give consideration to this paragraph
116? - A. Yes, sir.
Did you give consideration to Table A? - A. I gave
consideration to the details of the spacing of barriers.

Whereabouts on Table A does this terrace fall - I'm
sorry, Table 1 - whereabouts on Table 1 does the gradient
of the Leppings Lane terrace fall?   Is it five degrees,
ten degrees, fifteen degrees, twenty degrees, or what? -
A. Forgive me, I haven't those figures with me, sir.

No, on Table 1? - A. No, I haven't the figures of the
actual terrace with me.
Have you any idea? - A. The only answer which I do have
to your question is that I believe the interpolated value
from memory is that of about 3.9 metres.

Well, the figure which we have, and there will be
evidence no doubt about this later on, the figure we have
is 4.1, so your memory and ours, there is not much
difference.   That 3.9 in your memory, what does that
relate to?   Which gap is that we are talking about? - A.
This is the spacing between barriers.

You mean going down towards the pitch from the back to
the front? - A. In that form, yes.
                                                A. BUTLER


Your interpretation of Table 1, relying on your memory,
is that Table 1 works out that the gap ought to be 3.9
metres? - A. As I say, I did take that figure from
memory, being that you tell me that it is 4.1, then
that...
You would accept that? - A. We are talking of about those
figures.
Let's take it at the greater gap which is 4.1.    That
would make your interpretation of Table 1 that the gap
between barriers, working from the back down to the
front, ought to be no more than 4.1 metres?    Is that bur
expert interpretation of Table 1? - A. If I believe the
possible way in which your questioning is, then you have
to be very careful about the maximum spacing between
barriers since if taking the tunnel mouth entrance area,
then that is part of a route of travel and not
necessarily there just for the standing of spectators.

Mr. Butler, all I am asking at the moment before we apply
this to the layout of the barriers is I am asking you for
your interpretation of Table 1, and if necessary we can
go through how we arrive at this conclusion - I will go
through it inch by inch if we have to - to see how we
arrive there.   However, to save having to do that as I
understand it it is your evidence that as a surveyor
employed by the Council you arrived at the conclusion
that the back to front horizontal gap between barriers,
ought to be no more than 4.1?   Now is that correct,
4.1 metres? - A. Yes, sir.
I want to apply that to what happened.   First of all
look at C.383, that is the new photocopy we have just
been given.   There is barrier 144 as it was before it
was removed.   Do you see that, Mr. Butler? - A. Yes,
sir.
Do you see there is a gap there between the dotted part
of barrier 144 in pen 3 and then one goes down towards
the pitch and one comes to the next barrier?   Do you see
that? - A. Yes, sir.
Do you know what the width of that gap was before 144 was
removed? - A. The same as it was after, sir.

No, the gap between barrier 144 where it was, and the
next line of barriers? - A. I do beg your pardon.
What was the gap before barrier 144 was taken away? - A.
I don't believe this photocopy is to scale, is it?

No, it is not to scale.   I am just asking you if you
happen to know. - A. I'm sorry, I can't measure that,
                                                A. BUTLER


being that the other barriers were closer than the
maximum permissible according to the Guide, then it would
have been even better than the normal spacing of the
barriers.
Do you mean less than 4.1? - A. Yes.
Now that is taken away, and let's look at C.276, which is
still on the screen.   Now it is taken away.   I want you
to come into pen 3.   Come down the tunnel, enter pen 3,
go down by the central fence and which is the first
barrier you come to, just by your right hand? - A. Being
that you go hard by the fence and that it is the one that
is marked on that particular diagram with the 75:57:36
markings.
Right, go back one barrier towards the tunnel until you
come to the two-span barrier just above number 78. Do
you see that? - A. Yes, sir.
From that barrier, going back up the terrace towards the
stand, what is the gap without any barriers? - A. Is this
one to scale, sir?
Yes, that has got the scale. - A. To a recognised scale,
sir?
It has got the 5 metre scale in the top left hand corner.
What is the gap?   I am not asking you exactly. - A. It
is very difficult.
Yes, it is about 6 metres, isn't it?   I don't want to be
difficult, Mr. Butler. - A. It is just over 5, by the
looks of it.
Well, just over 5.   So the position is that as one comes
out of the tunnel there is practically a square area
which is, by our reckoning, 6 metres by 6 metres, which
has got no barrier in it at all.   That is what one
finds, isn't it, in pen 3? - A. Six metres by six metres?




          Q. That is 6 metres
                                                        57


                                      A„ BUTLER



Q. That is six metres from the last barrier, from the top
   barrier over to the central fence, which we have already
   looked at, and then six metres from the wall of the West
   Stand down towards the pitch until you get to the first
   barrier, so there is a square of about 6 x 6 metres? -
   A. There is the wall of the tunnel entrance sir within that
   area.

Q. But broadly is what I am saying right or not? - A. Being
   the wall over that tunnel entrance would also be to a
   strength similar to a barrier.

Q. Now bearing in mind that the provisions of the Green Guide,
   which we have just been looking at, 115, just go back to
   115 to remind yourself of it, which says there should be
   a gap in the line of crush barriers not more than 1.4 metres
   wide. Right? And the other rule that the gap, horizontal
   gap between barriers should be not more than 4.1 metres
   wide, what is your comment about this space without any
   barrier in it? - A. I believe as I have said on numerous
   occasions to your questioning, sir, the Guide is there
   for the guidance of professionals and not necessarily for
   its slavish following.

Q. You mean professionals like yourself? - A. I mean sir to
   refer to each and every one of the constituent Authorities
   of having professional Officers at that time.

Q. Well when this proposal was put up by the Police that they
   wanted this barrier taken away for the reasons that they
   gave, did anyone at the Officer Working Party ever say
   anything to the effect that we have just discussed now,
   that this is going to leave a 6m x 6m square area un­
   protected by any barrier. Did anybody say.anything to that
   effect? - A. The loss of that barrier was considered and
   the effects of it were considered sir.

Q. Were they considered in thelight of Chapter 9 in the
   Green Guide? - A. They were in regards to leaving a space
   there, yes.

Q. Are you seriously saying that somebody actually thought
   about these measurements and decided it would be safe,
   because if so who? - A. The matter was considered.
Q. What, by you? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Well when you considered Paragraph 115 and 116 what con­
   clusion did you come to? - A. When I had considered all
   of the facts then these were voiced to other members
   who were present at that time.

Q. What was voiced? - A. The effects of that removal.
                                                        58

                                     A-. BUTLER



Q. What effects? - A. The effects which I went through I
   believe with the Coroner right at the start of this session
   sir.
Q. Mr. Butler, are you aware of any document anywhere which
   makes the slightest reference to the application of these
   rules in the Green Guide when the subject came up about
   the removal of Barrier No. 144? - A. I beg your pardon sir.
   Would you repeat that please?
Q. Minutes were kept weren't they of these meetings of the
   Officer Working Parties? - A. Unfortunately no.

Q. What? Minutes were kept generally of the meetings of the
   Officer Working Parties weren't they? - A. Generally of
   the Officer Working Party meetings yes. Of this particular
   meeting, no.
Q. Are you aware of any document ever being made which made
   any reference at all to the fact that the removal of
   this barrier is going to cause a significant departure
   from the Rules in the Green Guide. Can you point us to
   any document where that was ever mentioned by anybody?
   - A. I believe that the Interim Report of Taylor did make
   some reference to that and also that the transcripts from
   that. Those are the only documents that I am aware of.

Q. I am talking about at the time that the subject came up.
   Well no doubt if there is any document it will be produced.

         Is this another case, Mr. Butler, where you would
   accept that your Department certainly would not just do
   what the Police requested about an important matter like
   removing a barrier without applying an independent judgment
   to make sure it would be safe from the building surveying
   point of view? - A. The matters were weighed as to the
   advantages and disadvantages.
Q. From the building surveying point of view the buck would
   stop with you, wouldn't it? - A. Within the Council, yes.

Q. Now that completes the three topics I wanted to look at
   in the Green Guide. Now unfortunately there are just
   one or two other matters that I have just got to clear
   up and to do this I want you, would you please Mr. Butler
   go back to the Safety Certificate which is C381, and when
   you have got that can you also have open C274 which is
   the plan of the ground.
         Now in the Safety Certificate can you turn to page 10,
   the familiar table about crowd capacity. This is something
   which I should have dealt with before and I apologise for
   coming back to it and it is entirely my fault.
                                   A. BUTLER



      In this crowd capacity we know the relevant entries
for the Leppings Lane are the West Terrace, 7,200, and
North-West Terrace 2,900 making 10,100 altogether and
this is the Certificate which was in force at the day
of the disaster wasn't it, Mr. Butler? - A. I believe
so.

Now just applying that to 274, the layout of the. ground.
By the time the disaster happened the terrace as we know
had been divided up by the radial fences, unlike the
condition which it was in in 1979 when these numbers
were first worked out. That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

And the situation in 274, the layout had been like that
all the time since Sheffield City Council took responsi­
bility for the Safety Certificate in 1986. Is that right?
The layout when you took responsibility was as it was
at the time of the disaster? - A. Sorry, I am just trying
to relate various dates together sir.




                    THE CORONER:   I think if I can .
                                                    A. BUTLER


Q.        THE CORONER:   I think if I can help you because
     you did answer the question earlier, you said, "Yes,
     apart from the removal of the barrier".

Q.        MR. PAYNE: That is the only thing? - A. I am
     sorry, sir, I was trying to relate as to when the
     works of installing the last phase of radial barriers
     would actually have been carried out and I believe
     that that work was definitely done before the demise
     of the County Council.

       THE CORONER:   Yes, that is what you told us earlier.

Q.       MR. PAYNE: We have got that. I do not want to
     go over old ground but I am apologising for coming
     back to it. That means that the central part of the
     west stand, apart from the c o m e r of the north west
     terrace, was certified safe to hold 7,200 people, was
     it not, at the day of the disaster? - A. I believe
     so, yes.

Q. Does that mean that as far as the Certificate was
   concerned those 7,200 - and I am not making this as
   an excuse for anybody but am just observing it in
   relation to the terms of this Certificate - could go
   into any one of those pens without a breach of the
   Certificate? - A. I believe not, sir, in that it
   would be, and I do beg your pardon that I cannot
   provide the exact wording instantly from the
   Certificate, the Club who would have a responsibility
   for safe stewarding of that area and not to have
   7,200 people into one of those pens.

Q. The Certificate does not say anything at all about
   these pens because they did not exist when the
   Certificate was made? - A. I wasn't stating that,
   sir. What I was trying to explain to you was that by
   the effective stewarding then it would be a
   responsibility of people who were actually there on
   the day to see that an area was not overcrowded to
   dangerous proportions.

Q. How does the Certificate provide, where does the
   Certificate say, how many should go into each
   particular pen? - A. It does not, sir.

Q. How would the stewards know how many to work out how
   many should go into each particular pen? - A. I said
   that I couldn't find that wording instantly. Do you
   wish me to find it, sir?

     THE CORONER:  I will find it for you. It is page 4,
paragraph 9.2. Have a look and see that is what you have
got in mind.
                                                   A. BUTLER



     MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, going on I would invite the
witness to read not only 9.2 but the whole of that
paragraph. I will explain to you, sir. It says:

         "The Holder shall arrange for the
         attendance at every Specified Activity of
         such number of Safety Stewards as may be
         required by Part 2 of Schedule 3..."

   That is the only obligation. Then those stewards
   have to perform one of the three functions set out.

     THE CORONER:     I know what you are going to say, yes.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: It is obvious, sir, and I would invite
the witness to read that and Part 2 of Schedule 3. It is
quite plain that there no stewards required in the area in
question.

     MR. PAYNE:   I am in your hands as to whatever you
want me to do.   All I am pursuing at the moment is how the
Certificate could be applied to the situation as it was at
the day of the disaster. That is what I am asking about.

     THE CORONER:   I think what you are asking him, Mr.
Payne, if I have understood your question is that because
of the wording of the Certificate and because it was not
ordered it is technically possible to say that the terrace
is only part of it.

     MR. PAYNE:     Yes.

     THE CORONER:   If, for instance, it had not been
divided and by chance 7,200 people had come down and had
stayed in the central area and had not split, the capacity
would not have been exceeded but there might have been
crowding.

     MR. PAYNE:     Quite.

     THE CORONER:   You are saying that the radial fences
make no difference to that.

     MR. PAYNE: Quite. What I am putting is that in the
terms of the Certificate as it was left unamended, the
7,200 could go anywhere along that terrace without breach
of the Safety Certificate.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, that is what I understood you were
putting to the witness. Yes, Mr. Maxwell.

     MR. MAXWELL: May I ask is it seriously suggested that
that has got anything to do with this tragedy because we
                                                      A. BUTLER


are pursuing something which, in my submission, has got no
factual basis and it is time to stop and get back on to
ground to find out how sadly these 95 died.

     THE CORONER:   It is a difficult situation, Mr.
Maxwell. It is an important aspect, particularly the
issues of the barriers and the capacities.

     MR. MAXWELL: With respect, what is important is to
see what tactics are being used and to deny the Police the
use of these tactics.

       THE CORONER:   Well, I hear you.

Q.      MR. PAYNE: What is the answer to the question?
     It is quite a narrow and limited question, Mr.
     Butler, and it is that on the terms of the
     Certificate as it stood at the day of the disaster
     the only number that one could work on is the 7,200
     on the west terrace and provided that number was not
     exceeded then there was no breach of the Certificate
     so far as crowd capacity was concerned. I know it is
     an absurd idea? - A. With respect, sir, I knew there
     was something tenuous within the document and that
     probably paragraph 7 of the Safety Certificate:

           "The Holder shall at his own expense
           arrange for the attendance at every
           Specified Activity of an adequate number
           of police officers to secure the orderly
           and lawful behaviour of the
           spectators..."

     being that all 7,200 were actually going into one
     pen, I would not consider that that would be orderly.

Q. How would the Police know how many could go into each
   pen from the Certificate? - A. They probably wouldn't
   from the Certificate, sir, but the Police Authority
   had been a constituent part of the Working Group
   throughout and, therefore, knew of the discussion
   which had taken place as to any numbers that had been
   even discussed within those meetings that were prior
   to my involvement and I had no knowledge as to what
   took place at those meetings.

Q. Are you saying that from the point of view of
   Sheffield City Council it was left up to the Police
   to judge how many could go into each pen without any
   certified capacity being put in the Safety
   Certificate? - A. It would appear so from paragraph 7
   of this document, sir.
                                              A. BUTLER

Is that what you understood was the policy of
Sheffield City Council during the years 1986, 1987
and up to the disaster that it was left up to the
Police to judge how many could go into each pen
without any certified capacity being told to them? -
A. It would either be the Police or the stewards of
the Club being that they were the only people who
could control the situation on the day.

If that is so, what is the point of putting a
certified capacity in a Safety Certificate at all? -
A. Being that I believe it is a legal requirement to
place such a figure.

It is obvious now with hindsight that very serious
attention should have been given by all those
responsible on the Working Party and all those
responsible for the management and layout of the
ground to work out what was the safe capacity of each
of these pens and how the capacity should be
controlled? That is obvious now, is it not, with
hindsight? - A. With hindsight, sir, a lot of things
are able to be seen.

Can't you answer that question? It is rather an
important one? - A. Sorry, the question again, sir?

It is obvious now with hindsight that when this
terrace was divided up into pens very serious
consideration should have been given by all those
responsible on the Working Party and those for the
layout and design of the ground to working out what
was the safe capacity of each of these pens and how
that capacity was going to be controlled? - A. The
answer must obviously be yes.

Control means a system of counting, does it not? - A.
I am not sure of any other alternatives. However, I
am sure since there may be, then that would leave the
situation at an adequate controlling mechanism.

  THE CORONER:   Do you need a break? - A. Please.

                 (Short Adjournment!

            Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS:

Mr. Butler, it is entirely my fault I am sorry to say
but I can just understand something about the
respective responsibilities of the various
Departments or Divisions within the Council. I must
say that I found it rather difficult to understand
and I would be grateful for your help. The
Department we are talking about is the Building
                                                 A. BUTLER

   Surveyors' Department,, is that right? - A. I can
   understand your problems in understanding this one,
   sir. There two Departments that are involved here.
   There is the Administration and Legal Department and
   the Department of Land and Planning. The Department
   of Land and Planning then is constituted by four
   Divisions.

Q. Could you tell us what those Divisions are? - A.
   Being Planning, Property Services, Joint
   Transportation Policy Unit and Building Surveyors.
Q. That is perhaps where I misunderstood a little bit
   because I understood you to say during some of the
   questions you were asked by Hr. Payne, when you were
   being asked about the Department responsible for the
   assessment of numbers, I understood you to say that
   would be the Land and Planning Division within the
   Building Surveyors' Department and I clearly have got
   that totally the wrong way around. In fact, the
   Department would be the Land and Planning Department
   and within that Department there is the Building
   Surveyors' Division? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Administration Ithink we all know about. That
   basically is the Legal Services Department of the
   Local Authority and they do things like issue Writs
   and serve Enforcement Notices and the like? - A. Much
   to that, yes, as well as many other functions.

Q. They have no specific expertise relating to
   engineering matters. They have to seek advice from
   other Departments of the Local Authority? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. Let us just leave them     toone side for the  moment.
   Let us deal with the Land and Planning Division.   You
   have told us there is your division, the Building
   Surveyors' Department? - A. The Building Surveyors'
   Division, sir.

Q. Are you in charge of that?

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Isaacs, it is Land and Planning
Department and within it there are divisions.

    MR. ISAACS:    I told you it was my fault, sir.
Q. Now of the Building Surveyors' Division, are you the
   head of that or are you acting in some other
   capacity? - A. No, sir, that division then being
   about 95 strong, you split into various units and I
   head the Site Supervision Unit of that division of
   the Department of Land and Planning.
                                              A. BUTLER



Site Supervision Unit? - A. That is right, sir.

Just so that we know what does that actually involve
on a day to day basis rather than in the context of
this case? - A. The normal function of the Division
is to control building regulations and you may know
the term Building Inspector.

Yes, of course, and I think most of the Jury will
appreciate that? - A. Or building control.

So if I was going to be putting up an extension at my
house somebody from your division within this
department would come along and make sure my builder
was doing it right? - A. Yes, sir.

What expertise do people within that division, and by
that I mean Site Supervision, have so far as football
grounds are concerned because, of course, this is
something totally different from seeing whether
building regulations are being complied with? - A. We
have knowledge of constructional techniques of
buildings and as such are able to recognise many of
the first signs of building failure.

That is why you told us and now I do understand why
your concern, or at least the concern of your - could
I call it subdivision - Site Supervision Unit or
shall we just call it the unit? - A. The unit.

Why your unit was responsible for structure and for
those aspects of buildings relating to whether they
would fail or not? - A. That was why I was there.
However, it was as a representative of that division,
being that we also have inhouse structural engineers
on the staff, a Structural Assessment Unit, and they
are also aided in the process of checking matters for
the purpose of safety at sports grounds.

Can we just leave those to one side for the moment
and just concentrate on your activities and your
expertise?? - A. Yes, sir.

Correct me if I am wrong but the situation seems to
be that your unit has expertise in building matters
relating to, for example, whether a building or a
part of the building is in need of repair or
something like that? - A. Yes, sir.

That is what you saw as your responsibility so far as
the Local Authority was concerned, your
responsibility? - A. Yes, indeed.
                                                 A. BUTLER


From what you are telling us there are other units
within your division that have other expertise, that
is right, is it not, because you mentioned one just a
moment ago? - A. Yes, sir.

Engineering expertise and design expertise I
expect? - A. Within the experience of those members
of staff, yes, sir.

Can we just look at that? Apart from the Site
Supervision Unit there will be units full of
consulting engineers? - A. They are structural
engineers but not required to be consultant engineers
being that they cannot take on private work, sir.

Because they only work for the Council? - A. That is
right.

But they have the same qualifications? - A. Yes
indeed.

And you would hope the same expertise as someone who
was a consulting engineer being an independent
professional because that is what a consultant
engineer would be? - A. Yes.

We know that the Club took advice from a consultant
engineer, Dr. Eastwood? - A. Yes, sir.




                   /Q. He was not part of the.
a
                                                                    * 67

                                                                A. BUTLER

               But he was not part of the Working Party that
               considered the question of certification for the
               Council? - A, That is right.
        B      That is right, isn't it? Now, does that mean that you
               would have to be able to consult with people within the
               local authority department structure, somebody who had
               similar expertise to that which Dr. Eastwood and his
               employees had? - A. Being that the need arose, yes.

            Q. When the need arose, and you had access to that, did
               you? - A. Yes, sir.

            Q. Which department or division or unit would those people
               be in? - A. They are another unit of the Building
               Surveyors Division.

               Could you tell us what they are called? - A. The
               Structural Assessment Unit.

            Q. The Structural Assessment Unit? - A. Yes, sir.
    D
            Q. So one of the matters which you would not have
               expertise upon, but which they would have expertise
               upon, would be this question of assessment of safe
               numbers once the arrangement at the terrace had been
               changed? - A. The time that the arrangement was
               changed, then a representative of the division was
               indeed a member of the Structural Assessment Unit.

               Again, I don't quite follow that. We know that the
               original certificate with the numbers which we have
               been referred to on a number of occasions was
               determined in 1979? - A. Yes, sir.

               We know that there came a time when the terrace,
               instead of just being wide open space, became penned? -
               A. In two stages.

            Q. Yes.  Help us, were those stages before or after your
               involvement? - A. Well before, sir.

            Q. But from what you are telling us, because of the way in
               which the County Council delegated its
               responsibilities, Sheffield City Council's Department
               of Land and Planning, within which there are all these
               divisions and units, they assisted? - A. They assisted
               the County Council by providing the building authority
               input.

               And what about the expertise so far as structural
               engineer expertise? - A. That was used, being that the
               person who represented the building authority was
               indeed a member of staff of that unit.



    H
                                              A. BUTLER

I see. This is the point I wanted to ask you about.
Did you ever go to anybody outside your unit, in other
words somebody, for example, in the structural
engineer's unit, for advice about numbers? - A. About
the numbers for that particular terrace?

Yes, for the various pens in the terrace? - A. Have
done of recent times, where the numbers have been
recalculated.

I meant really before the disaster? - A. No, sir.

So is this the position, after you took over in 1985,
up to the time of the disaster, you did not seek any
advice about the calculation of safe numbers for the
individual pens from anybody within the Council who had
the expertise to give you that advice? - A. Being that
had I done that then I would have only gone to the same
member of staff who had been there at the meetings at
the time when those pens were arranged.
So the answer to the question is no, you did not? - A.
That is right, sir.

Do you know from the documentation available to you
whether the gentleman concerned, and I don't need to
know his name, made any assessment as to the safe
numbers? - A. It would have been a consideration, I am
quite sure.

No, I think that isn't quite an answer to my question,
with respect, Mr. Butler. Do you know whether in fact
he made an assessment? Is there anything in the
documentation to suggest that he did? - A. There is
nothing in the documentation there to say so.

So, so far as you are aware, no such assessment was
made? - A. I didn't necessarily say that, sir. I just
said that I could not find any.

No, I am putting that to you. I know you didn't say
it, but I am putting it to you. As far as you are
aware - you haven't discussed it with him, there is
nothing in the documentation. As far as you are aware
no such safe assessment was made? It is a simple
question, Mr. Butler - as far as you are aware? - A.
The answer is yes, but I am also equally not aware that
the opposite took place.

Well I don't understand that answer, so could you
please answer the question? As far as you are aware,
no such assessment of safe numbers took place, is that
right? - A. Yes.
                                              A. BUTLER

Thank you.

             Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING

We talked either this morning or this afternoon about
Enforcement Notices and that sort of thing. You would
be aware of the procedure of putting a condition into
something? You may do this, for example, Mr. Isaacs'
extension, providing that, or on the terms that, or on
condition that x, y, z are done - a conditional
approval of something, or an approval with conditions?
- A. For certain pieces of legislation, yes, sir.

Let us take the very simplest, planning approval. You
are the building control officer, you turn up at his
house, you know that he has got planning permission
because that is there, you have actually got the
document granting planning permission, yes? - A. Yes.

And you know that it is subject to him having to do, or
not do, various things? - A. That is right, sir.

And that planning permission, in fact, does not
necessarily mean that he has got to do it immediately?
- A . True.

It says in effect, as we know, for five years, and then
can be renewed in certain circumstances, right? - A.
Yes.

And between the man getting his planning permission and
then deciding to do the work, the legislation changes
and the man comes to you and says that condition which
was in there does not need to be in there any more. Do
you understand the point? - A. I believe so.

So it is taken back to Council through an officer for
either the officer himself to consider amending it, or
for him to put it either to appointed members or to a
full sub-committee meeting of the planning committee,
to decide whether that condition ought to remain or
not? - A. Yes, sir.

Here was a Safety Certificate. Perhaps you ought to
have had it in your physical possession. With
hindsight perhaps you would agree with that? Do you? -
A. I would have thought that that would have been more
an administration function than purely my own, but yes,
I probably should have had a copy of the certificate
with me.

As opposed to a planning consent, which is a sterile
piece of paper - in other words, it doesn't have to be
actioned until the person wants it actioned - in this
                                              A. BUTLER

instance there was a positive commitment on behalf of
the Council, wasn't there? You had to carry out
regular inspections? - A. Yes, sir.

And you had to make sure that those matters which were
contained in the Safety Certificate were complied with?
- A. It would be the function of the authority to do
that.

Yes, all right. Well, let's take that as an
affirmative as to whose responsibility then. We have
now established that Sheffield City Council had the
obligation to check that what was in Safety Certificate
was complied with, you accept that? - A. Yes, sir.

Now, tell me please, so that I also understand like my
learned friends before, whether you felt that you were
the competent person on behalf of your unit to check
all and every one of those requirements within the
Safety Certificate that was granted by Sheffield City
Council? - A. I didn't feel that, sir.

You didn't feel that? So there were matters in the
Safety Certificate that you felt really should be
within the responsibility of another part of Sheffield
City Council? - A. Yes, sir.

Did you ever voice those views to anyone, Mr. Butler,
or did you just try and do your best to ensure that so
far as you could you looked it through? - A. Being that
I took it that the lead department should take that
role.

So that then, is it the answer to the second part of
it, that you were the lead department and you did your
best to check it through? - A. No, I am talking about
the lead department being the administration and legal
function.

The Administration and Legal Department, having
established that there was a certificate for this
ground, did not have vested in it the responsibility to
carry out the checks? - A. I am not sure of that point,
sir.

So it could be that in addition to those things which
you willingly and very fairly accept definitely fell
into your unit's responsibility for checks, that there
were other matters where you were not sure whether
those fell into somebody else's responsibility? - A. I
assumed that they would be within that other
responsibility.
                                               A. BUTLER

On the occasions that either you or members of your
unit attended at the ground to carry out the checks,
are you aware ever of any member of the administration
department attending at that same time? - A. Yes.

And was there dialogue between you, as the principal
officer of your unit, and anybody in the administration
department, as to the division of responsibilities as
to the checking of matters on the Safety Certificate?-
A. There was a considerable amount of discussion. As
to whether that specific point was raised, I cannot
remember, sir.




          THE CORONER:   M r . Manning, you have
                                                  A. BUTLER


     THE CORONER:   Mr. Manning, you have asked a
perfectly fair question and you have gpt the answer, but
I think in fact I am not entirely happy you have got the
correct answer because what you have put to the witness
is that if he wasn't the sole unit reporting to
Administration and Legal, what other units in the Council
would there have been.   He did tell me earlier, and he
told us before, that in addition to Council input there
was other input.   There was Fire Service input and there
was Police input.
     It may be, and this is really the point that I am
making, that input to Administration and Legal on the
Safety Certificate does not necessarily have to be
limited to Council Departments.
     Will you put the question or shall I do it, to make
sure we get this bit right?

     MR. MANNING:   Sir, you are speaking, by all means
carry on.

                 Further by THE CORONER:

Mr.   Butler, I just want to be sure about this.
Mr.   Manning asked you a number of questions and you said
you   didn't consider you   had expertise in every fieldon
the   Safety Certificate.     That is right? - A. Yes,sir.
He then asked you in effect which was the lead department
and you said Administration and Legal? - A. Yes.

You said you would have   expected them to look for
expertise elsewhere?   That's right, isn't it? - A. Or to
raise the questions directly.
Your answers to Mr. Manning in effect were that you would
have expected them to look to other departments in the
Council for expertise which they might need in order to
assess issues on the Safety Certificate.   Now is that in
fact your reply? - A. No, not necessarily the departments
of the Council, but other constituent parties to the
Working Group.
You would include in the input to Administration and
Legal, yourself? - A. Yes, sir.
The Fire Service? - A. Yes.

The Police? - A, Yes.

Possibly Environmental Health? - A. Yes.
                                                 A. BUTLER


Plus any other departments that might be consulted? - A.
That's right.
That is what you are saying? - A. Yes.
     THE CORONER:   Does that help in any way,
Mr. Manning, or have I totally destroyed your argument?
I hope not.
     MR. MANNING:   I am going to continue developing the
point if I may.
        Further Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

There were a lot of things to consider when inspecting
the ground? - A. Yes, sir.
I take it you didn't just go up and have a cup of tea
with the Club Secretary and say, "Everything is all
right.   See you in six months' time"? - A. Far from it,
sir.
You have said that your principal interest was that the
structure was secure and your principal expertise was
that you had knowledge of the constructional technique of
buildings and therefore could recognise structural
defects.   Is that right?   That is how you would... - A.
Yes.
Is it fair to say that of the input you made into that
you were particularly interested in the fabric of what
was there and that it was still in good condition or
repair? - A. Yes, sir.
Were you interested in and, if so, what other aspects
that you saw as being your Unit's responsibility in this
consideration of the Safety Certificate? - A. We can be
interested in many things.   However, that does not
necessarily mean to say that you have a direct input to
them.
I understand that. What are the items you had the direct
responsibility for? - A. Basically buildings and
structures, sir.
Back where I was two questions ago.    To your knowledge
was there any check list which highlighted all the things
that had to be looked at in the Safety Certificate and
had somebody ticked them off and put their initials or
whatever it was against it to signify that they had
looked at that particular point and were satisfied about
it? - A. There was no such check list.
                                                            74

                                                    A. BUTLER


Q. So you might have assumed, indeed, from what you have
   said, did assume, that other people would take care of
   other aspects that were not within your specific ambit? -
   A. Yes.

Q. When a time came that you, having been appointed to this
   position in 1986... - A. 1985, sir.
Q. You obviously had inherited a football ground, and that
   the Green Guide was revised, did you then look at the
   specific bits of your responsibility along with the Green
   Guide and say, "Now does this change anything?" - A. I
   looked at the Green Guide and its change, being that that
   was November of 1986, and looked to material changes.

0. But the only changes that seem to have been implemented
   were of the words of the Certificate rather than the
   substance or the conditions of the Certificate?   This
   ongoing process you had been talking about prior to the
   disaster was about the wording of the Certificate and not
   about the conditions? - A. Yes, indeed.

Q. It is fair to say that the publication of the new edition
   of the Green Guide, so far as you were concerned, did not
   cause you to suggest any material alteration to the
   specifics of the Safety Certificate? - A. It was actually
   after the publication of the 1986 version that the
   discussion started on to the revision of the Safety
   Certificate.

Q. Of the wording, not the specifics?    That is what you
   said? - A. The wording was to change.    Also the
   groupings of various conditions together.

Q. It was possible that the Green Guide may have made some
   alteration to the conditions necessary, in the same way
   as I made the analogy of the planning consent and then
   some piece of information or legislation which altered
   the situation, that that wasn't considered to be
   necessary so far as that Safety Certificate was concerned
   from the issue of the Green Guide in 1986? - A. I didn't
   deal with such considerations.

Q. You are not aware that anybody else dealt with that
   specific consideration? - A. Of changing the wording due
   to the change of the Guide?   I don't believe so.
   However, I could be wrong.
Q. You were in discussion with a lot of people and you don't
   think any of them raised any necessity to look again at
   the conditions because of the new Green Guide.   Just one
   last point and it is this: I take it you don't adopt a
   position that because you have been appointed in 1985
   that everything must have been hunky-dory before you?
                                                A. BUTLER


Just as a general proposition you would look at what had
been going on in the Department in the past? Yes? - A.
Yes.
If there were matters with which you either did not feel
comfortable or positively did not agree, you would
obviously raise those either with your immediate superior
Officer or ultimately bring them to a Minute in a Council
meeting or a sub-committee meeting? - A. It would depend
upon the confidence of that particular person and his
ability to make decisions.
I think you said at some stage you must have see the
Safety Certificate? - A. Yes, sir.

You said that by and large the work within your
Department wasn t of this type, it was of the more - I
hesitate to use the word - mundane, but of the everyday
type of the building control factor? - A. Yes, sir.

This was a special situation and therefore I imagine you
familiarised yourself with something which wasn't just
the ordinary everyday situation? - A. Endeavoured to
familiarise myself as much as I was able to do at the
time.
You yourself did not raise anything with regard to the
Safety Certificate which caused you concern? - A. At the
time of looking at the new drafted conditions and of the
existing Certificate, then, yes, I believe various
comments were made at that time.
That was, of course, afterwards.   It was ongoing before
the disaster but it was some time after your appointment?
-A. Yes, sir.
However, up to that time you had not made any comments as
to the matters within the Certificate? - A. No.

     MR. MANNING:   Thank you.
     THE CORONER:   No, Mr. King, we won't start, if you
don't mind.   Mr. Butler has had a long day and so have
we all.
     Mr. Butler I am afraid I have to ask you to come
back tomorrow because we haven't quite finished.   We are
about half way, I suppose.   Anyway, in the meantime
would you please remember you are still on oath.   This
is not strictly speaking a pause, it is just that we have
to adjourn, so don't discuss the evidence with people and
be prepared to be back here at ten o'clock tomorrow.

     Ladies and gentlemen, ten o'clock for you tomorrow.
                                                 A. BUTLER

             (In the absence of the jury)

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Do we take it that the proposed
witnesses for tomorrow are Mr. Butler, Mr. 3ownes and
Inspector Bullas?

     THE CORONER:   Yes.   I think that unless we finish
at noon we will not take anybody else, even if we finish
at 2.15.   I think we all need a break.

     MR. FOSTER:   Sir, could I introduce myself?    I am
acting for the South Yorkshire Fire Service.    It may be
that tomorrow I will have soine questions of Mr. Bownes
and I would ask your leave to put those questions.

     THE CORONER:   Certainly.   That's it then, tomorrow
morning at ten.

     (The Inquests were adjourned until 10.00 am
                the following morning)
