                                                                                              M IR .15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                   D ate and tim e raised                                Number
                                                                                                                          2)
 T itle                      &T~      O         X -     ^ \~ ^ >               C o u M                   l^ Q L y A Q

 ( Include source an d a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)      r~^
^ k .                                  V " '-                      ,-Ou"^CSC2-_          rX 2 i 5L. .

    eceiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                            Receiver




                                                                                                                            Indexer
 D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

  No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                        Statement Reader
 Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                            Indexer
  Indexed as indicated

  No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                                   SIO
  Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




                                                                                                                            Indexer
  F urther action No(s)


 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER
          ON THE 15th   OF   APRIL 1989.


           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


                   COLIN WAFER




                        Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                             At

              The Memorial Hall,
                  City Hall,
                  Sheffield.

                             On

         Wednesday, 18th April, 1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER             Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                          Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH              Medical and Dental Union of
                          Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                          Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER


     PROF. A. USHER Sworn

          By The Coroner


     M.R. SAWERS Called

          By The Coroner


     M. LAYTON Called

          By The Coroner


ADJOURNMENT
18th April.   1990-
               INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF COLIN WAFER

     THECORONER:     Members of the Jury,what I am now going   to
do, and I will do so in all the 95 cases, I am going to read to
you what was said at the opening, because first of all you ought
to know it.   It is standard form.  It will be the same for
everybody.  You will need to know it, but it will differ, of
course, because the names will be different.    Basically it will
be in the standard format.   You need to know it because it
repeats names and it gives ages and places of birth and so on,
because is all the information we need to have in our records.

     So we will now resume on the Inquest of Colin Wafer.  I
opened this on 18th April, 1989.  Neil Anthony Parkin, the Acting
Coroner's Officer said by way of documentary evidence:

          "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
          identified to SPC 66 Finnerty of theSouth Yorkshire
          Police as that of Colin Wafer by Ian Wafer, his
          brother.  He was 19 years of age, having been born on
          5th January, 1970, at Liverpool.   He was a single man
          and lived at                          1 in Liverpool.
          He was a bank clerk by occupation.   He died at
          Hillsborough Football Ground following an incident
          there on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.   SPC 66 Finnerty
          caused the body to be removed to the Medico-Legal
          Centre and there he identified it to Detective
          Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently identified the
          same body to Prof. Usher.   It is the family wish that
          the body should be cremated".

I then signed the Cremation Order and adjourned the Inquest to a
date to be fixed.   As a precaution we circulated the families
with a pro forma on which we recorded names and places of birth,
and  in this case the form was signed by M r . J. Wafer, and he
confirmed the details which I have already read out, name, age,
date of birth, place of birthand occupation.       Your instructions
are that that is correct, I take it?

     MR. FRASER:      They are, sir.

     THE CORONER:   We will now recall Prof. Usher.  Prof. Usher,
I want you to retake the oath, and this will be it then for all
the Inquests which you will be attending, because you will be
sworn for all of them.

     PROF. ALAN USHER was called and took the following oath:

     "I swear by Almighty God that the evidence that I shall give
     shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
     truth in respect of each of the bodies on which I performed
     a post mortem examination as a result of an incident which
     occurred at the Hillsborough Football Stadium on the 15th
     April, 1989” .



                                  1
                                                                        PROF. A. USHER

                    A
                                                      Bv THE CORONER:

                                Prof. Usher, you are Alan Usher, Professor of Forensic
                                Medicine, as we know.  Is it correct, in fact, that you
                                performed the post mortem on a young man called Colin
                                Wafer? - A. Yes.
                    B
                                And I think I am right in saying that this man was identified
                                to you by somebody you did not know but you understand was
                                Simon Weigold, who identified bodies generally to pathologists
                                of whom you formed a group? - A. Yes.

                                At about 9.30 in the morning or thereabouts? - A. Yes.  I
                                think I would like to say that the principal identification
                                was when the body actually came into the post mortem room, and
                                a name was given, and I checked that against the number and
                                against the tag which was on the body.

                                And in fact in virtually every case the bodies also had names
                                and numbers written on some part of their anatomy? - A. On the
                                leg.
                    D,C .       In large indelible letters? - A. Yes.

                                And you are quite satisfied that this was Colin Wafer? - A.
                                am, sir.

                        C       Can you give me the cause of death?        The cause of death,
                                sir, was traumatic asphyxia.
                    E0          As you know, I don't like upsetting families by taking you
                                through word for word, but just very briefly tell me the
                                reasons for this conclusion? - A. Yes.  This young man who was
                                normally healthy and in my view had an average expectation of
                                life had fairly typical signs of traumatic asphyxia.   His
                                brain was swollen.  His lungs were congested and there were
                                petechiae present on both the lungs and the heart.   He only
                                had very slight injuries in the form of grazes just under the
                                chin and on the side of the neck and on the shin, none of
                                which were larger than about an inch.  So that these were
                                lesions which were caused by things grazing past him or him
                                grazing past them.  He had no serious injuries.

                                There was a little bit of possible inhalation of blood you
                                thought may be from a nose bleed.  Is that right? - A. Yes,
                                but people who lungs are that congested as in traumatic
                                asphyxia often actually have a haemorrhagic fluid develop
                                which sometimes comes down the nose and appears at the mouth.
                                I looked for a lesion in the nose and did not actually find
                                it. So I think this was probably part of this traumatic
                                asphyxia.

                        0   ,   And there were no boney breaks in this particular case? - A.
                H               No.  The injuries were actually trivial.

                        Q.

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                            2
                                               PROF. A. USHER




           THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, any questions?

        MR. FRASER:       No, the family have no questions, sir,'
   thank you.
        THE CORONER:    Any questions from anybody else? (No
   response)   Prof.Usher, we w o n ’t be dealing with the second
   Inquest so there is no reason why you should remain.    I am
   sorry about that, because I realise it may have been
   inconvenient for you because you hav6 cancelled some other
   arrangements.  Tomorrow morning, if you could be here a little
   bit early, in case we manage to squeeze the second one in
   first thing in the morning.

        We have already heard from Dr. Forrest that the blood
   alcohol in this case was negative, or non-detected. You may
   have noticed that Dr. Forrest used the words "non-detected" in
   every single case.  I make no distinction, and I am quite
   happy to use whichever word you prefer.

           MR. FRASER:    "Negative" is preferred by the family, sir.

           THE CORONER:    Now, who is the Reporting Officer in this
   case?

              POLICE INSP. MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS Called:

                             Bv THE CORONER:

Q. You have already been sworn, have not you? - A. I have, sir.

Q. Would you please give us your name and title, please? - A.
   Matthew Robert Sawers, Police Inspector, West Midlands, sir.

Q. If you would be good enough then to take me through your
   summary. - A. Yes, sir. At 10.40 hours on Saturday, 15th
   April, 1989, Mr. Jim Wafer saw his son, Colin Wafer, leave the
   family home with the intention of travelling to Sheffield to
   watch the F .A . Cup Semi-Final football match at Hillsborough
   Stadium.  Colin was to travel alone on a coach organised by
   Barnes Travel from Liverpool.

        Shortly after 15.00 hours, following the severe crushing
   in the West Stand terracing Police Sergeant Eddison made his
   way to the Leppings Lane end of the pitch where he saw a
                                       M .R. SAWERS


number of supporters crushed against the perimeter fencfe. The
officer made his way into the enclosure through gate 3 and
assisted to carry out a number of apparently lifeless bodies,
including a man who he now knows to be Colin Wafer.

     Police Constable Steven Allen of the Metropolitan Police
was off duty at Hillsborough Stadium as a spectator and had
taken up his match viewing position in Pen 3. Following the
crushing on the terraces Police Constable Allen assisted to
remove a number of injured and apparently deceased spectators
from the enclosure, including a youth whom he believes to be
Colin Wafer.  Colin was carried by police officers away from
the gate in the perimeter fence and onto the pitch.

     Chief Superintendent Nesbit was one of those officers who
assisted to remove Colin from the enclosure.

      Shortly after 15.05 hours Policewoman Roberts made her
way onto the Leppings Lane end of the ground.   There she saw
two officers who were having difficulty carrying a youth who
she now knows to be Colin Wafer.   WPC Roberts assisted to
carry Colin onto the pitch.   He looked very pale and appeared
unconscious. The policemen left and Policewoman Roberts was
joined by another female officer believed to be Policewoman
Gill.   This officer has been unable to identify Colin, but was
later confirmed on video as assisting him.   The two officers
gave mouth to mouth and heart massage.   They were joined by a
St. Johns Ambulanceman who has not been identified, who also
attempted resuscitation.   After several minutes he informed
the police officers that Colin was dead.   An anorak was placed
over his face and the officers went to assist other persons.

     Shortly after 15.06 hours Police Constable Bevis made his
way to the Leppings Lane end of the ground where he was
approached by a number of supporters carrying a youth who he
now knows to be Colin.  PC Bevis, too, attempted to
resuscitate but was unsuccessful.  The officer also describes
placing an anorak over Colin's face before going to assist
other casualties.

     Special Constable Finnerty made his way to the Leppings
Lane end of the ground where he saw a man who he now knows to
be Colin lying on the pitch.  Special Constable Finnerty,
together with Police Constable Wheelhouse, Police Constable
Groome and a number of supporters, including Mr. Brian Holme,
Mr. Howard and Mr. Headon, carried Colin on an advertising
hoarding to the Spion Kop area of the stadium.  A doctor, who
as yet has not been identified, examined him but could find no
signs of life.  Special Constable Finnerty carried Colin's
body into the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had been
set up.

     At 15.40 hours Dr. Andrew Byrne examined Colin in the
temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

     At 01.35 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 1989, Mr. Ian Wafer
identified the body of his brother to Special Constable
                                                                   M-R. SAWERS

                    A
                          Finnerty in the temporary mortuary at the gymnasium.

                               Special Constable Finnerty later escorted Colin's body to
                          the Medico-Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
                          Detective Constable Simon Weigold.

                                On 16th April, 1989, following identification^by
                    B     Detective Constable Weigold, Prof. Alan Usher carried out an
                           autopsy and submitted a report giving his cause of death.

                               Found in Colin's personal effects was a full match ticket
                          for the match, but in the circumstances it cannot be
                          established exactly how or when he entered the stadium.

                        3. It is clear from the summary that a lot of people had dealings
                           with this lad? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

                          And I think my reading of the summary is that every single one
                          of them, starting from Police Sergeant Eddison downward, or
                          along, might be a better word, all came to the conclusion
                          that when they dealt with Colin he was unrevivable? - A. That
                          appears to be correct, sir, yes.

                    D           THE CORONER:   I pause here, because we are going to   take
                           the visual evidence next.  Have you any questions of this
                           Officer?
                                MR. FRASER:   The family have no questions, sir.

                                       PET. INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                    E                            Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q. Now, you have already taken the oath.   Just repeat your name
                           for the record? - A. Yes, sir.   Michael Layton, Detective
                           Inspector, West Midlands Police.

                        Q. Could you now take me through the rest of the summary as far
                           as the visual evidence is concerned? - A. Yes, sir. An
                           examination has been made of video film and photographic
                           evidence in respect of Colin, and Colin has been identified in
                           the process of being removed from the enclosure which we have
                           referred to earlier as No. 3, in fact via the actual gate.
                           That visual evidence shows that at that time he was apparently
                           dead, and he is removed on to the pitch and is subsequently
                           shown being carried on a hoarding across the pitch.

                                Sergeant Eddison and Police Constable Allen have viewed
                           visual evidence, and they have identified themselves on BBC
                           video, respectively showing them assisting to remove Colin
                           from Pen 3. The references in respect of those
                           identifications specifically relate to the BBC tape, which is
                           MAP 7, timed at 15:21:21:24.  In other words, 15.21 hours, 21
                           minutes past 3. Again on MAP 7 at 15:21:04:10.
                H
                                Chief Superintendent Nesbit has also viewed visual
                           evidence and he has identified himself on the same video tape,

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                       5
                                      M. LAYTON


MAP 7, again at 15:21:28:12, as was said, assisting in the
process of removing Colin from the pen.

     Policewoman Roberts has viewed visual evidence, and she
identifies herself on video, the same tape, MAP 7, reference,
timed at 15:21:32:12, and again she is in the process of
assisting Colin on to the pitch.  The officer has signed a
plan showing the approximate location where she first came
into contact with Colin, and this plan has been given the
reference number GR 1. She produced a second plan showing the
approximate location on the pitch at where she attempted to
resuscitate Colin.  The reference number for that is GR 2.

     Ex-Police Constable Anthony Bevis has viewed visual
evidence, and he has identified himself on photographs, and
states that at the time he was assisting with Colin on the
pitch.  The reference numbers referred on those photographs
are RBI/3 and RBI/4.

     Brian Holme has viewed visual evidence, and he has
identified himself with two friends, a Mr. Howard and a Mr.
Headon, and again they are shown on photographs assisting to
carry Colin across the pitch.  The reference numbers in
relation to those photographs are PR3/32A and PR3/33A.

     As a direct result of Mr. Holme identifying himself on
photograph, PC Brown, who is one of my colleagues, has
identified the same stretcher party on a further photograph.
The reference numbers in relation to in fact the two
photographs are LPE/4/10 and LPE/4/11.

     Special Constable Finnerty has viewed visual evidence,
and he has identified himself on photograph, together with PC
Groome and PC Wheelhouse, and at this stage they are in the
process of carrying Colin across the pitch.  The reference
numbers in relation to those photographs are ASP/10,
LPE4/11, and in addition the officer has completed a plan
of the pitch indicating the approximate location at which
he first came into contact with Colin.  That has been
referenced JF2.

     Mr. and Mrs. Wafer have in fact themselves seen the vast
majority of the visual evidence, and they are, I believe,
satisfied that it does show Colin.

We have a couple of plans, MWJL129, I think that is right? -
That is correct, sir.

Can you come across? I hope at the Medico-Legal Centre we can
do this a bit more conveniently.  I don't want to use the
photographs, as I explained to you earlier.   (I will tell you
why I give all these references when I finish). Can you
indicate the location where Colin was found within the
terraces on your first plan, MWJL 129? - A. Yes, sir.
Specifically, if we look at the model in fact, specifically in
the gateway, Gate 3.
                                                                      i>! * LAYTON



                        Q.   Directly in the gateway? - A. Yes.

                        Q.   Then if you turn over to your other plan, MWJL20, thereare
                             several markers there.  Can you indicate on the pitch, these
                             are positions where he has been identified as being carried or
                             helped? - A. Yes, or had attempts to resuscitate him.

                        Q.   Can you just show us? - A. They are basically a sequence of
                             photographs which take Colin from this area here, across the
                    B        pitch, here, and then towards the Spion Kop end of the pitch.
                             There is an alleyway, an exit here, which in fact goes towards
                             the gymnasium.  The last photograph we have got actually shows
                             Colin’s position round about this area here at the Spion Kop
                             end.

                        Q. I think those are all the plans we need in this instance.

                                  THE CORONER:     Mr. Fraser, is that all clear to you?

                                  MR. FRASER:     Yes,   sir, and to the family.     Thank you for
                             that.

                                  THE CORONER      Is it clear to you, ladies and gentlemen
                             of the Jury?
                    D
                                  A JUROR:      I could not see where he was pointing.

                                  THE CORONER:     You could not see?   We will show you on
                             the plan, because     it may be easier to see it, in fact.

                                  THE WITNESS:     Specifically, in relation to the plan MWJL
                             129, the location   on the video is directly in the gate at Gate
                    E        3 in enclosure 3.    If I take you to this plan here, it is a
                             sequence of photographs which actually start in this area
                             here, goes across towards the centre half and across the pitch
                             and finally the last photograph being in that location there,
                             a diagonal across the pitch.

                                  THE CORONER:   Have you followed that? Ladies and
                             gentlemen, any questions on this? Thank you.

                                   I will tell you what C numbers we are going to give to
                             these plans tomorrow morning, and we will add it to the
                             transcript.   We want to sort out how precisely we are going to
                             do i t .
                                  You may wonder why on earth we have read out all the
                             references to all the photographs, because I am not producing
                             those.  Those are not exhibits as far as I am concerned.   They
                             are the evidence or the support on which Inspector Layton's
                             evidence is based.  That is why he is able to give the
                             evidence because he has looked at those photographs, but I am
                             not exhibiting them at the Inquest, but we have given the
                             references so they can be recorded in the transcript and so
                             that if at some point in the future when somebody says, "Well,
                             why did you say that?” , we know where to look, and you know
                H            where to look.


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                            7
    Is that satisfactory to you, Mr. Fraser?

    MR. FRASER:   Yes, sir.
     THE CORONER:   I know you know them anyway because you
have already seen the summaries, so in that sense you are not
in the same position as everybody else, but does it sound
satisfactory to all of you?   I don't want to make all these
photographs and others exhibits. What I want to do is to use
the plans as demonstrated as the exhibit, but we want to know
what the base is of which those plans are prepared.  I hope
that is satisfactory.

     Ladies and gentlemen, I am going to adjourn this
Inquest again now to a date to be fixed. As I do so, I
want Mr. & Mrs. Wafer to know that although it has been a
hard day today because we have done an awful lot, and we
have done your Inquest last.  We had to do it this way.
Somebody, (a) had to go first, and it happened to be you,
and (b) we had to do it after we had done the
preliminaries, and I am sorry about that.

     You may also realise a lot of this seems a little bit
cold and clinical and so on.  It has got to be that way
because of the situation which we all find ourselves in, but I
do want you to understand, and I am sure, Mr. Fraser, you will
explain it to the family that I , and I am quite sure the Jury,
are very conscious of the loss which you have suffered.

     Adjourned until tomorrow morning, let us say quarter-to-
10, in case we can make it.

        (The Inquest into the death of COLIN WAFER
           was adjourned to a date to be fixed)
