HER MAJESTY *S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
              (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

         (Her Majesty*s Coroner)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

           28th January, 1991




       TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




 From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
      Official Shorthand Writers,
  55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                           Page

R. McMAHQN Sworn

    By The Coroner                          1
    Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne            14
    Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning          16
    Cross-Examined by Mr. Humphreys        17
    Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell          19
    Further by The   Coroner               21
    Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne    21
    Further by The   Coroner               23

A. BOOTH Sworn

    By The Coroner                         24
    Cross-Examined     by Mr. Payne        31
    Cross-Examined     by Mr. Humphreys    33
    Cross-Examined     by Mrs. McBrien     35
    Further by The     Coroner             36

J. FITZPATRICK Sworn

    By The Coroner                         37
    Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne            44
    Cross-Examined by Mr. Humphreys        44

J. SINGLETON Sworn

    By The Coroner                         46
    Cross-Examined     by Mr. Payne        52
    Cross-Examined     by Mr. Humphreys    52
    Cross-Examined     by Mrs. McBrien     53
    Cross-Examined     by Miss Addleman    53
    Further by The     Coroner             54

R.E. SEPHTON Sworn

     By The Coroner                        54
               THIRTY NINTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                 MONDAY, 28th JANUARY, 1991

        THE CORONER:      Good morning.     A new face!

     MR. HUMPHREYS:   Mr. Humphreys, sir, solicitor,
standing in for Mr. King today and probably tomorrow.

        THE CORONER:     Yes.    Robert McMahon.

                       ROBERT MCMAHON Sworn

                         By THE CORONER:

It is Robert McMahon? - A. That is right.

It is                                      Clwyd? - A. Yes,

I think you are a financial project manager? - A. I was
at the time, yes.

I think I am also right in saying you are a Liverpool
supporter? - A. That s correct.

It was your intention to come and watch the semi-final in
Sheffield on the 15th April, 1959? - A. Yes.

You travelled, I think, with your son and your daughter?
- A. That is correct.

I don't know what time you left Clwyd but you got to the
motorway turn off at about one o'clock and you were
coming from the Nottingham end? - A. Yes.   I think that
is one point that should be made, that I travelled from
Nottingham.   I dropped somebody off in Nottingham and
then travelled from Nottingham to the game so I didn't
come in in the same direction as the majority of
Liverpool supporters.

In fact having got to the turn off, it took you quite a
while, I think you said an hour and a quarter, before you
managed to park? - A. That's right.

You were eventually directed towards the Leppings Lane
end because you were a Liverpool supporter? - A. Yes.

You arrived there at about 2.25? - A. That is correct.

When you got there, just describe in a couple of
sentences what met your eye? - A. I think the only way it
could be described was mayhem.   There were a very small
number of entrances, turnstiles, I think it was half a
dozen.   It was a slope down from the road towards the
                                               R.   McMAHON


turnstiles and the area in front of me was completely
full of people.   There were four or five mounted
Policemen, two or three Policemen on foot.   The crowd
was milling around.   There was a set of gates away from
the turnstiles and the crowd, basically, was just full.
I think that is the only way to describe it.   There was
a wall on the left, there was a barrier on the right, and
there was a set of gates in front of you so the whole
area between myself and the turnstiles was almost
enclosed and you couldn't move in it.

When you say there was a big crowd there, which you have
just described, was that between the set of gates and the •
turnstiles themselves or on the outside? - A. It was
overflowing outside those gates, so there was a crowd
before the gates, but the main problem was once you were
inside the gates.

You mentioned a slope. We have all seen the area so we
know it.   You are not suggesting it was a steep slope at
that point? - A. No, as you came down the road you looked
down into the area from the road, but it then curls
round.

Did you come across a little bridge?   When you turned
into the turnstile area, did you turn right or left? - A.
Right.

That is right, you did come across a little bridge then.
- A. Yes.

The mounted Officers you saw at that stage were they
within the perimeter...   We call these railing gates
perimeter gates just for convenience.   Were they within
or without as far as you remember? - A. As far as I
remember there was one almost on the gates and one within
the gates.   I think the other two were outside.    In
fact I think one of them was outside the rail on the
right hand side.

That is in the road way? - A. Yes, it runs straight down
the side to where the exit...

If you turn round to the model for a moment -
Sergeant Griffiths, iust point to the road way along the
River Don. - A. That s right.

That was where one of them was, as far as you remember? -
A. Yes, but there was one actually where the gates were.

Were the gates at that point open or shut? - A. Open.
                                                  R.   McMAHON


There are three pairs of double gates there and you may
not have seen them all, but did you actually see all
three pairs? - A. I only remember seeing one pair.

Which pair is the one you noticed? - A. The pair of
gates, if you like, nearest to the right hand barrier, as
I went in.   That was all.   I can just remember going
through a set of gates.

When you say the right hand barrier, do you mean nearest
the river? - A. Yes.

Those were open as far as you remember? - A. Yes.

I think that you, your son and your daughter got
separated by the Police horse at one stage? - A. At one
stage, yes.

I think your son got split off from you? - A. Yes.

Was he inside or was he outside?   It doesn't matter very
much, but... - A. My son was behind me.   There was
myself and my daughter here and then the Police horse and
then my son.

There was some altercation between you and the Officer,
but I don't think that is terribly relevant to us? - A. A
very minor incident.

Eventually he did manage to rejoin you? - A. Yes.

How long did it take you to get from the outer perimeter
gates into the area which actually leads to the
turnstiles? - A. It was literally a matter of minutes.
The crowd was only just outside those gates, really. We
were then into the back of the crowd and in.

So at that stage the crowd outside wasn't...   It was
pretty dense, I think you say, once you got inside? - A.
Yes.

You presumably aimed for one of these turnstiles? - A.
Yes.

Together with your family, of course? - A. Yes.

Am I right in thinking it took about twenty minutes
before you managed to get through? - A. We didn't get
through the turnstiles.   We never entered the
turnstiles.

How long were you in that area? - A. Probably round about
the twenty minute mark.   In that time you were facing
all directions, if you like.   One minute you felt as if
                                               R.   McMAHON


you were getting close to the turnstiles.   The next
minute as the crowd moved you were away and back to where
you were again and then you were going to the left and to
the right so it was very much as though you were milling
around and getting nowhere.

So there was a lot of crowd movement, you say? - A. Yes.

Did you perceive where that movement was coming from? -
A. I think it was basically there was no queuing
whatsoever, so you were probably twenty, thirty, maybe
even forty deep trying to get through six turnstiles and
as people were trying to get into the turnstiles there
was then people trying to push back away from the
turnstiles, people trying to push away from the wall so
everybody that was in a difficult situation was trying to
free themselves so obviously that meant a lot of milling
around.

That is very helpful, the way you have described it.
Did you notice whether there was any specific pushing
from the rear? - A. There were a number of times when
people were trying to get in and the gates were closed at
least on one occasion.   I remember the gates being
closed behind us and thinking, "If they close the gates
and those gates remain closed, then at least if everybody
just goes in there will be no real problem."   The gates
were re-opened though because I definitely saw the gates
open again after they had been closed and there was
certainly more pressure coming from the back because as
it was approaching kick-off time obviously people who
were arriving then wanted still to get in by kick-off
time.

By this time had you got sufficiently close to the
turnstiles that you were within the area bounded by that
low railing? - A. Yes.   The railing was on the right.
If we are facing the turnstiles, the railing was on the
right all the time.

Presumably you could not really see what was happening at
the gates as to how they were being operated? - A. No.

All you knew was that you realised they had been shut? -
A. Yes.   On one occasion I definitely saw the gates
closed and then on another occasion later I saw the gate
opened again and more people coming in.

Within the area in which you were there were some mounted
Officers as well?   I think you mention at least one? -
A. There was at least one mounted Officer there, yes.

Was he having any success in relation to controlling the
crowd? - A. No.
                                                R.   McMAHON


You then, as you have said, didn't enter through the
turnstiles.   What happened? - A. We were right up
against the right hand rail and a Police Officer was
standing on the right hand rail by the wall of the
turnstile shouting to everybody to push back and
whatever.   Another Police Officer then - we were almost
crushed up against the rail, pushed quite closely to the
rail, and a Police Officer...    My daughter was on my
right hand side.   He grabbed hold of my daughter and
started to pull my daughter underneath the rail.    I then
suggested that he stopped, that we wanted to stay
together.   He said,  It's OK, come this way."    Cathy
then went underneath the rail.   I followed Cathy
underneath the rail and as we went round to my surprise
the main exit gate just alongside the end of the rail and
the start of the wall was then completely open.    It
wasn't partly open by a couple of feet, it was open by -
I don't know - six feet, or whatever, pulled right back.

Full width? - A. The Police Officer then left us.   As he
got us underneath the rail he stopped there presumably
talking to other people and we walked round and into the
gate and just straight into the ground.




       Q. Perhaps I ought to
                                                      R.   MciMAHON


    Q. Perhaps I ought to have asked you before I asked you
       this, when you were in this milling mass of people did
       you feel endangered yourself? You may have felt
       uncomfortable but did you feel endangered? - A. No.
B   0. Did you see anybody else who appeared to you to be
       endangered in that mass? - A. Not at that time, no.

    Q. I am talking about outside. - A. I didn't see anybody
       outside the ground that I felt was that distressed that
       they could have - you know, it never crosses your mind
       at the time - but be injured or lost life or whatever.
       It was very crowded, it was very crushed, it was very
       uncomfortable but that is the limit I would put on it.

    0. Did you see any youngsters being passed over people's
       neads? - A. No. There was a couple of people trying to
       climb up and climb away from it, up the wall and that
       type of thing, but I didn't actually see anybody being
       passed around.

    Q.   You then, as you have just told me, entered through
         .... - A. The exit gate.
D
    Q- We call it gate C. - A. It is the first gate that is
       shown open there above the River Don.

    Q.   Yes, I am sure it is gate C. Can you point to it? - A.
         Yes, that one.

    Q.   Having entered you were in the concourse area, is that
         right? - A. Yes.

    o.   I take it quite a lot of other people entered with you?
         - A. Yes, there was a lot of people entered but there
         was no crush at all.  It was then just walking, if you
         like, walking smoothly and easily into the gate and
         through the gate area into this sort of open area in
         front of you.

    o,   You headed for the tunnel, is that right? - A. Yes, as
         far as I was aware that was the only entrance.   I had
         never been to Hillsborough before that particular day.
         You came through the gate and there was a tunnel
         opposite to you. The general flow of the crowd was
         just straight towards the tunnel so we just walked
         straight towards the tunnel with them.

    Q« The tunnel presumably was fairly crowded with people,
       would that be right? - A. It was very crowded, yes.
    0 , Was the crowd still moving or was it stationary? - A.
        It was moving all the time but I would say once you got
        into the tunnel you were not walking. The nearest I




H
could describe it was shuffling.  You were literally
just moving forwards inches at a time but I don't ever
remember being stopped.  It wasn't stationary but it
was certainly shuffling forward slowly.

Did you notice whether the whole width of the tunnel
was filled? - A. I felt as though it was.

Did you notice whether anybody was coming up the other
way? - A. There was nobody coming the other way.  I
don't think anybody would have been able to come up the
other way.

Did you notice whether anybody was standing along the
sides of the tunnel? - A. No.

You may not have .... - A. I didn't notice anything
like that myself.  I just felt as though the whole
tunnel was full of people and they were all in a column
together.

I should just ask you this.  As you entered the tunnel
we know that one can actually see the pitch from the
concourse end, did you by chance notice the pitch? - A.
No, I didn't see the pitch at all.  It was just a
tunnel.  In fact, it was a very bright day, a very
sunny day, and as you entered into the tunnel it became
very dark very quickly, and even though I am six foot I
did not notice anything.  I did not see anything in
front of me, it was just a tunnel that you went into.

When you got to the exit of the tunnel though,
presumably you were able to see terracing, or
something? What did you see? - A. Basically it was a
bright light.  It was going then the opposite from
going from the bright light into the dark tunnel, it
went from very dark into very bright very quickly, and
the^first thing I realised was, in fact, that within, I
don t know, 20 yards, however deep the terrace is, you
were right behind the goal. The first thing that hit
me was bright sunlight and the goal, just the top of
the goal.

Can you remember when you exited from the tunnel
whether you went left or right? - A. Yes, quite
definitely we went left.

You definitely went left. - A. We were towards the
left-hand side of the tunnel and as soon as I saw tne
goal we were again towards -- we were right behind the
goal but to the left-hand side of the goal, and my
immediate reaction was basically, "Oh my God, we don't
want to be here, let's get to the side", and we tried
                                             R.   McMAHON


as much as possible to push then to our left because we
were on the left-hand side.

You wanted to get to the edge, if I can put it that
way? - A. Yes, away from the back of the goal, and out
of any problems or crush or whatever.

Is that because you had been behind the goal before in
matches, and you knew that that area tends to get more
crowded, or why did you want to leave that area, or
perhaps you don't like watching from behind the goal, I
don't know? - A. No, it is the first thing you said,
basically.  I have been watching football for a long
time.  I have never stood right behind the goal.   I
have stood on the Kop for a long, long time and we
stand higher up and to the side because, if you like,
everybody - I don't know how to describe them - all the
nutters or whatever - all the people that like to enjoy
themselves most by jumping up and down and being
crushed together like to stand right behind the goal.
There was no room, there was no space and I felt it
would be a lot safer and a lot better to the left-hand
side.

How old are your children? I didn't ask you that. - A.
At the time they were 16 and 17.

When you first exited and said, "My goodness me, this
is the wrong place", can you remember whether any of
the players were on the pitch? - A. Yes.

They were on the pitch? - A. Yes.

They weren't playing, I take it? - A. No.

Can you remember whether both teams were on or not?
You may not be able to remember? - A. Not definitely,
no.

But the players were definitely on? - A. The players
were definitely on the pitch.

At that point I realise you did not like it,but how
concerned were you when you first exited from the
tunnel? - A. Instantaneously, just as you said didn't
like it, I thought I was in the wrong place and I
wanted to be away from behind the goal where it would
be crushed, and we started fairly successfully, we
moved probably four, five, six feet, away from the
entrance to the tunnel to the left and down a few
steps. Once you had got that far away, perhaps six
feet away from the tunnel to the left, and down, I then
became concerned very quickly because there was a crash
barrier again about another, I don't know, five, six
                                             R.   McMAHON


feet in front of us, four feet in front of us maybe,
and at that time a crush really started to build up and
there was somebody bent backwards over the crash
barrier, so he was facing towards me and being pushed
backwards, and in fact started to scream out,
screaming, pleading with people to push back, and it
was that point then I think I became very, very
concerned that not only were we in the wrong place
behind the goal, but I certainly did not like the look
of the crash barrier just in front of us either, so I
was trying to, if you like, push further to the left
and at the same time everybody was trying to push back,
but you were just having no effect.

Quite often in a big football crowd if it starts to get
crushed or pushed up a bit, if you sort of bend your
knees and push backwards you can in fact get a bit of
movement, you can get a foot there or 18 inches there.
There was just nothing.  You were literally, there was
nothing happening because the crush became so great,
and this guy was still starting to howl out just in
front of us, and again it wasn t a young kid or
anything, it was a man, a big man, in quite some
distress on the barrier.

Of course, in addition to worrying about this man and
yourself, you were also concerned for your children
obviously? - A. Very much so, yes.




      /Q. Would I be right
                                               R. MCMAHON



Would I be right in saying that what you have
described, was it just an increase in the pressure
which you felt or was it - we have tended to use the
word surge but what I am trying to say is - a
pulse? - A. I think it was a general increase. To
get a surge I think you would have to have quite a
lot of movement. You would have to have quite quick
movement through the tunnel to sort of really push in
and you could not move quickly through the tunnel.
As you came to the end of the tunnel it did become a
sort of bit freer and people sort of came forward, so
there was a little bit of a surge but I think
generally it was just a total build up of numbers.
Every now and again that build up instead of becoming
extremely unpleasant and very worrying, in fact,
became petrifying. That was the different stage.
Every now and again there was another crush and you
thought, "By God, what is happening here?".

You have already told me the players were on the
field. Did you actually see the game kick-off at any
point? - A. Yes, the game kicked off within minutes
of us being there.

In relation to when you saw this man whom you have
just described? - A. That was before the kick-off.

It was before the kick-off? - A. But only, I don't
know, minutes. Certainly not more than a minute or
two before the kick-off and the second real surge
came just on the kick-off.

So what you are really saying is that having
traversed the turnstile area with a certain amount of
difficulty but no particular danger to yourself you
managed to get down a tunnel which was full but there
was no particular pushing? It was a shuffling gait.
Everybody was moving forward relatively slowly? - A.
Yes.

You managed to get on to the terrace where initially
you were able to make a little bit of headway towards
the left which is where you were wanting to go? - A.
Yes.

You then saw a barrier ahead of you and a man who was
in distress? - A. Yes.

You realised that you were in the wrong place and
there was some danger present? - A. Yes.
                                                 R. McMAHON



It was just at about that time that you started
feeling this substantial increase in pressure? - A.
Yes.

That happened a minute or two before the kick-off? -
A. Yes, that is right.

Is that correct? - A. Yes, that is very close.

Were you able to see - and I am moving away from you
for the moment - you have told me about the man? - A.
Yes.

How far down the front could you see towards the
perimeter fencing? - A. I could see the perimeter
fence clearly.

Could you see what was happening down there with
regard to the people because you were behind them? -
A. No, I had no idea whatsoever how bad it was at the
front until much later on.

How did you eventually leave the pen yourself? - A.
The first time I left the pen was through a hole in
the fence at the front and went on to the pitch to
get my son who had already gone over the top of the
fence on to the pitch.  I then came back to the same
hole in the fence on to the terrace again. We waited
for, I don't know, an hour and then left the ground
through the tunnel, back through the same gate we
came in, and back on to Leppings Lane.

May I ask you this; we know what time the fencewas
breached if I can use that word? - A. Yes.

Prior to that, what was the terracing like around
you? Did it remain compacted in the way in which you
have described right up to the time when you left or
did it clear to a certain extent at least? - A. It
cleared dramatically quite quickly. There was enough
to breathe and move and you felt then safe, if you
like.

How long did that in your pen, would you say?    You
have told me about the kick-off? - A. Yes.

Did you see the match finish? - A. No.

I am just interested to find out what the position
was like in the area where you were? - A. I didn't
know the match had stopped.  I didn't know the
players had left the pitch until you were able to
actually see that there was nobody there, if you
                                               R. McMAHON



like, and you realised then that they had gone. They
may have just been leaving the pitch or away from the
end where we were across to the tunnel.

At that point was it already becoming clearer in the
area where you were? - A. Certainly clearer, you
could breathe.  I think the best way I can describe
the crush to you at that point when it really came
just after the game had started, there was one
particular incident when my daughter who is
considerably smaller than I am, Kathy is only sort of
5' 2" or 3", Kathy was standing between me and
another man and the man was side on to me.  I can
only describe it as my nose was actually crushed
inside his ear. His head was side on to me and my
face was sort of crushed up into his ear like that
and Kathy was between us. That is how, if you like,
it was. You felt as though you couldn't breathe
hardly and yet Kathy was between the two of us and it
felt as though the crowd was coming over the top of
Kathy. Myself and, in fact, this chap next to us
were almost trying to push her head up and saying to
her, "Just keep your head up, keep your head up, you
will be all right". That is how close it was. Now
at that point there was no way you could have seen
what was going on on the pitch. Within a few minutes
suddenly, in fact, you could turn around and move
again.  It was still packed but you weren't crushed.

Did you notice whether anybody was trying to get out
through the tunnel? - A. No.

You did not? - A. I never remember seeing the tunnel
again until we walked through it. There were lots of
people behind us trying to get into the stand. There
were people hanging over the stand pulling people up
from the base, you know, pulling them up from the
floor into the stand. For a lot of the time I was
actually facing that way towards the stand.  I wasn't
facing towards the pitch and I couldn't turn round.
You couldn't do anything. You couldn't control your
movements in any way.

So you were further into the pen than the overhang? -
A. Yes.

The people who were being pulled up, could you see
what they looked like? You were in a pretty awful
situation. What I am trying to find out is how far
back was this situation as far as you could see. Do
you understand what I am asking? - A. Yes.  I would
say that I was six to ten feet away from the stand
wall.  Something like that. At one point so far as I
                                                  R. McMAHON



am aware the first barrier, just after kick-off, when
another sort of crush came, I was turned and pushed
towards the barrier.  I hit the barrier sort of side
on, sort of just in about this area here, and my
daughter at the time had been in front of me and as I
realised we were going towards the barrier, I sort of
pushed Kathy to the side and hit the barrier side on
and Kathy went to the side.  I don't know the
distances.  I am sure you know the distances from the
layout or whatever.  I would estimate it was
something like, I don't know, 10 or 12 feet from the
wall of the stand and that is where we spent most of
the time.  I think that people who were lucky enough
to be in the extreme left hand corner, with the wall
is here and the fence runs down to the pitch here, in
that little corner, may have been reasonably safe.
To be honest, to be enough room to get out of the
crowd and to be pulled up, it must have been less
compacted there than it was where we were because I
think if somebody would have tried to pull any of us
up I don't think they could have got us out. That is
how closely packed we were together.  So it was
certainly less compacted just behind us than it was
from where we were further down.

Could you see the railing fence going down? - A.
After the initial crush then I had seen the railing,
yes.

Did you at that point or at any point notice any
gates at the back? - A. When a Police Officer came to
my house some weeks later me and assured me that
there were gates there and said he had walked through
the gates I didn't believe him.

Really.  So at the time you did not know? - A. I
couldn't believe that there were gates there.

We are going to show you a little plan of this
terrace and I would like you to put a little cross on
it where you were? - A. Yes.

Can you walk round to the overhead projector? - A.
Ye s .

  MRS. PERKINS:   This will be C.394.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed.
Could you just sign it please? - A. Yes.
                                R.   McMAHON


           Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Mr. McMahon, I wonder if you would be kind enough to
help the Jury, please, not about the particular
circumstances of this disaster, which you have
described very graphically and helpfully, but about
your experience of the crowd packing densities which
have come to be accepted as the norm at football
matches in general.  I would like you to help the Jury
from the benefit of your own experience. First of all,
just give an outline of what your experience is in
attending football matches? - A. Do you mean how long
I have been attending them and how many I have been
to?

And whereabouts in broad terms? Keep your voice up.
- A. I was brought up living very close to Tranmere
Rovers.  I started to attend Tranmere Rovers with my
father when I was about A or 5 years old.   I am now 42
years old, so I have been going for some 38 years to
football matches on a fairly regular basis.   I
remember one particular game at Tranmere Rovers where,
when I was only small, I felt very crushed and it was
probably one of Tranmere's biggest gates, but nothing,
even though I was probably only 7 or 8 years old, like
I felt at Hillsborough.

Quite. - A. From then on, from about 1963 onwards, I
have been going to Liverpool on a fairly regular
basis. For most of the time, other than when my
children were very small, we have been on the Kop.
When they were very small we went into the stand.  So
for probably - I don't know - 20 of the last 25 years
I have spent almost every week, or almost every other
week, on the Kop and I have visited quite a number of
other grounds some years ago before the children were
born.

Twenty years on the Kop I think gives us a pretty good
idea - A. You can think back to various games when the
Kop has been very full.

Okay, let me help you.  I just want to direct your
evidence.  Obviously the situation at Hillsborough was
very much worse than any other situation.  That goes
without saying and the Jury are well aware of that? -
A. Yes.

What I want you to help about is the kind of pattern
density that has come to be accepted as the norm, do
you understand that, in the normal run of matches? -
A. Yes.
                                R.   McMAHON


Let us take it and start off behind the goal where you
do not like to stand. - A. Yes.

How would you describe that at a normal match, a well-
attended normal match? - A. I would suggest, I do not
know how deep the steps are, the steps are probably 9"
wide, or whatever, I do not think they are quite a
foot wide, maybe a foot wide. You would have the step
that you are on, quite often there would be a person
on the step in front of you, there would be people on
the side of you. Those people would be perhaps
touching you and I am not saying you are not in
physical contact with anybody else, but I think in the
vast majority of games the vast majority of time you
are standing with somebody in front that you are not
touching, somebody behind that is not quite touching
you.

Yes. - A. You are not actually in physical contact.
People to the side you are probably sort of touching.

Right - A. Quite often in games there is also a gap in
the step between you and the next step down, so you
are on one step, then there is a step and the person
is on the next step in front of you. So again you are
there to them, but you are not actually pressed
against them, but you may well be touching them but
only just touching them, I would say.

Thank you very much. Now describe the circumstances
in which sometimes you can get some relief. You said
sometimes you bend your knees and push back and you
can get a foot or 18 inches. What sort of situation
do you have to do that in? - A. Right.  Sometimes, if
you like, before a game is starting or at a particular
time, perhaps after a goal has been scored, that type
of thing, if a goal has been scored people tend to get
just a little bit excited. Well, it depends which way
the goal is scored.  Sometimes when a goal is scored
they get quite excited.  People jump up and down, and
then get into a position that they weren't in when it
first started.  So sometimes you then need to re­
adjust your position to get into a good place.  Other
times when a crush builds up perhaps before a game
starts as people are trying to get into the game,
trying to get into another place, then again you need
to sort of bend and push backwards to get yourself so
that nobody is, if you like, leaning on your back and
you are not going to stand for the whole of the game
in that position with a person on your back.

Do you agree with other evidence that the Jury has had
that before the kick-off there is sometimes a big
crush, but after the kick-off and in the first few
                                R.   MeMAHON


moments of the match, then the crowd finds its level,
that is the expression? - A. I think it depends very
much on the type of crowd it is and the type of game
it is. If it is a game where people are arriving
late, if it is a game where perhaps it is not all­
ticket and people are trying to get in, then there
might be a bit of a crush right towards the last
minute.  In the normal run of occasions, yes, it
builds up a bit as people are coming into the game
just before the kick-off.

So a big crush just before kick-off? - A. I wouldn't
say a big crush before kick-off.  I would say it gets
busy before the kick-off.  I think you have got to try
and make sure there is a big difference between what
we are talking about with regard to a crush and a
build-up in the number of people that are coming into
the particular area at the same time.  I do not feel
ever that I have been crushed in a football match
before.
Quite.  I just want to see if I have got an answer
from you on that point, that it is not uncommon for
there to be a packing, crowding - whichever word you
like - immediately before the kick-off, but that
within the first few moments of the game the crowd
eases itself out? - A. That can certainly happen, yes.

          Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

It was not your intention, indeed had not been your
intention, as I understand it, for some time to stand
behind the goal itself? - A. That is correct.

Have I correctly noted the whole of what you have said
in talking about that - "All the nutters that like to
stand together get crushed and jump up and down and
stand behind the goal". That was the way in which you
put it? - A. Yes.  It depends, I think, how you say
something. That can be described in a fairly
derogatory manner;  that can also be described in a
very friendly and, if you like, general manner.  That
is an expression I would use. When you use it it
sounds somewhat more derogatory.  It was not meant
that way.

I did not mean it that way either. What you were
saying is that you choose to have a little more room?
- A. Yes.

And perhaps not to get what some people consider to be
the prime view, that behind the goal? - A. That is
correct.
A
                                                                17

                                           R.   McMAHON


    Q.    But there are lots of people who aim for that    as being
           the point that they want to get to? - A. I am   sure
           they do, yes.
B
    Q.    When you got into the terrace   itself from the tunnel,
          could you then see whether at   that time there were
          people then who were actually   either climbing into or
          being assisted into the stand   above? - A. No.

    Q. You could not see that? - A. As far as I am aware,
        there wasn't anybody doing that.
             MR. MANNING:     I have no other questions.    Thank
    you very much.
                    Cross-Examined by MR. HUMPHREYS:

    Q.    Mr. McMahon, just a few things you can help us with.
          When you got into the crowd how would you describe the
          mood of the people there? - A. Into which crowd,
          outside or inside the ground?
          I am sorry, once you had got through the tunnel and
          you are in the mass of supporters just before kick-
          off? - A. When you say "mood", there was certainly no
          antagonism, there was no angriness,  there were no
          problems. In fact, in the tunnel it was quite
          friendly. People were sort of singing and whatever,
          you know, going through the tunnel. When we got into
          the actual terrace itself, initially again there was
          no problem in any way.  It was just a normal football
          crowd anticipating the start of the game.  I think it
          was within minutes that you realised then people were
          extremely worried and as the crush built up to beyond
          bearing point.

           You have been asked some questions about crushing just
           before the game. Let me try and as k you to explain a
           few things. Would you agree that a lot of people like
           to get behind the goal, so that if you come into the
           Kop, for instance, before kick-off there will be a
           concentration of people behind the goal and the wings
           of the terrace will be fairly empty , as it were? That
           is where the first build-up occurs, is it not,
           normally? - A. Quite often that is the way it comes,
           yes.
           You have seen that happen at other grounds as well? -
           A. Yes.

     Q.    Would you agree that quite often in those
           circumstances it is the younger people who like to get
           behind the goals?



H
                                                              18

                                          R.   McMAHON


              THE CORONER:  I am sorry, I just did not hear
         that question.  Could you just repeat that?

B   Q.        MR. HUMPHRIES: Would you agree that in this sort
         of area behind the goals that people like to go
         behind, it is quite often a lot of young people? - A.
         Yes, that is where I used to stand some, say, 25 years
         ago.  I don't now. My son would be very happy to go
         and stand there now, but I would prefer that he stands
         with me.  I think the only other thing you did say,
         though, was that there was something like crushing
         before a game.  I think I tried to make clear before,
         when this gentleman here was asking me, if you are
         going to talk about crushing and define crushing, I do
         not know how you do, but the way I think of crushing
         since Hillsborough is completely different to anything
         that you may think about crushing in any other game.
         I do not feel as though I have ever been in a crush
         and I never want to be in another crush if that is
         what a crush is like.

    Q.   It was totally abnormal? ~ A. Yes.

    Q.   Let me ask you this. At Anfield, or other grounds
         that you have been to, has the density of the crowd
         ever stopped you getting where you want to be in the
         ground? ~ A. Not that I know of, no.  I can never
         remember an incident.  It might take you a bit of time
         to get there, you might have to sort of push your way
         through, or whatever, but not really, no.

    Q.   I think you described people standing on steps in
         front of you and behind you? - A. Yes.

    Q.   But if you had wanted, for instance, to get a cup of
         tea or go to the toilet, you would weave your way in
         and out? - A. Yes.  I have never been in a situation
         where I could not control my movements and go where I
         wanted to go prior to that time.

         Just for the matter of clarification so that there is
         no misunderstanding, when you say "nutters' behind the
         goal, do you mean young people jumping up and down,
         that sort of thing? - A. I think that is a very good
         description, yes.   Perhaps my word was not well
         chosen.

    Q.   The normal happy behaviour of a football crowd at a
         semi-final? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Can I just take you   back to when you came through Gate
         C, and your natural   inclination was to go towards the
         tunnel. Were there    any stewards, Police Officers, or
         anyone in authority   in that area stopping anyone? - A.


H
                                                                 19

                                           R.   McMAHON


         I didn't see any other person in authority from the
         Policeman that actually pulled my daughter out of the
         crowd until after the crush had gone.  I am fairly
B        sure that there were no stewards or Police personnel
         inside that area between the tunnel and the gate and,
         in fact, in a letter that I wrote some time ago, right
         after the incident, I felt that one Police Officer
         and/or steward standing at the gate of the tunnel,
         because there was no pushing, there was no fighting,
         there was no anything to get to the tunnel, if one
         person would have just stood at that tunnel and said,
         "Either go to your left or right, left or right boys
         to get in, no problem the other side , that would have
         been the end of the difficulties.

                MR. HUMPHREYS:   No further questions.    Thank you.

                     Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

         Mr. McMahon, when you were making your way from the
         exit gate, Gate C, to the mouth of the tunnel, you
D        were making your way with a considerable body of other
         people, is that right? - A. Yes.

         Did you see anyone fall over within the group of
         people making their way from Gate C to the tunnel?
         A. No. Although you say a considerable group of
         people, obviously there was a considerable group of
         people but once you had been in a crush outside, then
         we had gone underneath the rail and into the gate and
         it was just a group of people. You were just
         literally walking freely from the gate towards the
         entrance to the tunnel.  It was only when you were
         compacted into the tunnel that it again became so
         crowded. But I didn't see anybody at any stage fall
         in the sort of walk towards the tunnel or in the
         tunnel.
         I am interested in the concourse, Mr. McMahon. - A.
         Yes.

    Q.   You did not see anyone fall over? - A. Not at all.

    Q.   Did you see anyone lose their shoes? - A. This was
         before we got to the tunnel?

    Q.   Yes.    - A. No.

    Q.   Between Gate C and the entrance to the tunnel, you did
         not see anyone? - A. I didn't see anybody like that
         and I would be surprised if there were enough people
         there to cause that at the time I went through.
                                R.   McMAHON


I am not interested in your surprise, so much as
fact that you did not see anyone lose their shoe
I definitely didn't see anybody like that.




                   /Further by THE CORONER:
A                                                                21

                                                       R.    McMAHON


                      Further by THE CORONER:

    Q. I just want to ask you one other question about mood.
       You have described the mood on the terrace.    What was
B      the mood outside the turnstiles - not when you were
       coming through Gate C but when you were actually aiming
       for the turnstile area? - A. I think everybody was
       getting quite agitated because they wanted to get into
       the game.   It was getting towards kick-off time.
       People wanted to get in.    There was a total lack of
       organisation.    There was no queuing or whatever, and it
       appeared that nobody was going in.    I think a number of
       people actually thought the turnstiles had been closed at
C      some time.    People around you were sort of saying,
       "They've shut them.    There is nobody going in.   What's
       happening?"    So people were starting to get a little bit
       agitated and wanted to know what was going on and were
       upset they could not get in, but there was no aggravation
       at all, no problem in any way.

    Q. You have mentioned an Officer who was shouting.   Did you
       hear any tannoy messages at all? - A. No, I can't
D      remember hearing any messages at all.

    Q. Neither from the front nor from the back? -     No.

    Q. Did you by any chance see a Land Rover? - A. No.

                Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

    Q. You have expressed surprise about something that was said
E      at the end of the bench here and you have given evidence
       about what you thought would have been the effect bf a
       Policeman or a steward standing at the entrance to the
       tunnel. - A. Yes.

    Q. That is from the way in which the situation appeared to
       you at the particular time that you and your children
       went across the concourse and into the tunnel? — A. Yes.
F   Q. You, of course, haven't been here during the rest of the
       Inquests, obviously? - A. No.

    Q. I take it from the time you went through you would be
       surprised that the three gatemen at that gate, who have
       actually given evidence - and I am summarising the effect
       of their evidence - said there was no way they would have
       put themselves in front of the crowd as it came through
       Gate C and headed for the tunnel for fear of being
G      knocked over.   That would surprise you from your
       experience at the time you went through, I take it? - A.
       I would put it at more than surprise.   It must have been
       a completely different time or a different day from when
       I was there.




H
                                               R.   McMAHON


One of them in fact was knocked over.    Does that come as
a surprise to you? - A. It does, indeed.    Can I add
something that might clarify that?    I think you will
note from what I said, I was in the crush on the left
hand side, the barrier was on my right. We were
together.   The three of us were together.    The
Policeman grabbed Cathy and Cathy went underneath the
barrier.   I then went underneath the barrier after Cathy
and the crowd had sort of closed in and John wasn't close
enough to the barrier to get under the barrier.    When we
went under the barrier John was then only perhaps two or
three people away from the turnstile, so Cathy and myself
went round and through the gate and stood on the other
side of the turnstiles inside this concourse you are
referring that was so crowded that people were being
knocked over.   Cathy and I stood there and waited and as
we were standing waiting for John to come in through the
turnstile, John then came through the gate, so John had
also come underneath the barrier that the Policeman had
directed him to do, and came in.

While we were all waiting Cathy asked if she should go
and get the programmes, so the two of us were standing -
I don't know - ten yards inside the gate, Gate C, that
had been opened, waiting for John to come through the
turnstiles in front of us, and then John came from the
side.    We were, if you like, still then in a mental
state, that there was absolutely no problem and no
difficulties and we couldn't foresee what was in front of
us, obviously.   Cathy was so all right, if you like,
that she was suggesting she go and get a programme.

There was absolutely no crush at the time we went in.
There was no hassle, there were no problems.   It was
only when you entered the tunnel that it started to build
up a bit.   If that was at a different time of the day
than these three people who were there who were so
terrified of this crowd that was going, in I don't know
how late it must have been.   When we went through it was
a trickle going through the gate and there was no way
that anybody could have been hurt or injured and we
actually stood and waited for my son to join us.

That is probably the explanation.   When you went through
you described it as a trickle going through the gate? -
A. Yes, the gate was wide open.   It wasn t opened by...
One of the Police Officers who first spoke to me...

What do you mean by a "trickle"? - A. There were people
walking through the gate.   You know, three or four
people at a go walking through the gate, who were being
directed in by the Police Officer.
                                                               23

                                                      R.   McMAHON


    Q. It is obvious that you are talking about a different
       time.

                      Further by THE CORONER:
B
    Q. Can I just ask one question which interests me?   When
       you were waiting there - you have told me about coming
       the gate - do you recollect whether the gate shut at all?
       - A. I don't ever remember the gate shutting.

    Q. You know which gate I am talking about?   Gate C. - A.
       Gate C was wide open when we were directed into it and I
       don't remember it shutting.

      Can I say just one thing, and I don't know whether
      everybody noted it, but I think it is important that I
      came from Nottingham.   A number of things that have been
      said were all directed at people coming from Liverpool.
      Again I am in no way trying to make any comments adverse
      to any Nottingham Forest supporters, or whatever.       I
      approached the ground from Nottingham.   I approached the
      ground from the M.l, and then queued for a long, long
      time.   On the way to the ground there were an awful lot
      of Nottingham Forest supporters that I went past.    It
      was all very friendly, high spirited, and whatever.     A
      lot of them were taking the Mickey out of us because
      obviously Cathy and John had Liverpool scarves on and
      whatever.

      We parked the car and went straight to the ground and all
      I can think of is that all those people were behind us,
      well behind us, and arrived at the ground, must have
      arrived at the ground after me and yet they had no
      problem.   I think that to me sums it up.   It is the
      total lack of control and organisation...

    Q. You had better stop now.   I have let you tell me about
       where you came from, but you cannot address the jury and
       it is for them to draw the conclusions from the evidence.
       - A. I just felt it was important to know I was coming
       from a different direction and I think it does put a
       slightly different...

    Q. We have heard several people from the Nottingham area...

           MR. PAYNE:   If I may be allowed to ask a question
      or two, I don't think that ought to pass without further
      questions, because the layout at the two entrances to the
      ground are quite different and when this witness speaks
      with some vehemence about lack of organisation he is
      talking about two completely different situations.

            THE CORONERS   Mr. Payne, I don't think we need go
       into it because like everything that has been said at




H
                                                     R.   McMAHON


   these Inquests, everything is double edged.   If you are
   going to argue that the organisation at the Nottingham
   end was so superb, as opposed to the Liverpool end...

        MR.   PAYNE: No, I am saying there is a difference.
   I am saying it is not fair to draw this comparison which
   he has.
        THE   CORONER:   Well, the jury will be able to sort
   it out.     I don't think it is necessary to explore it any
   further.
        Mr. McMahon, may I thank you for coming.    I know
   this is your second visit because the first time we
   overran and I had to ask you to come back, but I
   appreciate your coming here.   Thank you.

        When the time comes, ladies and gentlemen of the
   jury, I hope I will be able to distinguish for you how
   you approach the evidence and how you deal with it.    For
   the time being we will just press on.

                      ANDREW BOOTH Sworn

                        By THE CORONER;

Q. You are Andrew Booth? - A. Yes.

Q. Is it still                             Derbyshire? - A.
   That's right.

Q. You are 20 now? - A. I will be 21 in two weeks.

Q. I don't know what you are doing now, but you were working
   for a newsagents? - A. I work for my dad, yes.

Q. You left home, I think, on Saturday, 15th April, 1989, at
   about ten with your friend Paul Clark, is that right?- A.
   Yes.

Q. He unfortunately lost his life? - A. Correct.

Q. You went to meet another Mr. Clark, Mr. Kenneth Clark, at
   Chesterfield? - A. That's right.

Q. Then you came by car towards Hillsborough Stadium? - A.
   Yes.

Q. You were a Liverpool supporter, is that right? - A.
   That's right.

Q. Both you and Paul had tickets for the terracing? - A.
That's correct.
                                                    A.   BOOTH


Kenneth Clark had one for the North Stand? - A. Correct.

Can you remember what time you arrived at the stadium? -
A. Probably between half past twelve and one o'clock.

At the stadium? - A. Yes.

Did you go straight in at that time? - A. We didn't, no.

What did you do? - A. We parked the car and we went to
the chip shop and just walked about for a while. Went to
the chip shop and there was a pub across the road.   We
went in there for ten minutes but we didn't stay in there
long and then we walked down towards the ground.

What time did you actually get to the ground to get in? -
A. Between quarter past and half past two.

That is almost one and three-quarters hours after you
arrived? - A. That's right.

You say you went to the chip shop and walked around a bit
and you went into the pub for ten minutes.   What did you
do with the rest of the time? - A. We just walked around,
like, not a lot.

Did you see a lot of supporters when you were walking
round? - A. Yes, we saw quite a few.

Did you walk around in the Liverpool sector? - A. Yes.

What were all these supporters doing when you were
walking around? - A. Just standing about.   There were a
few looking for tickets.   Just mainly walking towards
the ground.

Did you see anything that concerned you? - A. No.
Apart from going into this pub did you have anything to
drink yourself? - A. We had a drink in the pub, yes.

What did you have? - A. I wouldn't remember.

Nothing much, in other words? - A. No, a pint of beer.

You said you approached the turnstiles at 2.30, about? -
A. Roughly then, yes.

Was it busy at that time as far as you were concerned? -
A. No, I didn't think exceptionally busy, no.

Did you have any difficulty getting in? - A. Not really.
A                                                              26

                                                        A.   BOOTH


    Q. Did you find the turnstile area very crowded or crushed
       at all? - A. There were a few people about, like, but it
       wasn't a terrible crush I don't think, no.

    Q. You have mentioned these people asking for spares? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. You know what I mean by that? - A. Yes.




c



D




E




F

              Q. How many did you
                                                     A.   BOOTH


How many did you see? Can you give us an idea or are
you unable to   say? - A.I would not be able to say.

The other thing is, I had better just check with you,
did you see people drinking alcohol out of cans in the
streets, while you were walking round for your hour and
a half or whatever it was? - A. A few, yes.

When you say a few, do you mean literally afew?   Do
you mean 10 per cent, 20 per cent of the ones you saw,
30 per cent, 40 per cent, what sort of percentage, can
you say? - A.   Less than 10 per cent.

You would say   less than 10 per   cent. - A. Yes.

You have told me you managed to get in without any
particular difficulty.  You went through a turnstile I
take it? - A. We did, yes.

Were you searched? - A. Not as I can remember, no.

Was your friend searched, can you remember? - A. Again,
not as I can remember.

You can't remember? - A. No.

You entered through the tunnel,    did you? - A. We did,
yes.

Were players on the field at that time? - A. No.

It was empty? - A. Yes.

Which pen did you go into? - A. As we went through the
tunnel, the one to the right.

To the right? - A. Yes.

Was the tunnel empty or full at that time? - A. Fairly
empty.

You had not difficulty getting through it anyway? - A.
No difficulty.

Did you have any difficulty getting onto the pen at
that time? - A. No.

When you entered? - A. We didn't, no.

You wanted to be there, didn't you, because you are a
young man? - A. Yes, we wanted to be in the middle.

Had you been to Hillsborough before, as a matter of
interest? - A. Yes, quite a few times.
                                                                  28

                                                           A.   BOOTH


    Q.   So you knew that there were railing fences, or not? -
         A. I did, yes.

    o, Did you know there were gates at the back of the
       railing fences?  Did you know that you could get from
B      one end of the terrace to the other by walking along
       the back? - A. No, I didn't.

    Q.   You didn't know? - A. No.

    Q.   3ut then you had never had any reason to look because
         you liked being behind the goal, is that right? - A.
         That is rignt, yes..

    0. You took up your preferred viewing     position, is that
       right? - A. That is correct.

         Did you stay at that position or were you moved
         subsequently? - A. We stayed roughly ....

    o, Okay. We will get you to show us in a moment where
       that was.  As time went on what happened? - A. Well, as
       time went on it got busier and you got pushed down
D      towards the front.As time went on     you seemed to be
       getting nearer the   front.  You just pushed back a bit
       like.  I never really moved positions.

    Q.   So you were pushed forward and then you were able to
         come back? - A. Yes.

    0. You were still with your friend Paul at that point,
       were you? - A. Yes.

    Q« Can you remember the players corning onto the pitch just
         before the match kicked off? -   A. I can do, yes.

    Q.   You can remember.    What was it like at that particular
         point in time? - A. Just everybody applauding really.
         It was swaying a bit like, a fair bit of singing.

    o. Nothing that worried    you at that point? - A. Nothing,
       no.

    Q< And Paul was with you? - A. Yes.
    0. Did he appear to you at that point to be    upset or
       distressed? - A. No.

    Q.   So you saw the players and everybody was singing and
         cheering? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Can you remember the match kicking off? - A. I can do,
         yes.




H
                                                    A.   BOOTH


Perhaps I will just finish this section - did you see
Beardsley hitting the crossbar? - A. I did, yes.

You did actually see that? - A. Yes.

Did you see the match finisti? - A. I did, yes.

When the match kicked off, going back, were you still
with Paul at   this time? -A. No.

What had happened to him?- A. He      had kind of drifted
towards the front.

Further forward? - A. Yes.

That was between the players coming out and kick-off,
is that right? - A. That is between them coming out and
warming up to when we actually kicked off.

So within a few minutes,   is that right? - A. Within
four or five minutes.

Did you feel   any pressure on yourself   at anypoint?      -
A. Well, it was tight yes, but ....

You weren't frightened, were you? - A. No.

Were you able to breathe? - A. Yes.

Wnen was the last time that you saw your friend? - A.
Probably 2-minutes-to-3, two minutes before kick-off.

At that point what did he look like to you? - A. lie
still looked all right from where I was stood, a few
steps back.

Were you able to speak with him at that point still? -
A. Yes, I was.

You were actually talking to him? - A. He was three
steps down, yes.   I tapped him on the shoulder and
spoke to him, yes.

Did you feel any surges?   Do you know what I mean by a
surge, any sort of rushes?   I think you said he floated
off forward.  Was that just a gentle movement or was it
a sudden impulse? - A. Gentle really until Beardsley
hit the bar, then there was a surge forwards.

Did you see any crash barriers break? - A. No, I
didn't.

And you did not hear it either? - A. I did not, no.
                                                  A.   BOOTH


I think you did see a little gate leading onto the
pitch, can you remember that?  Can you remember the
gate, I mean? - A. Yes, I know where the gate you mean
is, yes.

Can you remember it being opened at all? - A. No, I
didn't see it open.

Did you see it open at any time, as opposed to being
opened - do you understand what I mean? - A. Yes.  I
can't recall doing, no.

In your statement you refer to this gate.   I am not
trying to catch you at all, but you say something about
the pressure eased - "As the gate was opened in pen 3 1
felt the pressure ease".   Does that assist you in any
way tiow, or has it gone from your mind?  If you can't
remember it's all right. - A. It's gone, I can't
remember.

You got out by going up into the West Stand, is that
right? - A. That is correct, yes.

Did you have to move back in order to get to the
position where you could be pulled out? - A. I did,
yes.

Why did you decide to go out that way, as opposed to
going out through the tunnel, say? - A. Well, there
were a lot of people up in that stand saying, "Come up
here", so that's where a lot of people were going, so I
went up there.

It would be fair to say that you yourself were not
distressed at that point? - A. I wasn't, no.  I didn't
know what had happened.

When you went up had you realised what the situation
was like further forward? - A. Yes.

Did you know it was bad, that is what I am trying to
ask? - A. You could see people on the pitch by that
time, yes, lying on the pitch.

Did you understand that they were in trouble? — A. Yes.

Had you seen them in trouble within the terracing
before they got onto the pitch? - A. Not really, no.

It was only as you looked out that you realised
something was seriously wrong? - A. Yes.

Did you see any Police Officers standing, or indeed
fans, standing on the pitch side of the railings either
                                                                  31

                                                           A.   BOOTH


         shouting or signalling in? - A. I wasn't really
         looking.

    Q. You weren't.   Did you hear any calls from anybody
       saying,                or ----------
                Push ’back", --             i
                                 anything like that? - A. I did,
B      yes.

    Q.   Where was that coming from? - A. I thought it was
         coming from down at the front.

    Q.   Did you, in fact, attempt to do that? No, let me ask
         you the question another way.  Did you notice whether
         anybody near you was attempting to respond to that? -
         A. Well, I was trying.

    Q. What was stopping you? - A. You    tried to push   back but
         you couldn't.

    o. But you did manage to move back to be pulled out, that
       is right? - A. Eventually, yes.

    0. Were you pulled up after the match had stopped or
       before? - A. Long after the match had stopped.

    0. Long after, I see.      Show us on the little plan where
       you were.     Not where you were pulled up but when you
       were with Paul, two minutes before kick-off or
       thereabouts?
       (The Witness marked his position on Exhibit C395)
       I only w a n t t o ask you one more question because a lot
       of people did not see the match but you did - A. Yes.

    Q.   And you saw Beardsley hit the cross bar, didn't you? -
         A. I did, yes.

    o, You told me that.  Can you remember what effect that
       nad on the people in your pen around you? - A. We just
       seemed to go forward like, you know, like they do when
       somebody scores.

    Q.   There was excitement, was there? - A. Yes.

    o. I am not blaming anybody for that, I am just interested
       to know.  Did you notice any significant change at all
       within the pen after that? Later on obviously it
       changed because you went out, but within two or three
       minutes of that, as compared with one or two minutes
       before he hit the crossbar? - A. Not really, no.

                     Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

         Andrew, could you just tell the Jury please about your
         experience as a football supporter, about how often you
         have been? - A. Well, I have had a season ticket for




H
                                                A.   BOOTH


about six years now.   I have been going to Liverpool
for about ten years.

Right, and where do you stand? - A. I sit down now in
the main stand.

For that six years? - A. Well, for four years I stood
on the Kop, yes.

Whereabouts on the Kop? - A. In the middle.

Behind the goal? - A. Yes.

From that experience can you just help, please?  You
have described yourself going onto the terrace, you
have shown us where you went and you have told the
Court about the players coming onto the pitch, with
everyone applauding, swaying and singing, that is what
you said? - A. Yes.

That is right, is it? - A. Yes.

Nothing worried you at that point? - A. No.

So how did that compare then with the kind of crowding
that there is at a normal big match, behind the goal? -
A. It was just probably a normal game.

A normal game? - A. Yes.

That is when the players came out.  Now then, tne next
landmark that we have got in our timing is that the
match kicked off? - A. Yes.

You were still at about the same place, right? - A.
Yes.

At that time you have not told us what people did.
Were they shouting and cheering at that time? - A. At
kick-off, yes.

At the kick-off.  So how did things seem to you at tnat
time at the kick-off, compared with a normal big matcn?
- A. It was just busy like.

Busy? - A. Yes.

Nothing out of the ordinary from your point of view? -
A. Not really, no.
                                                   A . BOOTH


That is kick-off. The next event we have got is
Beardsley hitting the crossbar? - A. Yes.

By that time what was it like compared with your
normal experience of a normal match behind the
goal? - A. Packed.

More crowded than usual? - A. Yes. When he did shoot
and hit the bar everybody went forward. Normally
there is room to go back. That day there wasn't. We
went forward and there just wasn't the room to go
back.

When Beardsley hit the crossbar there was the surge
forward and was there a lot of cheering and shouting?
- A. Not really cheering and shouting, no.

A not of noise anyway? - A. A lot of noise.

           Cross-Examined bv MR. HUMPHRIES:

Anthony, the picture is developing from your evidence
that you were not overly concerned about position and
safety, is that right? - A. That is right, yes.

Let me ask you a few questions about your evidence to
find how normal this was. You described a situation
just before kick-off where Paul had floated down some
three steps away? - A. Yes.

Trying to think back as best you can, if Paul had
wanted to come back to you or if you had wanted to
get to Paul, would that have been something easy or
difficult to achieve at that stage? - A. What stage
was that? About kick-off time?

About kick-off time? - A. It would have been possible
I suppose.

It would have been possible? - A. Difficult but
possible.

Comparing it to another game, a normal game and a
normal crowd, would this have been more difficult to
get to him? - A. Probably more difficult.

Why was that?- A. Than getting to him on   the Kop.

I am sorry? - A. Probably more difficult. It was
packed like two or three steps down. Youcould have
got to him.

I am not indicating in any way that you should have
got to him, if you follow my meaning. You have said
A                                                                  34

                                                             A . BOOTH


         that when Beardsley hit the crossbar there was a
         surge forward? - A. Yes.

B   Q. But then there was no room to go back? - A. That is
       what it felt like, yes.

    Q. Is that totally outside your other experience at
       other games? - A. Yes.

    Q. No matter how big the crowd? - A. Yes, no matter how
       big.

    Q. Did you attend the 1988 Semi Cup Final at
       Hillsborough? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you approach down Leppings Lane in much the same
       way as in 1989? - A. I did, yes.

    Q. Was there anything different between the behaviour of
       the crowd from one year to the other? - A. No.

D   Q. In 1988 about 10 per cent would have been having a
       drink from a can? - A. I said 10 per cent.  I said
       maybe less than 10 per cent.

    Q. Generally the mood of the crowd in the two years, was
       it the same? - A. Yes.

    Q. How would you describe the mood? - A. Happy.

    Q. Going back to 1988 can you remember any Police
       presence on Leppings Lane in that year? - A. Pardon?

    Q. Can you remember any Police presence in Leppings Lane
       in 1988? - A. I don't know if it was Police or
       stewards but in 1988 when we got in they advised us
       to go up to the left hand top bit because the middle
       pens were packed solid.

    Q. Is that inside the ground? - A. Yes, that was either
       Police or stewards, I can't remember which.

    Q.    I was actually asking about outside the ground but I
         will come back to that.   Inside the ground you say in
         1988 you were told to go to the other sides? - A. Up
         to the top left, up round that bit.

    Q.   In 1988 as you went in, did you see the tunnel at
         all? - A. We went through the tunnel, yes.

    Q. The year before in 1988 did you go through? - A. We
       went through that same tunnel, yes.




H
                                                          A . BOOTH


Q. So you went into the pens in 1988? - A. Yes, but they
   was blocked off just before you went down in the full
   bit, like.

Q. How did you get round to the left hand side? - A. We
   went round the back.

Q. You mean you went down the back of the pen? - A. Yes.

Q. What time was that, if you can remember, in 1988? -
   A. I couldn't remember.

     THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien,I think we had better stop
for coffee and   then we will start again with you, is that
all right? Mr. Booth, you must stay to finish your
evidence. You must not talk about the evidence with
anybody but you can have coffee.

                       (Short Adjournment)

                Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Did you see   any Police Officers near the tunnel
   entrance in   1989 when you went in? - A. Not as Ican
   remember now but I wasn't looking.

Q. What time did you say you went in in 1989? - A. It
   would say between quarter past and half past two.

Q. Did you see any Police Officers in the pen when you
   went down the tunnel and you went into Pen 3? Did
   you see any Officers in there at the back, near the
   wall at the back? - A. No.

     THE CORONER:      Are you talking about 1988, Mrs.
McBrien?

       MRS. McBRIEN:    No, sorry, that was 1989.

     THE CORONER:   I beg your pardon.  I was not sure
which year you were thinking of.  It is quite all right.
Carry on.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Were you surprised that Paul did
     not come back to stand by you when he floated off, as
     you said, a few steps in front of you? Were you
     surprised he did not come back? - A. Not really, no.
     We used to split up and probably meet at half time or
     full time.

Q. So that did not alarm you? - A. It didn't, no.
                                                 A . BOOTH


You said you were pulled up into the stand at the
back. Did you notice if the tunnel was blocked with
people at that time? - A. I didn't notice.

Were you quite near the tunnel, the part where you
were being pulled up? - A. No, I was as far as the
fence between Pens 3 and 2.

               Further bv THE CORONER:

I would like to get this quite clear because I have
not really understood what happened in 1988.  I think
you said that when you got to the tunnel you were
diverted, is that right? - A. No, we went down the
tunnel and then just before you branch off into No.
3, to the right, there was a couple of Police
Officers there or stewards, I can't remember which,
and they said, "This is full, do you mind going on?".
So we turned left and went behind, right up to the
upper left.

When I asked you whether you knew there were gates at
the back of the radial fences you said, "No, we
didn't know" but you must have gone through those,
must you not? - A. No.

So how did you get from when you came out of the
tunnel and got to the elevated section? How did you
do it? - A. Right along the back.

Pardon? - A. Right along the back.

So there was a passageway there? - A. Yes.

What you are saying is that you did not realise there
were gates blocking that off? It was open and you
could get through? - A. You could get through, yes.

Perhaps I misled you when I used the word "gate" but
you knew there was a passageway there, that is what I
am trying to find out? - A. I did know, yes.

You obviously saw quite a bit and when you say the
players were on the pitch, did you mean they were on
the pitch ready for kick-off? - A. Yes.

That is what you are talking about? - A. Yes.

Because they came out early as well. There were some
people on the pitch messing around at an earlier
time, were they not? Did you see those? - A. I did,
yes.
                                                                     37

                                                              A . BOOTH


    Q. That is not what we are talking about?     - A. No, they
       had come out for the game.

B   Q. Mr. Booth, thank you very much indeed. Thank     you    for
       being here. - A. Thank you.

                     JONATHAN FITZPATRICK Sworn

                           Bv THE CORONER:

    Q. You are Jonathan Fitzpatrick? - A. Yes.

    Q. Are you still at
       Derbyshire? - A. Yes.

    Q. You are a plater I think, is that right? - A. Yes.

    Q. You do not have anything to worry about either, all
       right? - A. Yes.

    Q. Are you a Liverpool supporter? - A. Yes, I am.
D
    Q. You had a ticket to go to the terraces on 15th April
       1989? - A. Yes.

    Q. You left home by car I think with some friends? - A.
       Yes, I did.

    Q. I think you left at about eleven in the morning or
       thereabouts, is that right? - A. 10.30 something like
       that.

    Q. What time did you get to Sheffield? - A. We got there
       about two.

    Q. Had you stopped somewhere for a bite to eat or not? -
       A. No.

    Q. You had come straight through? - A. Yes.

    Q. That is quite a long time. That is almost three
       hours. Were you held up? Did you have any problems
       or not? - A. Not really.

    Q. You cannot remember and it does not matter,      You were
       in Sheffield at two, did you say? - A. Yes.

    Q. What time would you say that you got to the ground? -
       A. Ten past two.

    Q. You parked quite close? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you have any difficulty getting in? - A. No.




H
                                                    A . BOOTH


Were you searched at all? - A. No.

Were your friends searched, can youremember?     - A.
They didn't go in with me.

You went by yourself and they had tickets for
somewhere else, did they? - A. Yes.

Were you stopped at all on the way to the ground?
Did anybody stop you? - A. No.

You got in and you went on to the terracing, is that
right? - A. Yes.

Do you remember which side you went in?     Was it the
left or right side? - A. The right.

That would be just a few minutes after youentered,
about 2.15, would that be about fair? - A. Yes.

At that time what was your pen like? Was it okay,
not okay? What was it like? - A. It was pretty
empty.

I think about a quarter of an hour later you were
joined by your friends, Paul Clarke and Andrew Booth?
- A. Andy was about three paces behind Paul and he
came down to me.

What time was that? - A. About 2.20.

Pardon? - A. I think nearer three.     Quarter to three
I would say.

We have just heard from Andy, of course.  That is the
same Andy Booth who we have just seen, is that right?
- A. Yes.

You were there first and they came into the pen? - A.
Yes.

Did you see them arrive together? - A. Yes.

What time did you say that Paul joined you? - A. It
must have been about quarter to three.

What was it like at that time so far as you were
concerned? Never mind about anybody else? - A. There
was quite a lot of people in there.

Were you concerned at that point? - A. No.

Were you and Paul close enough to be able to talk? -
A. Yes.
                                                    A . BOOTH



Can you remember the teams coming out ready for kick-
off? - A. Yes.

You remember seeing that. At that point what was it
like for you? - A. There was quite a lot of people
in. It wasn't really crushed when that happened.

I am sorry, there were a lot of people and you were
really crushed I think you said? - A. No, I wasn't
really.

   MR. ISAACS:    "There was quite a lot of people there.
: really crushed".

  THE CORONER:    Thank you, Mr. Isaacs.

That is right, is it? - A. Yes.

The players were warming up I take it during this
time? - A. Yes.

Did you see the kick-off? - A. Yes.

You actually saw it? - A. Yes.

At kick-off   where was Paul? - A. By that time he had
been pushed   right down the front.

When did that push begin? - A. It must have been just
before or after the kick-off.

I see, just around the kick-off time you think? - A.
Yes.

You yourself were not pushed I take it, is that
right, or were you? - A. I wasn't really pushed to
the front.   I managed to pull myself back.

Describe to me what happened then at kick-off time?
You say he was pushed and what actually happened? -
A. Quite a lot of people went forward and he went
with them.  I managed to stand my ground.

Did you sort of move to the side a little bit or
what? - A. No, more backwards.

You went backward? - A. Yes.

Were you able to follow Paul? Could you see where he
finished up? - A. He just went     in a crowdof  people
and I didn't see him again.
A                                                              40

                                                           . BOOTH


    Q. You do not know how far down the terracing he had
       got? - A. No.

B   Q. You did not see him go right up to the perimeter
       fencing or virtually right up to the perimeter
       fencing? - A. No.

    Q. Definitely not? - A. No.




c



D




E




F




                             /Q. Were you at that point,
                                            J.   F IT Z P A T R IC K


  Were you at that point hemmed in in any way? — A.
  After he had gone down the front it was very quick
  that the crush started.

  So at that point you felt crushed yourself, is that
  right or not? - A. Yes, I couldn't move.

 You could not move? - A. No.

 You could breathe, could you? - A. Yes.

 The pressure which moved Paul, was it a sort of a
 steady increase or was it a sudden push? - A. He
 suddenly went down, yes.

 Could you see people climbing up the perimeter fences?
 - A. I remember seeing one lad go, being pulled u d b y
 Police.                                           v  j


 Was that after Paul Clark had already, so to speak,
 left you? - A. Yes.

 Did you see the gate?  Could you see the gate from
 where you were? - A. No.

 Could you, from where you were, see what was happening
 to the people in the front? - A. No.

You could not tell? - A. No.

Did you hear or see Police Officers, or indeed fans,
or anybody asking people to move back? - A. Yes.

When was that? When was the first time that you
noticed that? - A. A few minutes after the game was
stopped.

After the game was stopped? - A. Yes.

That was the first time that it registered with you,
if you are right, I am just checking? - A. I knew
something was wrong, but it took a while for the
Police to notice.

I was not asking you what the Police were doing;  I
was asking you when you first noticed people sayinp
 Push back"? - A. When it was crushed we tried to push
03C lC «


Did you succeed? - A. No.

Why was that? - A. We just couldn't move.
                                                               J.   F IT Z P A T R IC K



  opened?             Yes^       shoutin8 that the 8ate should be

  Where were these people who were shouting? - A. Mainly
  down the front.                         °        dlluy

  Further down the front? - A. Yes.

 When did you hear these shouts? - A. I am not sure.

 Had the game already kicked off, that is what I am
 trying to find out, when you heard it? - A. A few
 minutes before the game had stopped.

 A few minutes before the game had stopped, so it was
 in play when you heard the shouts? - A. Yes.

 Did you see the gate they were talking about? - A. No.

 So did you see it open or not? - A. No.


 fence?U-kA°WYesere W3S 3 8at6 °" the fr0nt E)eria,eter

         w   kn°" that? - A. K e U ,                  I was in there quite
 a while before the match.

So you had seen it earlier? - A. Yes.

I just want to be quite sure about this gate because
H - 2U i sJratement y°u seem to indicate that a gate
which leads onto the playing area was opened and
a b o u t % h ^9 f?CCed throuSh - Can you remember anything
about that? I am not too concerned.        I am iust
        t0 find °ut wh et he r yo ur r e c o l l e c t i o n is as
you have n ow told me, or as it is in your statement.                               -
A. I can t rem emb er that.

You cannot remember it now? - A. No.

inch1 1 r6ud ^°U What you said in your statement and
Can y o S M s t e n r - ' A . ^ e S ? 5 a n y t h i n « b ac lc '   aX1

I will start, I think, here:

       "    at about 3 p.m. Later I suddenly felt crowd
       pressure from behind."

That is more or less what you have told me.

        I saw Paul Clark move right forward virtually up
       to the perimeter fencing.  I couldn't do
       anything, I just couldn't move and was hemmed in
                                       J.   F IT Z P A T R IC K


     by the mass of people all being crammed into Pen
     3.  I then felt a surge from behind me which
     tightened up and I couldn't move anything.   I was
     looking forward to where Paul Clark was but I
     could not see him.  The match had only just
     started.  I then saw some fans had climbed up on
     the perimeter fencing and over onto the pitch.
     The Police then came and were asking people to
     move back and though I tried to force myself
     backward I couldn't move.  I heard people
     shouting 'Open the gate' and 'We can't move', but
     after a little while the gate which leads onto
     the playing area was opened and people were
     forced through.  The bodily crowd pressure then
     started to slowly come off and we could slowly
     start to move back.  The game had been stopped by
     now and part of the fencing was pulled down."

Does that remind you? - A. I can remember the fencing
being pulled down, but I can't remember the gate.

You cannot remember the gate, okay.  You cannot now
remember whether you actually saw Paul move right up
to the perimeter fencing, is that right? - A. I can
just remember him going into a crowd of people.

May I ask you this.  We have heard from Andrew, who is
of course your friend as well, that he was talking to
Paul just shortly before kick-off.  Can you remember
whether you would join them as a 3-some, or whether
Paul was moving backwards and forwards between the
pair of you? - A. He walked down to me.

Once had had walked down, did he then stay with you,
or did he go back to Andrew and then come back again,
can you remember that? - A. He was at the side of me
and he was just pushed a bit forward by one person in
front of me and a few seconds later he was pushed
right forward.

You said that he walked down to you at about quarter-
to 3 which is, of course, quite a long time before
kick-off.  Did he stay with you from quarter-to 3, or
did he leave you and then come back just before kick-
off, can you remember that? - A. Once he left me he
did not come back.

I am sorry, you have misunderstood me.  I understand
that once he was pushed forward to the perimeter fence
he never came back to you and you lost sight of him.
What I am trying to find out is before that happened,
did he pass backward and forward between you and
Andrew? - A. No.
                                          J.   F IT Z P A T R IC K


He stayed with you once he was with you? - A. Yes.

What did he look like to you up to the point in time
when he was moved away? - A. Just happy.

We will get you to mark your plan.  Can you just put a
little cross on that plan? (Witness marks plan

     THE CORONER: Sergeant Griffiths, the young man
can do the marking and signing, and so on, later on.

     MRS PERKINS:   That is C396.

           Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Are you a regular football supporter? - A. Yes.

At Anfield? - A. Yes.

Do you usually stand behind the goal? - A. Yes.

Roughly how long have you been doing that? - A. I have
been going regularly for round 5 years.

Do you agree that just before the kick-off behind the
goal quite often there is a crush of people, and then
during the first few minutes of the match it eases off
as the crowd finds its own level? - A. It depends on
what match it is.

Okay, at a big match? - A. Yes.

The way I have put it is right, is it? - A. Yes.

At this particular match did you think that was what
was going to happen after the kick-off? - A. There was
a lot of pushing, you know, usual, everybody singing
and swaying and that.

But did it seem to you that the situation up to kick-
off was the kind of thing you have been in before? -
A. Yes, just the normal happy, singing, swaying.

         Cross-Examined by MR. HUMPHREYS:

Can I ask you about the arrival of Paul Clark.  Did
you actually see him coming down the terrace towards
you? - A. I had just seen him arrive behind me.

You saw him when he arrived? - A. Yes.

So you do not know how he got to you, as it were? - A.
He walked a few paces down.
A
                                                                         45

                                                    J.   F IT Z P A T R IC K


    Q.    Did you see him walking down? - A. Yes.

B   Q.   This question of the crush just around kick-off and
         the relief of it just afterwards, you normally go on
         the Kop, do you, at Anfield? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Is it then the case that on the Kop it is fairly easv
         to move around? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Before kick-off on this occasion how easy or difficult
         was it to move around on that terrace? - A. When I was
         with Paul it was easy, you could move around, but
         after he left it quickly got tight.

         So that the crush became worse after that time, did
         it? - A. Yes.

    Q.   So the crowd did not find its own level? - A. No.
    Q.   Did you go to the 1988 semi-final? - A. No.
D
              THE CORONER:  There is nobody else, I take it.
         Mr. Fitzpatrick, I am most grateful to you for coming.
         Thank you very much indeed, and of course I am sorry
         that two friends, both of you, lost Paul in this
         disaster.
         Paul's parents are not here, are they? - A. Yes.

              THE CORONER: Which are Paul Clark's parents?
         ....Mr. & Mrs. Clark, I am very very sorry that it
         has happened.  Thank you very much indeed.  Shall we
         stop and have lunch? We will start again at 2
         o clock, is that okay?  Then 2 o'clock this afternoon.

                       (Luncheon Adjournment)



F




G
                                                J.   SINGLETON


     THE CORONER:      Mr. Singleton please.

                  JONATHAN SINGLETON Sworn

                      By THE CORONER:

You are Jonathan Singleton? - A. Yes.

Of                                 Merseyside, is that
right? - A. Yes

I don't know how old you are now, but in 1989 you were 15
I think? - A. Yes.

You are a little bit older now.   You went to see the
semi-final on the 15th April, 1989? - A. Yes.

In Sheffield here? - A. Yes.

You went with Mr. Case, James Case, and Robert Sephton? -
A. Yes.

James and Robert are your friends? - A. Yes.

You arrived quite early and you got into the ground
between quarter to two and two o clock?   Would that be
about right? - A. Yes.

I take it you had no problems getting into the ground? -
A. No.

You went down the tunnel, which I also assume you didn't
have any problems with? - A. No.

Just as a matter of interest, were you searched when you
went in? -A. No.

Were your friends, do you remember? - A. I don't
remember.

You went down the tunnel with no difficulty and you
turned into the right hand pen? - A. Yes.

Was that the first time you had ever been to Sheffield? -
A. Yes.

You went right to the front, is that correct? - A. Yes.

In fact I think you took up a position...   Where did you
position yourself, tell me? - A. On like a raised
platform right against the gate.

Right against the gate? - A. right against the gate, yes.
                                                 J.   SINGLETON


Was that the position you kept until you eventually left
the pen  and after the problems had arisen? - A. Yes.

So once   you were there you stayed? - A. Yes.

You didn't go back out or anything   like        that?-     A.No.

You are sure? - A. Positive.

So you were on the step right against the gate.   We will
be hearing from James and Robert in a moment, but tell me
where they were as far as you remember? - A. James was on
the platform next to me, right next to me.   Robert was
standing behind us.

The platform was just a couple of steps up? - A . Yes.

The terrace slopes? - A. Yes.

Then you have got to come up a couple of steps to get to
the gate? - A. Yes.

You wanted to be there, you said you wanted to see well?
- A. Yes.

Initially things were fine, weren't they? - A. Yes.

You didn't have any problems.   Did you see the players
run around and kick the ball about and mess around as
they sometimes do? - A. Yes.

Did you see anybody playing with a beach ball, do you
remember that? - A. Yes, I can vaguely remember it.

Did you hear the names announced? - A. Yes.

You know, how they do over the tannoy? - A. Yes.

You do remember that? - A. Yes.

When that was happening what was it like, as far as you
were concerned, are you able to recollect? - A. I think
that was just before kick-off.   They were pushing
forward and the pressure was starting to get more severe.

What I am trying to get to is when did it begin to feel,
shall we say first of all, uncomfortable? - A. I would
say about ten minutes before kick-off.

Had the team already come out on to the pitch read for
play, or was it before that? - A. It was just before
that.
                                                J.   SINGLETON


At that point, just before the team came out ready for
the kick-off and it was uncomfortable.   Were you scared?
- A. No, because it is just the normal thing.

Have you been on tight terraces before? - A. Yes.

Do you usually go behind the goal? - A. Yes.

So at that point you weren't too concerned? - A. No.

The team then came on to the pitch? - A. Yes.

Did you see the match kick-off? - A. Yes.

When it kicked-off how were you feeling? - A. By this
time it was just a constant push.   I was right up
against the gate.

Were you distressed at that point? - A. Yes, because it
was difficult to breathe.

Were you beginning to find it difficult or had you
already had difficulty with your breathing for any length
of time? - A. Well, as I said, it was uncomfortable, but
once the kick-off started it was really uncomfortable.

You were right against the gate, and it was Robert next
to you? - A. James.

Did you see anybody else against the front fence?    Did
you notice anybody else? - A. Yes, there was one young
lad standing on my right.   He was also on the platform
and I think there might have been someone else on as
well.

There were at least three of you, and possibly four, on
this platform? - A. Yes

On the far side, on the pitch side, did you see any
Police Officers at that point? - A. Yes, there was one
Policeman facing the crowd.

Where was he in relation to the gate? - A. He was a
couple of yards behind it.

What do you mean "behind"? - A. Well, I would say he was
a yard or two from the gates, on the gravel, by the
pitch.

Back towards the... - A. Back towards the pitch, yes.

Was he in line with the gate or was he to one side? - A.
I think he was slightly to one side.
                                             J.   SINGLETON


Was he doing anything as far as you could see at that
point?   Kick-off had just taken place.   Was he doing
anything? - A. No.

Did you see any other Police Officers around at that
point? - A. Not directly by the gates.

Where were the others that you saw? - A. They were sort
of spread out at maybe ten or twenty yard intervals.

How many would you say you can remember at that point in
time? - A. I can't really...

You can't say.   Could you hear any noise coming from the
area in which you were, from the pen in which you were? -
A. Some of the fans were shouting for them to open the
gates.

When did you first hear that call to open the gates?
Try and pin it down in relation to the players coming
out, getting ready for kick-off, or the kick-off, just
try and relate it to those? - A. I would say it was just
before the kick-off.

Did the Officer appear to respond to that, as far as you
could see? - A. No.

Are you saying he did absolutely nothing or that he gave
some response but it wasn't the response that people
wanted? - A. He didn't do anything.

What happened then? - A. I am not sure how long exactly
it was, but the pressure was constant and the gate gave
way and me and James spilled on to the pitch, on to the
gravel.   The Policeman got hold of us and pushed us back
in and shut the gate.

Was it the same Policeman whom you had seen before? - A.
Yes.

Have I understood you correctly that the game was already
in play at this point?   Had kick-off taken place
already? - A. Yes.

Can you remember whether you were the only two who
spilled out or did others spill out as well? - A. I think
we were the only two because we didn't exactly go that
far before we were pushed back in.

You spilled on to the gravel.   The gate wasn't opened by
anybody, it just opened on its own? - A. Yes, it just
opened under the pressure.
                                             J.   SINGLETON


This Policeman grabbed you and pushed you back in, is
that right? - A. Yes.

How difficult was it for you to get back into the pen
when he pushed you back in? - A. It was very difficult
because there were people pushing forward to get out also
and we were sort of pushed really back, and the Policeman
really had to push us to get us back in.   We still
weren't properly in when he started to shut the gate, but
the gate pushed us back in.

So he got you thus far and then he shut the gate and that
completed the job, so to speak? - A. Yes.

Did you shout at him or say anything to him at the time,
as far as you remember? - A. No.

You didn't protest? - A. No.

So you were back? - A. Yes.

What happened then? - A. The gate had been shut, it can't
have been for more than a minute or so.   It was forced
open again and this time the Policeman directed us down
to an outside pen along the side of the pitch.

So you spilled out again? - A. Yes.

However, this time it was different because having got
out they didn't put you back? - A. No.

They sent you further down the field.   Did they send you
left or right? - A. Right.

The time interval between the two openings, was it long
or short? - A. Short.

When you were going down towards the right, did you look
back to see what was happening to the gate at all? - A.
Yes.

What was happening to it? - A. People were coming out.

So it stayed open as far as you were concerned? - A. Yes,
it stayed open.

Can you remember, apart from these two openings when it
sprung open, was it opened whilst you were there at any
other point in time? - A. No.

Did you hear anybody behind you shouting about the little
boy? - A. No.
                                             J.   SINGLETON


One final question.    You mentioned that the pressure was
quite strong at this point.    Was it a steady pressure or
was it a pulse pressure?    Do you known what I mean by
pulse pressure?     You know, coming and going.   What was
it? - A. It started off as a pulse pressure but then just
before kick-off it was just steady pressure.

When did you first notice the pulsing? - A. About ten
minutes before kick-off.

In other words, just before the team came out, as far as
you are concerned? - A. Yes.




     Q. We will show you
                                                          52




Q. We will show you this plan, and can you put a cross
   exactly where you were, as near as you can.  (The
   Witness marked his position on Exhibit C397)

                 Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Q. Do you regularly go to watch Liverpool matches? - A.
   Yes.

Q. And you usually stand in tne same place behind the
   goal? - A. Yes.

Q. You told the Court that at about 10 minutes before
   kick-off, just before the players came out, talking
   about the crowding at that time, it was just the normal
   thing so you were not too concerned at that time? - A.
   No.

0. Can you just explain in your own words what you mean by
   the normal thing? - A. As in, just as people coming in,
   just swaying forward and back.  Like, there was
   pressure on but then it would sort of relieve after a
   bit, you know, and you could stand normally again.

Q.   Usually there is a crush just before, or a big crowd
     just before, a lot of crowding just before kick-off and
     then just after kick-off the crowd finds its own level?
     - A. Yes.

Q. That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

               Cross-Examined by MR. HUMPHREYS

Q.   Were you surprised by being put back into the pen after
     you had been forced out of it? - A. I was, yes.

0. Why was that? - A. Because people were shouting for
   them to open the gate so I thought once it had been
   opened that they would direct people away.

0. While you were under this constant pressure, about
   kick-off time, did you call out to the Police Officer
   at all? - A. No.

          MR. RUSSELL:   I am sorry, I did not hear the
     answer.

          THE CORONER:   "No" was the answer.

Q*        MR* HUMPHREYS:   The second time you came out you
     were escorted around to the right.  Was that by the
     same Police Officer who had put you back in? - A. Yes.

Q. And that was a very brief time afterwards? - A. Yes.
                                                               53




                    Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

         Mr. Singleton, how long was it would you say in minutes
         from the time you were put back the first time, to when
         you got out the second time? - A. It may have been just
B        short of a minute, no longer than a minute.

    o. Just before the gate sprang open, that is the first
       time, did you really fear for your life then? - A. Not
       really for my life because I did not think it was that
       serious but ....

    Q.   For you. - A.     I was worried.

    0. So when the Police grabbed hold of you to put you back
       in, you did not tell him that people were being crushed
       to death or anything like that in there? - A. No,
       because I could not see behind me.    I did not know what
       was going on.

    Q« You were not aware of that at all? - A. No.
    Q.   Did the Police Officer have to use   much force on you to
         put you back in? - A. Yes.

    0. Can you describe what happened to you? - A. Well as the
       gate snapped the pressure from behind forced us
       forward, and the Policeman sort of seen the gate snap
       and stepped in the way and pushed us back, and as we
       were half way back in closed us back in with the gate.

    Q« Were you injured at all by that? - A. No.
    0. Thank you very much.

                   Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAH

         When you were at the front of the pen and things riad
         become very uncomfortable do you recall that there was
         a lot of noise? - A. Yes, a fair amount of noise.

    Q.   You have told us about the Police Constable who was
         standing at the front slightly to the side of the gate,
         I think, and he did not appear to react? - A. Ho.

         When the gate had sprung open on the first occasion,
         you and a friend, I think, spilled onto the track, the
         perimeter track? - A. Yes.

         And the Police Officer put you back into the pen.  Am I
         correct in thinking from your evidence that you said
         nothing to that Officer? - A. No.




H
     THE CORONER:   I think tnat "no" is an ambiguous
reply.  Does it mean no he did not, or ...?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   You spoke no words to the
Officer, is that correct? - A. That is correct.

     THE CORONER:      I found it ambiguous.   It may not
have been.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:      Sir, yes.

                  Further by THE CORONER

I have a couple of questions from the Jury.      Did you
see Beardsley hit the crossbar? - A. No.

You didn't? - A. No.

When you went out of the pen the second time and you
were walking or being escorted to the right, did you
look into the pen at all?  You looked back and told me
you saw the gate was open.  Did you actually look into
the pen itself? - A. No.

So you don't know what could be seen by walking past?
You can't help us? - A. No.

I have already asked  you this but Iwill just repeat
it.  I am right in saying that you were not displaced
from your position, your vantage position at the gate,
until it burst open?   Nobody kickedyou out of the way
or pushed you - you managed to hold your position? - A.
Yes.

Thank you very much indeed, very helpful.

        ROBERT EDWARD SEPHTON Called (Sworn)

                      By THE CORONER

Good afternoon.     You are Robert Edward Sephton? - A.
Yes.

                     Merseyside? - A.




                    Q. At the time I think
                                              R. E. SEPHTON


At the time I think you were a student I believe? -
A. Yes.

Are you still? - A. Yes.

You went with your friend, Jonathan Singleton, James
Case and Mr. Case to the match on the 15th April
1989? - A. Yes.

Was that the first time you had been to Hillsborough?
- A. Yes.

I take it you all went in more or less together? - A.
Yes.

You came by car and I take it you had no difficulty
getting through the turnstiles? - A. No.

Were you searched, can you remember? - A. Yes.

Were you searched outside and inside? - A. No,
outside the turnstile.

Just outside the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Having got through the turnstiles you went on to the
terracing through the tunnel, would that be right? -
A. Yes.  I think we may have stopped to go to the
toilet first.

In fact, you thought you had got there a little bit
than your friend, about quarter past two I think you
thought? - A. Yes, I wasn't sure about the time.

But earlyish? - A. Yes, quite early for the game.

Was the terrace that you entered empty or full? What
was it like? - A. I would say it was quite empty.

You were able to get right down to the front without
any difficulty? - A. Yes, that is right.

Was it the right hand side that you went down? - A.
Yes.

Behind the goal on Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.

Can you tell me where you positioned yourself? - A.
Jonathan and James were on the step in front of me
and I stood, I can't remember if I was on the step
below them, directly behind them, so that I could
look between their heads.
                                                 R. E. SEPHTON


Q. In line with the gate, in other words, were you? - A.
   Y e s.

Q. Or were you to one side? - A. No, I was on line with
   the gate.

Q. Was there anybody between you and the two lads, James
   and Jonathan? - A. No, I was leaning on them.

Q. Jonathan has told me that there were several people
   on this first row. Were there people next to you? -
   A. I can only remember Mr. Case on my left.

Q. He was right at the front as well? - A. Yes.

Q. I take it you were quite happy to be there because
   you were going to have a good view? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you remember the players coming out just before
   the match started? - A. Just before or earlier on for
   a warm up?

Q. I am sorry? - A. Sorry, I do not know when you mean.

Q. I was taking you to right up to just before the   match
   began? - A. Yes, just before the match began.

Q. You can remember them coming out? - A. Yes.

Q. That was just six minutes or so before kick-off in
   fact? - A. Yes.

Q. What was it like for you at that time? - A. I was
   quite comfortable up until a few minutes before the
   game.

Q. Until? - A. A few minutes before the game, there was
   no problem.

      THE CORONER:   There is a message I have to pass to
the Jury which is a personal and private matter. I do not
think it would be right for me to delay it. So I am going
to interrupt this examination of you at the moment.    It has
got nothing to do with the Inquest let me say straight
away.   It is a matter entirely personal to one of the
Jurors.   I will give the message to my Officer and he will
pass it to you in your Jury room.   If you would like to go
to your Jury room he will join you.

                (The Jury retired from Court!

     THE CORONER:   It has to do with the illness of
somebody and I do not think it is right to delay.   I
suggest we rise.  It is just one of those things. Let us
                                                R. E. SEPHTON


wait and see what happens.    I am sorry to have done this to
you. Hopefully we can get it sorted out but we will just
have to wait and see. Unfortunate one of the Jurors has
got to leave and go off to hospital and so I do not feel it
right that they should stay in view of what I have read.     I
am afraid I am going to just adjourn for the afternoon.     It
is most unfortunate because we cannot finish with you and
we cannot finish with Mr. Case. We would have done it
quite easily in fact and   it also means that you and Mr.
Case have to come back.     I suggest Mr. Sephton and Mr. Case
that you do not leave Sheffield yet. Wait until half past
three and get in touch with one of my Officers and we will
try and tell you when we want you again. We will
definitely want you.   I hope it is not going to be too
inconvenient but that is bad luck. That is our first non­
scheduled problem in I do not know how many weeks. We will
rise.  I do not think we are likely to resume this
afternoon.  I expect tomorrow we will be functioning as
normal at ten o'clock.

     MR. MANNING:  I would anticipate that since we have
all made your Officers aware of ways in which we can be
contacted in the event of some unforeseen circumstance if
unhappily the position were not to be resolved by tomorrow
morning you could in some way try to get the message
through to us.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Humphreys, did you want to say
something?

     MR. HUMPHREYS:  I was just checking with my colleague
to see whether your Officers had her number as she will be
over in Sheffield this evening but I go back to Liverpool.
I will want to know whether or not I have to come back
tomorrow.

     THE CORONER:   I anticipate that things hopefully will
have settled down.  I think it would be unwise to say with
absolute certainty.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I will need to phone you to let you
know the telephone number to contact me in Sheffield as you
will not have it.

     THE CORONER:   Give it to Sergeant Griffiths because
that is a much safer way than giving it to me.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Do you have any idea who you might be
calling tomorrow assuming that we do go ahead.

     THE CORONER:   Assuming all is well we are going to
call this young man plus Mr. Case first thing in the
morning. Mr. Sterritt is here as well.   I think Mr. and
Mrs. Aspinall are here as well.  I am very sorry, it is
                                                 R. E. SEPHTON


most inconvenient but there is nothing I can do about it.
We will finish off what we have got, those three, plus who?

     MR. JONES: S. Clarke, R. King, I. Southgate, H. J.
Clarke, and also J. Glover.

        THE CORONER:   I will have to decide whether to review
it.     It is maddening but that is how it is.

     MR. MANNING:  I was going to say the speed we made
with the last witness plus what we would have done this
afternoon seems to be a probable impossibility.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Jones has read out the whole of
tomorrow's prospective list and we will clearly have to axe
a few but clearly it is more sensible to take the overspill
from today.

Q. You will be back here tomorrow, will you? - A. I have
   got my driving test tomorrow.

Q.      We will sort it out. We cannot make you miss your
      driving test either. Do not worry about that. - A.
      Yes.

(The Inquests were adjourned until 10 am the following d a v l
