  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)
                                                  16
        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

              STADIUM DISASTER

           ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                      At

                The Town Hall,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

             10th December, 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                       Page
     F.N. GRUNHILL Sworn

             By The Coroner                             1
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Payne             13
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Manning           15
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. King              18
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Catchpole         25
             Cross-Examined   by Mrs. McBrien          26
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Hale              29
             Further by The   Coroner                  32

     P.S. SMITH Sworn

             By The Coroner                            37
             Cross-Examined   by   Mr.   Hale          45
             Cross-Examined   by   Mr.   Payne         46
             Cross-Examined   by   Mr.   Manning       48
             Cross-Examined   by   Mr.   King          52

DISCUSSION                                             61

             Cross-Examined by Mr. King (Cont)         70
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole           74
             Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien            74
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell             78
             Further by The Coroner                    79
             Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King        80
             Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole   80
             Further by The Coroner                    80
             Further Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien    81
             Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King        83

     E.J. WILSON Sworn

             By The Coroner                             84

DISCUSSION                                              94
             SIXTEENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

             MOMDAY. 10th DECEMBER 1990

     THE CORONER:   Good morning.  I am glad to see
you, all of you.  I think we have got a new
representative, is that right? Perhaps you could
introduce yourself.

     MR. COUGHLIN:   Good morning, it is Mr. Coughlin,
of Hepworth and Chadwick, solicitors in Leeds.    We are
instructing Paul Isaacs for Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield.  I am pleased to say that we will be able
to return, hopefully on a daily basis, front now.   Hr.
Isaacs will be here regularly save for the days which
are unavoidable that he be absent and this is one.    So
I am here today but Mr. Isaacs should be here
hereafter, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I think we have got Merseyside
Officers here as well, which is an even better effort -
well done - and we have got Mr. Gunhill, is that right?

          FRANCIS NICHOLAS GRUNHILLSworn:

                   By THE CORONER

Could you give me your full names, first of all? - A.
Francis Nicholas Grunhill.

You are P.C. 1300? - A. 1300, yes sir.

Is it in the Merseyside Police Force? - A. Merseyside.

And you are a mounted Officer? - A. Yes, sir.

I think you have been a mounted Officer for a good few
years, is that right? - A. 33 years, sir.

So about 31 in 1989, or thereabouts? - A. Thereabouts,
yes, sir.

You came over on 15th April, 1989? - A. We came over on
that day, yes, sir.

To help police this match? - A. Yes, sir.

Between Liverpool and Nottingham Fore.st, and you came
over with several of your colleagues but we are not too
worried about that at the moment.   Initially was it
intended that you would be concentrating on the
Liverpool end? - A. Yes, sir.
                                            F. N. GRUKHILL




Is that because you police the Liverpool crowds in
Liverpool from time to time, and they might recognise
you, as far as you know   - was that thereason? - A.
Could well have been, I   don't know, sir. Wewere just
designated an area to police.

Is it right that you do police at Anfield? - A. Yes,
sir.

I think - we don't need to spend too much timeon this
- you initially did a tour of the area at about 11.30
or so? - A. Yes, sir.

To familiarise yourself and so on, and was there
anything on that tour which is significant which is
worth mentioning? - A. No, except as we went past one
area it was nice weather and we did pass a public
house, and the people, fans, outside drinking, that is
all.

But they weren't .... -   A. No trouble.

No trouble? - A. None at all.

And you would not be surprised at that at all, would
you? - A. Not really.

On that day and at that time? - A. No.

Then you approached the ground? - A. Yes,    sir.

I think you got there at about quarter-to-1 or so? - A«
Round about that time.

For the next hour I think basically you were .... - A.
We just patrolled round, just in front of the
turnstiles, in the area over the bridge, just
encouraging people to go into the ground, and that was
that.

No problems whatsoever? - A. No problems.

This is something which you would normally do if you
were policing a major match? - A. Yes..

There is nothing unusual about that at all? - A.
Nothing, no.

Did you move into the area immediately outside the
turnstile at some point? - A. We did eventually move
in. My colleague and I went in when it started to
build up. We went in just between the gates and the
turnstile, and between the bar on the right hand side.
                                              F. N. GRUNHILL




Q. Can you - times are very difficult because I don't
   suppose for a minute you were looking at your watch
   every second - just give me a rough idea of what time
   that might have been? - A. Really it would be round 2
   o'clock-ish, round about that time.

Q.   Why did you actually go into that area?    Was there a
     reason for it? - A. We noticed it starting to build up
     round the gates.

Q. You mean the gates or the turnstiles? - A. The
   turnstiles.  We call them the gates in Liverpool, but
   the turnstiles, and they started to build up round
   there so we went in, my colleague and I, and stood
   between the gates. This has a funnelling effect and
   directs the fans through the turnstiles.

Q. So you were standing not across the path but
   horizontally? - A. Horizontal to the gates, yes.

Q. Did you notice the fans at that point were being
   searched?   I believe you did notice that? - A. Yes,
   they were being searched.

Q«    So there were Officers outside the turnstiles? - A.
     Yes, the foot Officers either side, their job
     apparently was to search people as they went through.

Q. And that had the effect of actually slowing things down
   a bit, didn't it? - A. Yes, it does, because with
   selective searching if you take one person out and if
   they are in a group, well they are his mates and they
   go with him and then you get a bottleneck, so the idea
   if you are standing there is to encourage them to go
   through and say, "Your mate will be through in a
   minute".

Q. I think you said it was about 2 ‘-o'clock when you were
   taking up this position? - A. I must emphasise, as you
   yourself said, sir, you are not looking at your watch
   every minute.

Q. I said about.  It does not actually matter whether it
   is 2 or 10-past at this stage. Times, get more critical
   but at this stage it does not matter.  I just want to
   know whether this was early-ish? - A. Early-ish, yes.

Q. Rather than late. What then happened? What did you
   see, notice, observe? - A. I noticed one thing, that
   they were very slow going through the turnstiles, very
   slow.  If that had been working at Liverpool or Everton
   the speed they were going, I would have expected them
   to be paying, not with tickets. When you have got
   tickets you expect a freer flow to go through your
                                           F. W. GRUiiHILL




/ turnstiles, and with this then they started to build up
  but it was still quite reasonable and they were moving
  through and people were quite happy.

 And the mood was good? - A. Yes.

Again I am not pinning you to a minute but can you say
how long that went on before there was a change, if
any? There may not have been a change. - A. It would
be after quarter-past, because I would say anything
after quarter-past-2 I ara out the door - I don't know
what time it was after that, but it was after that, and
it started to build up, but the two horses were still
working well, a bit up-tight with the pressure building
up, but we were known.   The chap and I worked the Kop,
we were known and we could get the people and we were
easing thera off and they were going through all right.

You have already mentioned that you were in this area
and that there is a metal bar which guides people
towards the turnstiles.  Can you remember, were you
within that area or were you a little bit further back?
- A. At the time we are talking about now I would be in
that area and about that time, at first when I went in
I was facing on to the thing, as I said the horse got a
bit restive with the crowd building up so we both,
myself and my colleague, turned round so then we are
facing at the crowd, at the gate, with the turnstiles
at our back. This has the same effect, but the horse
can see what is coming at hits and he is a lot easier.




              /Q. That is one of the problems
                                                               5




                                                 F. N. GRUNHILL


Q. That is one of the problems.  The horses are great
   provided they stay calm? - A. Yes.

Q. Were the people at that time who were around you
   still able to move away from you or were they
   so.... - A. At the time I turned round there would be
   a little movement but not a great deal of movement.
   They could not.  The pressure was really building up
   then.

Q. Where was this pressure coming from? - A. From the
   back.  It always comes from the back.

Q. Did you make any appeals to anybody? - A. Lots of
   appeals, y e s , sir.

Q. Were these appeals in fact effective? - A. They were
   early on but we had gone past that stage.  They
   weren't effective.

Q. I have no doubt there was quite a lot of noise going
   on? - A. Yes.

Q. Because there were lots of people and there were
   excited football fans.  Even if they were not there
   would have been a noise? - A. Yes.

Q. Could your appeals be heard by the people further
   back or not so far as you could tell? - A. Yes,
   because it is not a great area and at that time they
   had not built up to the shouting.    That was a small
   area and so you could get your voice to the back.     In
   actual fact we did come o f f . Where we had been stood
   on the gates we came off the gates towards the back
   to try and narrow that effort down to the gates
   because that area goes like that and so if you are
   stood on the gates you have got a big, like a wedge,
   and so we go down the queue or what should have been
   a queue. It w a s n 't a queue. We then funnel. So we
   were nearer to the back.

Q.    The people who you   were then appealing to, and I am
     not talking to the    people around your horse or past
     your horse towards    the turnstile because I think you
     have said they had    limited movement? - A. Yes.

Q.    The people you were appealing to, were they, so far
     as you could see capable of responding to your
     appeal? - A. At that time they could have eased and
     gone back again because they went full back and they
                                                         6




                                            F. N. GRUNHILL


   at that time, the gates weren't really wide.   They
   were sort of half closed.

Q. This is a very important point, you see, and this is
   what I am trying to establish from your observation.
   If a person is incapable of movement because he is so
   hemmed in it does not matter what you ask him to do.
   You would agree with that, would you not? - A. Yes.

Q. What I want to establish is whether the people you
   were appealing to had a capacity for movement? - A.
   Those at the back had a capacity for movement but
   there again in all the time and all the years I have
   done football matches I have yet to admit, or find a
   supporter that admits, he pushes.  Everybody else
   pushes but he doesn't.  So when you ask them, "It is
   not me.  It is him".

Q. Tell me whether you observed any pushing? - A. Oh
   yes, I observed pushing.

Q. You have no doubt whatever about that? - A. Yes.

Q. Are you saying this was pushing by people who, so far
   as you could observe and as far as you could judge,
   were not compelled to push? - A. I couldn't argue
   about that, no sir.  The people around were being
   pushed but it is momentum, isn't it? It just comes
   on and on and on until they cannot do anything.

Q. The time came when you decided it was not safe to
   stay there? - A. Yes.

Q. Either for you, the horse or the supporters? - A. At
   that time the crush had amounted to that much that my
   colleague had gone and the pressure on the horse was
   such I felt the horse start to get agitated, really
   agitated, and he was actually as I described before
   like a bar of soap.  The pressure was so great it was
   starting to lift him off his feet.y A horse once he
   feels the insecurity nothing - then I had to take him
   out because then he would start and he would have
   injured somebody.

Q. In fact you did come out? - A. I did go out.

Q. Did you come out towards the perimeter gates? - A. I
   went out towards the perimeter gate and started to
   work at the back.  At one stage we did manage to
   close the perimeter gates and we started to try and
   get people to come off the back of the queue but it
                                                          7




                                               F. N. GRUNHILL


     was virtually impossible and at one time I would say
     there was something like between the perimeter gates
     and the back of the queue, there was six feet or
     eight feet, when they could have come back.   By this
     time it was this urge to get through the gates.

Q. Again this is an important point.  Are you saying
   that when you came out of this confined area you
   actually created a gap between the people, I will say
   on the Leppings Lane side of the perimeter gates, and
   the people within the turnstile area? - A. That is
   right, yes.

Q. The gap I think you said was 6 feet or thereabouts? -
   A. Thereabouts, yes.

Q.   There was a gap? - A. Yes.

Q.   The people could have moved back? - A. Have moved
     back. .

Q. If they had wished? - A. If they wished.

Q. But they did not, is that what you say? - A. But
   there again....

Q. Were any appeals made   to them to move back      at      that
   point? - A. Yes, sir, yes.

Q. You shouted? - A. Shouted, more than shouted, yes.
   It didn't last for long. We had the     gap. We    got the
   gap and then the gate   went again and  that is when the
   crush really came on then.

Q. You have mentioned this railing which funnels people
   towards it? - A. It is on the outside, the riverside.

Q. It does not go all the way up to the perimeter gates,
   does it? - A. No, sir.
                                     y
Q. Was there anything you could see which would have
   prevented the people who were between the perimeter
   gate and the beginning of that railing spilling
   towards the riverside? - A. There was nothing there
   to stop them, no.  They could have gone through but
   the perimeter gates go right across there, sir, and
   so they were coming over the bridge and' through there
   and on to that part.

Q. What I am trying to find out is this; were the people
   aiming for the turnstile area? Have a look at the
                                              F. N. GRUNHILL


model.  Can you see the model? Can you point to the
A to G perimeter gates? Take the point a bit nearer
in and across there.  That is the perimeter gates, is
it not? - A. Yes.

Then inside that area there is a railing,      is that
right? - A. Yes.

Where the pointer is that is where the beginning of
that railing is? - A. Yes.

Between that pointer and the outer perimeter gates,
move it up and forward? That is what I am trying to
find out, I do not know, but would it have been
possible for people to have spread and filled up that
area this side of that railing?  It would not bring
them to the turnstiles, I agree, but would it be
possible for people to spill into that area? - A. It
would be possible but the fans wouldn't go there,
sir, and so there is no point.  The only way into the
ground for them is through the gates or the
turnstiles and so they would aim for where the
turnstiles are.

That is an explanation why they did not go. What I
am asking is, was there any reason why they could not
have gone there if they were being squashed in that
area? - A. Oh no.

In that area which we are talking about, was there a
crush as well or not? Were you in that area? - A. I
wasn't in that area, sir.

You were either further back or further out? - A. I
was always in the area enclosed by the blue rail, the
outside rail and the other fence, always working
there.

Until you left? - A. Until we were told to stand
down.  Even when I came out I came,,out to the back
because in my opinion that was the only way I had of
trying to ease the pressure because if we....




                              / Q . Show me
C .'
                                                                  9



                                              R. N. GRUNHILL


           Q. 7 Show me that.   Go up to the model and show me not
                where you were working initially, but when you decided
                that the horse had become unstable and you moved out?
                -            A. Where I had been working in there, we came dow
       B        to the end here.
           Q. That is right.     - A. That is where the gates were
                shut and that is where we were   stood round there.

           Q.   That is where you created the gap, is that what you
                say? - A.   Yes, that is where we created a gap across
                there and then it went, and so my colleague and I
                tried to put the horses sideways on to make like a
                breakwater, or something, to stop the crowds.

           Q.   That is right, and what I am asking you is whether
                when you were in that position - can you point again
                where you had created the gap?   Have you got that? -
                A.   Yes.

           Q.   Would the people coming in have been physically able
                to come to the right-hand side down the pathway?   I
                know there are no turnstiles there and they may not
       D        have wanted to come, but could they have come down
                there where you are pointing? - A.   As far as I am
                aware they could.

           Q.   Okay.  I think we have got a photograph which might
                just help with this because I want to sort this out in
                my mind, you see.  - A. Yes sir.

           Q.   It is MWL10/29A, I think.   Could you put C299 up?
                This is at about 14.56.   It says 14.57 on it, but the
                timing is not right.  Are you on that picture? - A.
                Yes sir.

           Q.   Which officer are you? - A.     That one.

           Q.   In the distance there? - A.     Yes.

           Q.   What were you doing at that stage? - A.    At that
                stage, sir, I was at the end.  When we were talking I
                didn't realise that was the time. At that time I was
                at the end of that blue bar, endeavouring to take the
                horse inwards, if you can see,   he is facing i n , to
                ease the pressure on the people.

                Was this before or after you had managed to create
                this 6-foot gap, do you think? - A. . That is well on
                from then, yes.

                In other words, when you had already lost that? - A.
                Y es.
                                                            10



                                      R. N. GRUNHILL

    Q.   You can see the area which I have been talking about
         is on the right-hand side of the picture.  Ther e are
         quite a lot of people there on the right-hand side,
         iurther over,  I am sorry, left-hand side. - A. Y e s ,
B        at that time. As you can notice, my back is to that.
         I am working towards the crowd all the time so I did
         not know from that picture they have got three horses
         across that side endeavouring to cut the people off
         from coming in there.

    Q.   Yes.  We will come back to this in a moment because we
         have got another picture which shows you a few minutes
         earlier and maybe we will go over this again.  What
         happened then, as far as you were concerned? - A.
         When, sir?

         After you had created the gap, it had filled up again?
         - A.    The gates were forced, they came in again,“and
         we decided to try and work in from the side again to
         hold, but we couldn't go right across because of the
         pressure that was there.   If you want to ease a queue
         like that, you would go in from the front, but you
D        could not go in from the front because of the blue
         bar.  That stopped your ability to get across the
         mouth of the gate.   If you can get in that way and
         send your horses in that way, then you can start that
         funnel, but you couldn't break at all because the blue
         bar was stopping you.

         In other words, the people who were between the
         turnstiles and the end of the blue bar, there was not
         really anything more you could do for them? - A.   No.

    Q.   Because they were caught, if you like, on three sides
         plus the people coming from behind? - A.   Yes.

    Q.   So are you saying that what you tried to do was to
         create a wedge between that group of people and the
         people at the back? - A.   At the back, yes, then tell
         the people there that they are not being pushed and
         that they can ease off.

         I appreciate this is a specialised area, but is that,
         in fact, the standard technique of breaking up a
         biggish crowd, from your experience? - A.   Yes.

         Presumably the ideal thing would be to have officers
         doing this in blocks all the way further back, would
         that be right? - A.   That would be right.

         If we look at that photograph, the one that we have
         got up there, assuming for a moment that this is what
         you are doing, is that right, is that what you are




H
                            R. N. GRUNHILL


trying to do? - A.   Yes, that is what we are trying
to do.

Would it be right to say that you obviously do not
know what those officers were doing, but if you just
look at that photograph, would you expect that that
was the next section trying to break up the block, the
ones who were further out than you were? - A.   Yes,
that is what they are endeavouring to do.

Did the pressure on the crowd ease in front of you at
any point as far as you can remember? - A.   From what
I gather, it eased from the sides first originally,
and that must have been from what Igather when that C
gate was open for that first time.

You did not see the gate open? - A.      No.

But you have heard about it since? - A.   I have heard
about it, and if you look at that position, itwould
be impossible for me to see C gate.

Yes, but you did notice that there appeared to be a
diminution --- A. Well the side people went.

You, in fact, then remained in that position until
eventually you were asked to close the turnstiles
themselves? - A.   Yes.

Which was some time later? - A.   Yes.

In fact, by then the crowds outside had virtually
disappeared? - A.   That is right.

There may have been a few people but not that many? -
A.   Not a lot.

You have told me that you have had 33 years of
experience? - A.   Yes sir.

Have you policed this ground before in this location?
- A.   Once before, yes sir.

When was that, can you remember? - A.      I think it was
a couple of years previous.

So you were not there in 1988 at the previous semi­
final? - A.   No sir, I think it was before that.

In your experience, was this situation with people
wanting to come forward and pushing forward - you have
mentioned the fact that nobody ever admits to pushing
- unusual in your experience, or was this exceptional?
                             R. N, GRUNHILL


-A.    I have seen crowds   before, yes.   I have seen
crowds wanting to get in,   yes.

So was there anything exceptional about this crowd, or
was it just another crowd that you have seen before? -
A.   No, as far as I can imagine, it was frustration,
the narrow area endeavouring to get in, but I cannot
really think of anything outstanding - it is a while
back now.

Okay, that is fair enough. I do not want you to
invent anything. - A. No sir.

I am just asking you and you have given a very fair
answer.  One final question before we put this other
shot up and just go over that again.  You could not
see what was happening in Leppings Lane right up in
the distance, would that be right? - A.   No, I could
not see.




                            /Q.   Because you were
                                                               13


                                                 F. N. GRUNHILL



Q. Because you were concentrating on that... - A. Yes, you
   concentrate...   If you are in the area like that and you
   are dealing with a crowd that is around you, then you
   don't start looking what's there.   You have got to
   concentrate on the people that's around you.

Q.   Have you by chance see the compilation video at    any
     point? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   You feature on that, don't you? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   It is you? - A. Yes.

Q.   We have all seen it twice now.Can we put this one        up,
     is it 29A?

          MR. JONES:   29A, sir.   That will be C.215 and the
     corrected time is 14.52.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Now this is in fact about five
     minutes earlier than the scene which I showed you a
     moment ago.    Can you find yourself on there at all? - A.
     Yes, I think that is where the officer is pointing.

Q. Has he got you? - A. He has got me.   That is when we
   would make the point - again, I am towards the end of the
   blue bar and we decided to go in again from the side.

Q. So this is also after the point when you had created that
   gap? - A. Yes.

Q. In other words when the crowds on the outside had joined
   up with the crowds on the inside? - A. That is when the
   gates had gone and it had just come right in.

Q. We see a few other mounted officers.   Do you know where
   they came from?  If you don't know, say you don|t know. -
   A. I gathered afterwards they were called up from round
   the ground.

Q. But you didn't know at the time? - A. No,     sir.    We were
   only aware of what we were doing. ^

                  Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q. Just tell the jury a little more about your preparations
   for this event.   To start with you patrolled at some
   distance and then you took up your station in Leppings
   Lane? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Then eventually you moved closer to the turnstiles? -A.
   Yes, sir.
                                             F. N. GRUNHILL


What I want to know is during that period before the
events that you have been dwelling   on in    your evidence,
during that period did it seem to you that the
preparations for the arrival of the crowd were following
a normal pattern? - A. Yes, sir.

Quite.   Nothing out of the ordinary at all? -A. No.

From the police point of view, that is what I am asking
you, from the point of view of the police the policing of
the situation, did it appear to you that the preparations
were proceeding quite normally? — A. From my side of it,
from the mounted side of it, yes.

Quite normally? - A. Yes.

If someone at about two o'clock had said to you   that in
forty-five minutes there was going to be such a   crush
that people were going to be in danger of their   lives,
what would you have said at two o'clock? - A. I   didn't
think it would be.

At that time there was no reason to think that anything
was going to go wrong at all? - A. As far as I can
remember - to me this is early on?

That is what I am talking about. -   A. It     just seemedto
be like a normal football match.

I want to ask you two other matter judging by your
experience.   The first is this, when there was a
terrific crush at the front but people were still pushing
from the back and you were appealing to them to ease
back, you have said they didn t respond, that's right? -
A. That's right.

I want you to compare this with your normal experience.
Policing big crowds depends on co-operation between the
crowd and the police, doesn't it? - A. We have always
said so, in my experience of 30-odd years, that we police
crowds with the crowd's consent.

How does the behaviour of this crowd in response to your
appeals compare with ordinary behaviour? - A. Well, they
always say the same, sir, "It's not me.  It's not me."
You cannot make a crowd stop pushing if they don't want
to stop.

That's what happened here, is it? - A. That's what
happened there.

On the question of your horse and the reaction of your
horse on this occasion, can you tell the jury how long
you have known this particular horse? - A. I have had
                                             F. N. GRUNHILL


this horse since he came as a three year old.     I have
had him about eighteen years.

That's now, is it? - A. That's now, so about that time I
had had him about sixteen/seventeen years.   This animal
- that is the first time I have ever known'that horse not
to want to go in to a crowd.   He leads the National
winner in and if you can think of the crowd that he comes
round with and he is going down into and he has never...

Do you mean at the Grand National event? - A. At a Grand
National event when we are leading the winner in.^  It|s
an enclosed space but he will walk on, but the third time
I tried to take him in there he did not want to go in.

Can you offer an explanation for that? - A. He was
frightened.

Can you amplify that?   What was frightening him
particularly this time? - A. Well, I suppose the
pressure.   He has never had pressure like that.   He is
17.3.   He weighs something like three-quarters of a ton.
At one stage if you can start to imagine pressure taking
him off his feet, three-quarters of a ton, and they are
not the brainiest animals.

So your interpretation is he was frightened? - A. Yes.

            Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Before all the build-up had started, PC Brunhill, did you
have, on the outside of the ground, to deal with people
who didn't have tickets? - A. No, we were just asking the
people - the general thing is you go round, you are
policing round, and you say, "If you have got tickets
will you please go in and if you haven't will you please
go away?"

Were there people who didn't have tickets? - A. They
didn't tell me they didn't have tickets, no.

Were you, as part of the duty at that time, encouraging
people to go into the ground? - A. .Yes.

Was there any reluctance of p'eople to do so, did it seem
to you at the time? - A. No.    They would go in in their
own time, but there was no...    Early on they were going
in in their own time.

You then described how you walked’through the queue and
got up to the front where the turnstiles were? - A. Yes.

That would be perfectly normal police duty, the tactic of
an officer on horseback? - A. Yes.
                                           F. N. GRUNHILL


Effectively walking up and down the lines of supporters
to the turnstiles? - A. Yes.    In that narrow position,
where it is not as long, say, as where you work at the
Kop, but that would the idea that you place yourself m
between the gates' and funnel people through the gates,
yes.

A time came when you and your horse were being crushed
against that wall? - A. When I turned him round...   He
wasn't crushed against the wall, no, because when I said
we came off the wall to try and break, to narrow the
thing down so that they would go in, that is when we came
out and that was when I felt him start to get upset
because the pressure was too great.

That was a very frightening situation for both yourself
and your horse? - A. One worries about what would happen
to the people.




               Q. Indeed, and indeed
                                                           17

                                                 F. N. GRUiiiilLL




    Q.' Indeed, and indeed that was being displayed, wasn't it,
        because there were people who were being crushed, and
        indeed people were being passed out of the crowd? - A.
        Yes, at one time, yes, we passed people over.
B
    Q. That would be visible, in that people were being passed
       over the heads? - A. Yes.

    Q. So even if it was somebody further back that would be
       something that could be seen because it was higher than
       normal? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did that action, people being physically lifted out of
       the crowd, did that seesi to have any easing effect on
       the people pushing forward? - A. Mot that I noticed.

    Q. You then went back to try and assist in securing the
       perimeter gate, and initially that was not being
       successful but your arrival secured the gate for a
       short period of time? - A. Yes.

    Q. The gate was then bolted into its position? - A. I
       don't know about that.  We got the gate shut, once it
       was shut I moved off the gate to the back of the crowd.

    0. You then made a very determined attempt to puli people
       off the back of the crowd, they having six or eight
       feet then which could have eased them back and eased
       progressively all the way back down? - A. Yes.

    0. But your evidence on that is that save for a few
       people, most chose not to respond to you? - A. Yes.

    Q. Could there have been any doubt, Officer, as to what
       you were saying and the way in which you were moving,
       as to what your instruction was to thera? - A. No, there
       couldn't be any doubt.

    Q. Was that something in your experience of policing that
       you thought was surprising or not? - A. 0o, I didn't
       think it was surprising.

    Q. Then the gate gave way? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you actually see that happen? - A. No.

    Q. And the people who had been one side of the gate
       flooded through? - A. Yes.

    Q. And came up to the back of the crowd? - A. Yes.

    Q. And continued? - A. Yes.

    Q. Causing that crowd to surge forward again.




H
                                                               18

                                                     F. N. GRUi.'HILL




     '       THE CORONER:    Hhat was the reply to    that?

Q. The question was when they joined up did the crowd
   surge forward again? - A. Yes, as much as we are saying
   when we got the gap people didn't move, what I am
   saying is they did not readily walk back six feet but
   they would ease off, so you would get a little bit of
   breathing space but when the crowd came on again, then
   of course everybody goes forward.  It is like the
   surging that you see on terraces.

Q.            MR. MANNING:    How did they get pastyour horse,
         Officer? - A. well those that wanted tried to go
         underneath hita. Some did go underneath him, but when
         they got underneath there was nowhere to cone up
         because he was hard against the back, so we then have
         them pushing him and leaning into him, and that is one
         of the reasons why you had to come out, because they
         were going underneath.

Q.       What effect did that have on the animal?   It may be a
         very foolish and obvious question. - A. He would get a
         bit agitated.

Q. You have talked about your horse and your own
   experience, summing up that crowd and that situation,
   in the totality of your own experience, how do you view
   it? - A. I don't know. The crowd lost it on that day.
   They just had this one obsession about getting in and
   if they won't work with you, you cannot break it.

Q. Thank you very much indeed, Officer.

                      Cross-Examined bv MR. KING

Q. Officer, one of the problems is that you were working
   in a very restricted area between the perimeter gates
   and the turnstiles, weren't you? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And one of the problems with horses is that if they are
   going to be effective they need a bit of space, and the
   people around them need a bit of^space? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And if the situation arises that there is no space,
   there are so many people there that they envelop the
   horse, then the horse becomes frightened? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. The people around become frightened? - A. Yes.

Q. And really the horse becomes counter-productive, I
   suspect, at that stage? - A. Not the two horses that we
   had in there at the time.
                                                               19

                                                     F. M. GIIUNHILL




    Qs But there came a point when you withdrew your horse? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. Because you were frightened for your horse? - A. I was
B      frightened for the people.

    Q. So be it, you were frightened for the people.  In other
       words, the horse could not do the job it was designed
       to do because of the number of people around it? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. At that stage.  So you would agree with me, Officer,
       that one of the most important things about policing
       the turnstile area between the perimeter gates and the
       turnstiles at Leppings Lane where you were, would be to
       try and ensure that the number of people who got into
       that area at any one time was limited? That would be a
       planning aim, wouldn't it? - A. Yes.

    Q. When you first began to be concerned, that is if I can
       take you back to round about 2 o'clock and you said
       there was a build up and you decided to go in, did you
       notice anything about the direction from which fans
       were coming which surprised you? - A. Ho, because when
       I first went in we noticed a crowd building up round
       the turnstiles, so we went in and we faced onto the
       turnstiles, so we could not see what was happening
       behind us.

    Q. I understand that but before you went in could you see
       the direction from which the fans were coming, that is
       to say along Leppings Lane or in a different direction?
       - A. When we were walking round just generally, just
       before 2 o'clock, and we were asking people to go in,
       they were mostly coming up, as far as I can remember,
       Leppings Lane. There was a few coming round the
       bridge, there was a few sat on the bridge, but mostly
       round there and we were just walking round asking them
       to go in.

    Q.    Didn't   there come a time when more fans came over the
         bridge,   when in fact you were expecting them really
         just to   be coming along Leppings Lane, so there was a
         sort of   bottleneck effect of people coming from two
         sides.

    Q. Being within that area, I can honestly say that I can't
       remember from which direction they came.  I remember
       the surge and the people.  I would be tending to spend
       most of my time controlling the people within that
       area, trying to get them to ease.

    0.   I don't want to press too hard on it ....




H
                                                                20

                                                      F. U. GRUtiHILL




              MR. KING:   Sir, if you have got the transcript in
         front of you at page 80B, sir, of the Taylor Inquiry.

                 THE CORONER:   Yes, shall we let Mr. Grunhill read
B        this?     That might be easiest:

    Q. It is at letter B, Mr. Grunhill. - A. Yes, sir, I see.

    Q.        MR. KING:    Does that jog your memory?  -A. That
         jogs cay memory, yes. That must have been just, as   you
         were saying, round the 2 o'clock time.

    Q.   Yes. - A. Yes, I will     agree with that.

    0. We had better make sure we know what you agree with.
       Before you started your work that day did you have an
       idea in your mind the direction from which you were
       expecting the fans to come? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Which was that direction? - A. Up Leppings Lane.

    Q. So along Leppings Lane as we see on the model, front the
       top? - A. Yes.

    Q. What was it you noticed round about 2 o'clock before
       you went into the turnstile area? - A.That they did
       come from the opposite direction, over thebridge.

    Q. And that created something of the nature of a
       bottleneck, didn't it? - A. Yes.

    0. So you had two prongs of fans if I can put it that way
       making for the perimeter gate area? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. And the turnstile area? - A. Yes.

    Q. At that stage the turnstile gates were all open,
       weren't they? - A. Yes, sir.

    0. And there was nobody actually on the perimeter gates
       controlling the numbers going in, they were just
       allowed to go in when they arrived there, at that
       stage? - A. Yes, at tnat stage.

    Q. You moved in because you noticed that there was a build
       up at the turnstile area and that people were very slow
       going in? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. I get the impression that you were quite amazed at how
       slow it was, would be that be fair? - A. Yes.

    Q. Turnstiles clearly restrict the numbers going into the
       ground, they slow it down? - A. Yes.
                                          F. M. GRUNHILL




/ If it is slowed down too much then of course the build
  up of people within the turnstile area grows, doesn't
  it? - A. Yes, sir.

 So if turnstiles don't operate efficiently that can
 create a problem in itself, can't it? - A. Yes.

 Were you of the view that that was a problem being
 created at that time, when you first went in? - A. Yes.

Then when you originally went in and positioned
yourself in the way you indicated, which was really by
the metal barrier half-way up into the turnstile area,
wasn't it - that is where you moved in to? - A. Yes.

You weren't, I am not criticising you for this, you
weren't manning the perimeter gates at that stage? - A.
No, sir.

So people were still coming through the perimeter
gates?- A. Yes.

There was nothing to stop them, they were still open? -
A. I don't know about that, because there were other
horses there.

You don't know but you certainly weren't .... - A. I
was not, no.

Because there came a time when you were so enveloped by
the people who had obviously come in, that you had to
move away from that position? - A. Yes.

It was only then that the attempt was made to close the
perimeter gates? - A. I gather that.  I was inside, I
don't know.

The point I am trying to make clear is that wtien you
originally moved in because you were concerned about
the build up in the turnstile area, as far as you were
aware froia your own knowledge nothing was done to clos
the perimeter gates at that stage, from your knowledge
- A. No.

That is correct, isn't it? - A. Yes, that is correct.

 Then of course, people came in through the perimeter
 gates, enveloped you and you had to deal with the
 situation as you then found it? - A. Yes.  When we
 first moved onto the gates, sir, it was only because
 they were getting round the gates, and when we went in
 and stood between them we created this funnel effect
 which speeded it up.
                                            F. N. GRUNHILL




'I understand that.  You were speeding the entry of
 people into the area? - A. Yes, sir.

You were encouraging people in, in fact? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   When you say gates, we are talking
about the turnstiles? - A. Turnstiles.

We have got so many gates. - A. Sorry, sir.

     MR. KIMG:   I have made myself clear, I think.
You were working the turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.

You then became enveloped? - A. Yes, sir.

Because clearly people were still coming into the
turnstile area? - A. Yes, sir.

And it was only then that you noticed and you were part
of an attempt to close the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

Can you help us on that attempt to close the   perimeter
gates, which perimeter gates you are talking   about?  If
I can just show you a photograph - 258. - A.   The one to
the right of the sign which says "No Through   Road".

So you are pointing to the middle gate.  What was the
position as regards the far left gate as we look at the
photograph? - A. To be quite honest, sir, I can't
remember.

Could that still have been open? - A. I wouldn't know.

What about the gate to the right hand side? - A. Again,
sir, I saw what was in my opinion, if you look at that,
the main body were coming through that gate and I went
to shut that gate.  I saw a Constable trying to shut
the gate over and I went to the foot Constable's
assistance, put the horse across there, and we managed
to close it.

Can I just take you back a stage >dn time, just before
you tried to close that gate when you had become
enveloped, and you were being asked questions by the
learned Coroner, very properly, as to whether or not
people were pushing or being pushed, and you recognise
the distinction? - A. The people at the front are the
people who get pushed.  The people at the back do the
pushing.

And your observation could only be as to the people
round your horse? - A. Yes.
                                                 23

                                            N, GRUNHILL




     MR. KING:   I wonder if he could be shown page 84
of the transcript, sir?




                  /THE CORONER:
                                              F. N. GRUNHILL


       THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. KING:   It is letter G on page 83, sir, and just
to letter A on page 84.  This is before he goes to try and
shut the gates, sir.

       THE CORONER:   Have you got it?

Q.       MR. KING:  If you just could at letter G on page
     83? Just read that to yourself, Officer.   Then turn
     to page 84-A? - A. "Did you see any people who you
     could truthfully say were pushing rather than being
     pushed?"

Q. Yes.  Read the answer to yourself and I will ask you
   a question.  First of all, do you agree with the
   answer you gave on that piece of paper? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q.   The question is, "Did you see any people who you
     could truthfully say were pushing rather than being
     pushed?" and your answer is? - A. "No, I couldn't."

Q. I am obliged for that.  The gap which you managed to
   create, how long in time would you say that that
   lasted for before it was enveloped? - A. Two or three
   minutes at the most.

Q. So a very short time? - A. A very short time.

Q. You very fairly, Officer, near the end of your
   evidence spoke about crowd frustration.  Is that
   something you have had experience of in the past? -
   A. Yes, sir.

Q. You had that experience, and can you tell us a bit
   about that. What is it which makes a crowd
   frustrated in this situation? - A. Invariably the
   fact that they have got a ticket and they can't get
   in.                               ✓
Q. That does not come as a surprise to you, this
   frustration? - A. No.

Q. The effect it has on the crowd does not come as a
   surprise to you? - A. No.

Q. If one could remove the source of the frustration
   then clearly I suspect your view is that half the
   battle would be solved, if you could stop them being
   frustrated? - A. Yes.  The other thing is that you
                                                          25




                                            F. N. GRUNHILL


   have got to encourage people with tickets to come
   early.

Q. One way of removing a frustration is to postpone the
   kick-off, is it not? - A. Yes.

              Cross-Examined bv MR. CATCHPOLE:

Q. Can I just go back to the stage when you first went
   to the turnstiles because you had an impression they
   were operating slowly? I think you said in your
   answers to the learned Coroner that if it had been an
   Everton/Liverpool you would expect them to be paying
   rather than it being an all-ticket match.  They were
   going through reasonably happy at that stage? - A.
   Yes.

Q. There was a build-up beginning at that stage? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Was it your impression that you could deploy your
   horse quite valuably to assist the flow of spectators
   going through the turnstiles at that stage? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. It was not a dangerous situation.  You were going in
   because with your 31 years as a mounted Officer you
   knew you could be useful assisting fans through the
   turnstiles at that particular stage? - A. Yes.

Q. You also describe the searching going on outside the
   turnstiles at that point? - A. Yes.

Q. Was there any reason you could see for slowness or
   was it just an impression you had? You were not
   counting people through I imagine? - A. I wasn't
   counting, no.  It was just a general impression.

Q. Again before the real build-up actually came was it
   your impression that your action assisted those fans
   to get through the turnstiles more^ smoothly? - A.
   Yes, if you put a horse in between the gates, as we
   did, two, then only two people can go through.
   Remove the horse and the people bulge round.   Then
   the thing is that the person on the outside is trying
   to get in, the person there, so nobody goes through.
   Put your horse there and you get two single lines and
   everybody goes through.
                                                          26




                                              F. N. GRUNHILL


Q. The object is to get a line of one person going up to
   this turnstile gate and going straight through? - A.
   That is it.

Q. I would just like to be clear about this; your
   evidence is that when you went in you positioned your
   horse there.  That actually assisted the flow of
   spectators through those turnstiles? - A. At that
   point early on, yes.

Q. What happened later was that there was a very big
   build-up, the crowd creating some problems? - A. Yes.

                Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Officer, do you think it is fair to search only some
   fans at the turnstiles?

     THE CORONER:   This Officer is a mounted Officer.       He
has had 31 years of experience.  Can I rephrase the
question slightly?

Q. In your 31 years of experience is it normal practice
   to search every fan who goes through the turnstile or
   is searching done selectively? - A. Selectively, sir.

Q. Are you saying it with regard to this match only or
   is this the general practice? - A. General practice.

     THE CORONER:   Does that help you at all?    Not quite
because you want him to say what he thinks.

       MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, in a way.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Since you have been a mounted
     Officer have you engaged in searching people,
     generally speaking? - A. No, sir.

     THE CORONER:   He is not an expert and so he cannot
answer that question.                ^

Q.      MRS. McBRIEN:, Do you not think it was pointless
     simply to make appeals to fans to ease back? Why do
     you think they were eager to push forward, Officer? -
     A. Because they wanted to get through the gates and
     the only way I have of asking, the only way to stop
     them pushing is to ask.  If I go and be aggressive
     then I am going to get an aggressive response back.
     If I ask people politely and ask people to go back
     that is all I can do and over the years I have found
                                                           27




                                                F. N. GRUNHILL


     if you talk and ask people politely then you will get
     some- people answering you.

Q. Wasn't it because they wanted to get in by a certain
   time that they were so eager? - A. Yes.

Q. That is what they were running out of.  Do you agree
   that because there were so many people still outside
   quite close to kick-off time that it was absolutely
   essential to delay the kick-off?

     THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, this is not the right
Officer to ask that question of. Mr. King asked a question
correctly and forgive me for putting it like that.   I am
not trying to be patronising.   Mr. King asked the question,
is one way of easing the pressure, and I cannot remember
now what he did say.

       MR. KING:   I said removing the source of frustration,
sir.

     THE CORONER:   That is right and he said, "Would it
mean delaying the kick-off?" and the Officer said, "Yes".
That I think is a fair question but to ask him the policy
he is not the right man.  You will never get to the right
man, I agree with that, but he is not the right one.

       MRS. McBRIEN:     I am sorry, sir.

Q. Could I put it this way; do you agree that problems
   normally cause delays?

       THE CORONER:     I am sorry?

       MRS. McBRIEN:     If I may put the question.

       THE CORONER:     I just did not hear you, that is all.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Do you agree that problems
     normally cause delays automatically?

     THE CORONER:   I think you can give an answer to that
because it is a common sense question.  Anybody is able to
answer that.

       THE WITNESS:    Yes.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Would you agree that animals are
     usually quite intelligent and if it was obvious that
     the horse saw danger then it was also very dangerous
                                                             28




                                                  F. N. GRUNHILL


     for the fans there? - A. It is a debatable point
     about horses being intelligent.

Q. He seemed to be telling you something, didn't he? -
   A. Yes, because he was being crushed at the time,
   yes.

Q. So perhaps with the intelligence of a horse he
   thought the organisation was not quite the same that
   day, do you think? He saw something different
   happening?

     THE CORONER:   Try again, Mrs. McBrien.  What is it
you are actually asking? No, I am not going to ask.   Just
try the question again because I do not think you have got
the question quite answerable.

        MRS. McBRIEN:   I am not very sure now.

      THE CORONER:   Just take your time. Mrs. McBrien, you
are under no time pressure.   You can have as much time as
you want or need to try and get the question right in your
mind.   Just try and put it slightly differently.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN:   This horse was one which had
     been used many times at football matches and I
     thought perhaps that day he saw a situation which was
     different, noticeably different? - A. Having had so
     long with him even now I couldn't tell you what he
     was thinking.   He would sense.  He would feel or
     sense agitation, people being upset, and the pressure
     on him he would think - I am trying to put it over -
     that fear would come across to him.   That fear from
     the people or the agitation he would transmit into
     fear.

Q. He was used to working with a sensible system
   normally? - A. He was usually working in a different
   position.
                                       v'


Q. That day he could not do his work because the system
   was not being operated properly perhaps?

        THE CORONER:   I do not think the Officer has said
that.     It is quite a clever question.

Q. What was the reason why this horse was not working as
   it normally would have done in that situation as far
   as you can judge? - A. At the end, sir, fear.

Q. What gave rise to that fear? - A. The pressure.
   ✓                                              F. N. GRUNHILL



       THE CORONER:      You can ask another one if you like.

       MRS. McBRIEN:      Thank you, Officer.

                   Cross-Examined bv MR. HALE:

Q. What is being put to you, Officer, that the horse was
   sensible of what was happening around it but the
   people apparently were not.  Is that a fair
   assumption? - A. He knew he was being crushed, yes,
   sir.

Q. Is there any reason why the people would not have
   known they were being crushed? - A. They did know
   they were being crushed.

Q. They apparently had not the sense or the ability to
   back off and get themselves out which is what the
   horse was trying to do? - A. I wouldn't know how they
   felt, sir.

Q. You have been referred to another statement that you
   made.  Do you remember making a statement to the
   Chief Officer of mounted about this affair very
   shortly afterwards? - A. I can't remember it.

Q. I will give it to you, if necessary, but it may not
   be necessary.  Do you remember expressing a
   comparison of the crowd that you were faced with on
   that day compared with all the crowds you have been
   faced with in the past? Do you remember whether they
   were the same as, better than, or worse than any
   other crowd you had ever met?

     THE CORONER:   Let us do the same as we did with the
transcript.  Is it the final paragraph you are talking
about, Mr. Hale?

     MR. HALE:        It is the final paragraph, sir, that is
right.

     THE CORONER:   Perhaps I had better look at your copy
and just check that it is actually the same.   Yes, it is
the same.  That is my copy and it is the final paragraph.
Return this to Mr. Hale because he may need it.

       MR. HALE:      I have another copy, sir.
                                              F. N. GRONHILL


     THE CORONER:   I will keep this one while he looks at
it.  Ignore the highlighting.  The highlighting is nothing
whatever to do with it.

Q.        MR. HALE:   It is the entire final paragraph
     please which starts, "I have been a mounted
     Officer? - A. Yes, yes.




                                /Q. Would you like to.
                                                         31



                                    R. N. GRUNHILL


Q. " Would you like to read it out?

          THE CORONER: Let him read it first of all.

          MR. HALE:   That is quite right.

Q*        THE CORONER:  Do you adopt it today as being a
     correct statement, that is the first question? - A. I
     agree with it as regards the end of the crush, yes
     sir.

          THE CORONER:   Okay, in that case I do not mind
     you reading it out.

          THE WITNESS:  "I have been a mounted officer
          for 31 years and in that time have only once been
          confronted by a crowd of people so unco-operative
          and unwilling to listen to reason, and that was
          on the occasion of a football match between
          Scotland and Wales played at Anfield in 1977.   My
          horse is a very stable and brave horse and Ihave
          never before known him to show apprehension as he
          did on this occasion.

Q*        MR. HALE:  So the important matter there was the
     unco-operativeness and unwillingness of the crowd to
     listen to reason? - A.   At the end, sir, yes.

          MR. HALE:   At the end,    yes.   Thank you.

          THE CORONER: Mr. King?

          MR. KING:  Sir, there is nothing out of that.
     Could I make a point, sir, about the photograph.   You
     originally very properly put a photograph to this
     officer, which was C.299, and the officer was giving
     evidence and one would be forgiven for thinking that
     he was giving evidence using the photograph of what
     was happening while the crush was still on and while
     there was trouble.

          THE CORONER:   Yes.           y

          MR. KING:  But, sir, I was just noticing that, in
     fact, that photograph was at 14.57, which we know was
     after Gate C was opened and, indeed, after the great
     pressure had been relieved.

          THE CORONER: Actually, that is a very good point.

          MR. KING:  So it was perhaps an unfair photograph
     to use for the purpose for which it was used.
                            R. N. GRUNHILL


     THE CORONER: I agree.  That is a very proper
point.  That is the one that I put up.  I had
forgotten about the time.  The other one we put up was


     MR. KING:  Sir, I am not concerned with that
photograph.  I am concerned with the questions you
put, sir, about C.299.

     THE CORONER: Please correct them if you want to.

     MR. KING:  Sir, I do not particularly want to go
through it all again.  I simply want to make the point
that really the questions and answers involving C.299
could not help us at all in relation to this officer’s
evidence of what it was like before Gate C was open.

     THE CORONER: Because what you are saying is, by
deduction, it ought to have been worse.

     MR. KING:  And the use of     horses at14.57 cannot
help us as to what use was being made of them before
the gate was open.

     THE CORONER: Very right.

              Further by THE CORONER

Have you understood this exchange?     Perhaps not. - A.
Yes sir.

I will just clarify it because Mr. King is quite
right.  This photograph is later.  Have a look at 299
again.  That photograph, as I think I told you, is
timed at 14.56.    It says 14.57   on there,butitis
14.56.  Can you   see that? - A.  Yas sir.

The point about that is that we know for a fact that
Gate C was opened at 14.52, four minutes earlier? - A.
Yes sir.

You told us that the crowd had (disappeared, though you
could not actually see Gate C open yourself? - A.    No
sir.

You have worked it out since that that must have been
the reason, but that is another point.  The point is,
and I think Mr. King is right, that when we see you in
that photograph I was asking what were you doing and I
think you were telling me you were putting a wedge in
there.  But, of course, by then the crowd was already
easing off, or going down towards the concertina gate
C. So the first question, having put that to you, are
you able to clarify what, in fact, you think you were
51
                                                                33



                                         R. N. GRUNHILL


              doing on that photograph at that time? - A.  Still
              what we were saying, sir, because if you look there
              the fans are all going down the side to Gate C, they
              are going in. We still had fans within that area.
     B        Those fans close to the turnstiles did not realise
              what was happening with Gate C, the people there, and
              we were going in to still take the pressure off those
              people.

         Q.   If we go back a few minutes prior to the opening of
              this gate, say 6 or 8 minutes, would your objectives
              have been the same as you were now describing? - A.
              Yas sir.

              I am not asking you to say whether the crowd scenes
              were the same because it is impossible to remember
              that, of course, but would you have been trying to put
              this wedge in in order to break up --   A.    To tryand
              take the pressure off the people that were on the
              turnstiles.

                   THE CORONER: Does that make it any clearer, Mr.
     D        King'

                   MR. KING:  Sir, I was only anxious because you,
              sir, for example pointed oat what officers at the back
              were doing but, in fact, it would not be fair at all
              to use this photograph for assessing the nature of
              Police tactics, or what they could do or could not do,
              at the time we are interested in.

                   THE CORONER: Yes.

                   MR. KING:  I say no more than that, sir.  It is
              simply not a useful photograph to use for that
              purpose.

                   THE CORONER: Yes.

                   MR. PAYNE:  Before Mr. Grunhill retires, I am not
              asking to ask another question njyself, but I wonder
              whether, sir, you would like to ask a further question
              about the matter of pushing because his evidence is
              not entirely clear on the point.

                   THE CORONER: Yes, I am going to ask him some more
              questions.
              Mr. Grunhill, I want to explain to you before we carry
              on that the only purpose of an Inquest, it is a fact
              finding exercise and it is a matter for the Jury to
              try and find out as much as they can as to what
              happened and it does not make any difference to me or,
              indeed, to them what the facts are, so long as we try
              and get to them, as far as we are able within the
                             R. N. GRUNHILL


 limits of one's recollection and time factors,   and so
 on. - Yes sir.

Quite rightly Mr. King asked you about what you had
        another Inquiry with regard to pushing, and
the first response you gave was, in fact, very similar
to what you said to me, that in all your years of
policing you have never yet found a fan who will admit
to pushing, it is always somebody else.  That is
right, is it not? - A.   Yes.

The second response you gave, to the question "Can you
truthfully say whether you actually saw anybody
pushing?" was "No, I did not see anybody pushing".  Do
you remember that? - A.   Yes.

I asked you during the course of my examination-in-
chief, and this is not verbatim because I have not
kept a note of my exact words, whether the people
close by you were pushing or being pushed, and you
said, "No, they were being pushed, it was people
further back , and then you said, "I have never yet
found anybody who admits to pushing".  I asked you
what you did and you said you tried to communicate,
and I specifically asked you whether or not your
communication in your judgment was receivable by the
people further back, and your response was "Yes", or
words to that effect? - A.   Yes.

What I am interested in is this.   Are you saying that
the people at the front and the people who were within
that enclosure, within the railing area, at a point
were unable to do anything about it, they were being
pushed from behind?   Is that the first thing that you
are saying? - A.    Yes.

Those people, I think you are saying, really whether
they would have wished to or not, there was not much
they could do because they were hemmed in, that is
right, is it not? - A.   Yes, that is right.

What I am interested in is how far back were you able
to see and what did you see?    You see, if you are
saying these people were being pushed, on what do you
base that statement? - A.     The fact that those could
not move, sir.    Pushing in a crowd is not somebody
stood there going like that, but pushing in a crowd is
body p re ssu re. It is not somebody, as you would say,
to pusn that, that is pushing.    It is body pressure in
a crowd.

So what did you mean when you said at the other
Inquiry,  I truthfully could not see anybody pushing"?
                            R. N. GRUNHILL


- A. You cannot see them literally pushing, sir, that
is what I mean.

So what you are saying is that there may be body
pressure but you did not sae anybody pushing with
their hands? - A.   No.

Is that what you were trying to say? - A.    Yes, that
is right.

     THE CORONER: I will let you come back, Mr. King.

     MR. KING:  All I am asking, sir, is that you
should, with respect, put the question which he was
asked to answer at the Inquiry, which was, "Did you
see any people who you could truthfully say were
pushing rather than being pushed?"

     THE CORONER: Very well, I agree.
I will read you the question.   As I say, my only
objective is to try and ascertain what you saw and
what you meant, and what you mean.   Actually I am not
interested in what you meant; I am interested in what
you mean.   Now the question which is the crucial one
is "Did you see any people who you could truthfully
say were pushing rather than being pushed?" Your
reply was "No, I couldn't say that".   That was your
reply and when Mr. King asked you, "Is that true, do
you accept it?" you said, "Yes, I accept that as being
true"? - A.    Yes.

What I am now asking you to do is to explain that
answer in the light of the evidence which you have
given here? - A. Well, I didn't see anybody literally
pushing, sir, but I have never seen anybody pushing as
you think about it in a crowd.   I invariably work with
my horse in a crowd at the front, and you cannot see
people.  It is not like pushing.   We call it pushing
but it is different.

     MR. MANNING:  I wonder if I could assist by
reading to the witness the wordsf that I believe that
he used because I think that if you take it in its
general form this is what he meant.   He used the
words, "I observed pushing".   Is that not, with
respect, different from, "I didn't see any people
pushing, but I observed pushing"?   I wonder if that
could be put to the witness.

     THE CORONER:  What we are trying to do is find
out what you are meaning. - A.  I didn't see anybody
pushing like that.
                            R. N. GRUNHILL


You are making signs with your hands? - A.    Yes, I am
sorry.

No, no, I am saying this so that the shorthand writer
can take a note.  That is what we want.   Go on. That
is what you saw and that is what you mean? - A.   Yes.

      THECORONER: Mr. King, do you want to take it any
further?     Iwant to be, as you know, to the best of my
ability,    as fair as I can. I certainly do not want to
undermine anybody and if I ask questions which appear
to, then I want you to have the opportunity to come
back.

     MR. KING:  Sir, I think the witness has been very
fair, and I am content.

     THE CORONER: Is there anybody else who wants to
say anything on that?  (No response). Thank you very
much indeed, and thank you for coming over as well on
a bad day like this.  Can we stop before we take the
next witness for a few minutes and have a cup of
coffee?

     MR. HALE:  You will remember that that clock is
about 20 minutes slow, sir.

     THE CORONER: Yes, but even so I think we will
still stop for quarter-of-an-hour. I am obliged to
you, Mr. King, for that photograph.  I can see the
point you are making and I am sorry.I did not spot it
when I put it to the witness.

               (Short adjournment)
                                                               37


                                                     P. S. SMITH



            THE CORONER:   I think it is Police Sergeant Smith.

                     PHILIP SYDNEY SMITH Sworn
B                          Bv THE CORONER:

    Q. Can you give us your full name? - A. Philip Sydney Smith.

    Q. You are a Police Sergeant with the Merseyside Police? -
       A. That's correct.

    Q. It is 1952? - A. Yes.

    Q. You, in common with others, came over to police the semi­
       final in 1989, on the 15th of April? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Can you tell me how much experience you have had of
       policing football matches? - A. I have been a mounted
       police officer now for just coming up to nine years,         it
       was just over seven years on the day.

    Q. So no quite as long as Mr. Grunhill? - A. Not as a
D      mounted officer.   I have been a police officer for
       twenty-nine years.

    Q. I think you attended in Sheffield and after the initial
       meetings and briefings, where were you posted to? - A. My
       responsibility was for the Leppings Lane turnstiles for
       the Liverpool fans, but prior to going there I went round
       the area in company with a South Yorkshire police officer
       to familiarise myself with the geography of the ground
       and the surrounding streets.

    Q. As I asked the previous officer, did you in fact notice
       anything of any moment as you did that tour? - A. The
       main thing I did notice was there were a large number of
       fans in the streets, not necessarily close to the ground.
       The area we covered was within about a half mile
       perimeter of the ground and as far away as that I noticed
       large groups of fans from both clubs, many outside public
       houses, off-licences, some sitting down on the pavement
       drinking.   There were a large number of fans around at
       an early stage but at that point there was no trouble of
       any sort.

    Q. At that stage you weren't worried about that?^ You
       didn't think, Oh, my goodness me, this is going to cause
       us loads of trouble later"? - A. No, sir.

    Q. You then having very properly orientated yourself came
       back to Leppings Lane? - A. Yes, sir.
                                              P. S. SMITH


If we start at about one o'clock, which I think is the
time you got into the area, just briefly describe what
you did between 1 and 2? - A. At that time we patrolled
around the turnstile area and along Leppings Lane over
the bridge and back towards Halifax Road.   Our strategy
at that point was to try and persuade people to go into
the ground.   People were congregating in the area but at
that point there was no great flow of people into the
ground, so we were going along encouraging people if they
had tickets to go into the ground and if they didn t have
tickets we were telling them they should go away and
leave the area.

I don't want to get into a great deal of detail on that,
but did you come across anybody who actually admitted to
not having a ticket? - A. No, sir, they never admit to
not having a ticket.   They have either got it or they
are waiting for a mate who is coming down with the
ticket.

That is the reason why they don't move away? - A. That's
correct.

I take it that if you are told that there isn't really
very much you can do about it provided they are behaving
themselves? - A. As long as they are behaving themselves,
yes, sir.

And they were? - A. At that point, yes.

I think the next major event that you picked up was when
a crowd came along who had come off the train? - A.
That's correct, sir.   They came along with their escort.

This escort consisted of mounted officers plus some foot
officers? - A. Yes.

Again I would be right in saying that as far as you could
ascertain these were all perfectly well behaved... - A.
Yes, sir, they came along and went into the ground
without any trouble.

That's all I wanted to know.   Were' you within the
turnstile area, by which I mean the area between the
perimeter gates and the turnstiles, or were you on the
outside? - A. I was on the outside of the perimeter gate.

Could you see the turnstiles from where you were? - A.
Yes, sir.

Which turnstiles are you talking about, A to G? - A. A to
G.
                                              P. S. SMITH


Did you form any impression with regard to those
turnstiles at that time?    This is between 2.00 and
2.15. - A. Between 2.00 and 2.15 the main thing I noticed
was that for an all-ticket game the crowd appeared to be
going in slower than I would have anticipated.    I
noticed there were police officers on foot who were
searching people which would obviously add to the
slowness.

It added to the slowness? - A. That would add to the
slowness of the crowd going through, but it did strike me
that they seemed to be going through slower than I would
have anticipated for an all-ticket match.

At this time what was the atmosphere like? - A. The
atmosphere was what I would have expected at a semi­
final.   What I described in my original evidence as a
carnival-type atmosphere.   People were very happy,
singing, shouting.   They type of atmosphere you get at a
football match.

One which you would expect and be quite content with? -
A. Yes, sir.

What happened at about this time?   Did any of the
officers enter that area at that point or were they
already in or what? - A. When I saw they were starting to
get a build-up at those turnstiles, because it appeared
the crowd was going in slower than we would have
anticipated, I sent Constables Grunhill and^Standridge,
who was another police officer from Merseyside, into that
area, to try and sort out why it was going slow and try
and ease the passage of the people up by the turnstiles.
I sent those two officers because they had what I
considered to be the two best horses for the job.

We have already heard from Mr. Grunhill about what he was
trying to do so I don't think we need to go over that bit
again.   You stayed outside? - A. Yes, sir, I stayed just
outside the perimeter gate.

Then describe to me what occurred as far as you are
concerned. - A. I stayed just outside the perimeter gate
and there were other mounted officers there as well.
What I was trying to do was to restrict the flow of
people through that perimeter gate.   I had my horse
placed broadside, not actually in the gateway itself but
a couple of feet away from the gateway, but placed
broadside across.   I was trying to restrict the flow of
people through that gate because all that was happening
was that the crush and the build-up between the gates and
the turnstiles was increasing.   I was trying to restrict
the flow of people through there by telling them to wait,
to hang on, Don't go in, there's nowhere to go," that
                                               P. S. SMITH


type of thing.   However, the crush inside started to
build up. When I say inside I am talking now about
between the perimeter gates and the turnstiles.   I could
see it was getting more and more intense the crushing
there.

Did you time it at all? - A. All I can say is that it is
some time after twenty past two, because I remember
looking at my watch and it was twenty past two.   That
was shortly after the fans had arrived from the railway
station and gone into the ground.   That was^the last
time I looked at my watch.   I can only say it was after
that.

It was after that but you don't really know when? - A.
No, sir.

These fans who were approaching, obviously coming either
down or up Leppings Lane, were they coming in both
directions as a matter of interest? - A. Yes, sir.

And who you were trying to impede?   I think that is what
you are really saying, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Did they respond to you in any way? - A. Not really, sir,
no.   I wouldn't have expected them to with my experience
of football fans but I tried anyway.   Some will but
others are more determined.   You can try and stop one^
but while you are trying to stop one six others are going
round your back.   It's a difficult situation.  Some
people will respond but again some people are then
carried along in a crowd whether they wish to go or not.

That is what I am trying to find out.   You were outside
the gates? - A. Yes.

Were the people who were coming forward capable of
voluntary movement or not? - A. Yes, sir.    The crowd
outside the perimeter gates were not subject to the same
crushing or pressure as the ones inside.    They had ample
room to move outside because they had the whole of
Leppings Lane to move in.   There w<js no pressure on them
to go forward other than voluntarily.

How far up Leppings Lane could you see? - A. The way I
was positioned I was actually facing down Leppings Lane
towards, I think, Halifax Road and I had quite a good
view along that road.

I will ask you two questions about that.  As far as you
could see, the crowd were not being impeded, I'll say
higher up or further back. - A. No, sir.
A
                                                      P. S. SMITH


    Q. S q they had free access to come down Leppings Lane? - A.
       Yes, sir.

    Q. So that is one side of the equation.   The other side is
       that there was ample room within Leppings Lane because it
B      is quite a large area? - A. Yes, sir.   They were
       restricted slightly by the fact that there was still
       traffic moving on the road but other than that there was
       no restriction on them.   There was plenty of space for
       them.

    Q. The crowd you have described filled up the turnstile area
       and presumably started spilling up towards the perimeter
       gates? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did they spill outside as well? - A. Well, eventually it
       reached the stage where the crowd was a solid mass of
       people inside the turnstile area through the gateway and
       out to where I was with my horse.   That is when a
       cordon, which is the way it has been described, of police
       horses, was put right across the front of the turnstiles
       in an effort to stop any more people getting through at
       all.
D
    Q. Was that effective? - A. It was effective for a while and
       then one of the horses became agitated and moved from its
       position which created a ten foot gap in that cordon and
       the crowd pushed through there and into the turnstile
       area.

    Q. You have already said it is difficult with timing, but we
       have heard evidence of at least two cordons which were
       placed.   Can you remember whether there was just one or
       two? - A. I can only recall the one, sir.




              Q. Did you see any of the,




H
                                                           42

                                                   P. S. Si'.ITH




    Q- Did you see any of the gates open, the big gates? - A.
       The concertina gates?

B   Q. Yes. - A. Yes, sir, I saw what I now know to be Gate A.

    Q. You saw that one open? - A. Yes, sir.
    o. Can you remember whether the cordon which you are
       speaking about was in place prior to that opening? - A.
       It was prior to that, yes.

    Q. I aio not asking you to give me exact timings, but for
       how long prior to that opening, would you say? - A. I
       would think probably some 10 to 15 minutes.

    Q. I might help us to pin down which one you are talking
       about.  Prior to the formation of the cordon, prior to
       that, did you notice any appeals being made or did you
       make any appeals to the people? - A. We were all doing
       it.  I could see Constables Grunhill and Standridge who
       were inside the turnstiles area, they were in my view
D      for quite a long time, they were appealing for the
       people at the front and at the back to ease back, ease
       the pressure on the turnstiles.  I was appealing to the
       people outside not to go through because there was
       nowhere for them to go and at some stage, and again I
       can't give a time at all, I saw a landrover.  I did not
       see it arrive, I just saw it there, with a loudspeaker
       on the top, and there was a Police Officer in there
       making appeals to the crowd outside the turnstile gates
       to come backwards, ease off, and allow the pressure at
       the front to ease.

    Q. Did any of that, as far as you could tell, have   any
       effect? - A. No effect at all, sir.

    Q. None at all? - A. No, sir.

    Q. Did you notice whether the perimeter gates were shut at
       any point? - A. Yes, they were.  At one stage
       Constables Grunhill and Standridge did create a space
       at the back of the crowd, in front of the turnstiles,
       of about six feet, and I saw at least one Police
       Officer on foot, there may have been two, actually
       physically close the perimeter gates, and I positioned
       the horse, as I say, he was in front of tnose perimeter
       gates so the gates were shut, there w.as a gap of about
       two feet, and then my horse, but the gates were only
       shut for a very short while because they were then
       forced open again by the crowd, who pushed forward.
       Once football supporters, when they are queueing to go
       into a football match, if they see a space in front of
       then they will go and stand in it.  When they saw a




H
                                                           43

                                                   P. S. Si'ITH




       space at the back of the crowd they wanted to get in,
       so they forced the gates and in they went.

       If you look at 258, we will just see whether you can
B      help us which gates were shut.  There are, in fact,
       three sets of gates. - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. You can see that, can't you? - A. Yes.

    Q. Which ones did you see shut? - A. The one I saw shut,
       sir, is the left hand one of the three.

    Q. The left hand one? - A. Yes, sir, that's the one.     That
       is the one I was positioned in front of.

    Q. The other two, you don't know what happened? - A. I was
       facing the other way, sir.

    Q. But you definitely saw that left hand gate shut? - A.
       Yes. The other two gates were behind me so if they
       were shut I did not sea them being shut.

D     This was before the cordon was formed? - A. I was there
      before the cordon was formed.

    Q. When that gate was shut? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Are you able to relate it in any way to the landrover?
       Can you recollect - if you can't .... - A. I don't
       recall the landrover being there at that point. The
       time I recall the landrover being there was when the
       cordon of horses was formed.

    Q. You saw you saw the gap on the far side of it? - A.
       Yes, sir.

    Q. There were people this side of you, on the horse? - A.
       Yes, sir.

    Q. Then they eventually came through? - A. That is right,
       sir.
                                       ✓
    Q. How did they pass you? - A. In front of, behind and
       underneath the horse.

    Q. Did you feel that it was obvious that you were trying
       to block the route? - A. I would nave thought it was
       obvious, yes, sir.  I was standing broadside on. My
       horse is a very big norse, and his length is the width
       of the gateway.  I would have thought it was obvious to
       people that I was trying to block the gateway.

       The people who were coming through, the first row, or
       first two or three rows if you like, were they at that




H
                                                             44

                                                      P. S. SMITH




         point, when the gate had been shut and you were
         standing there and then they came forward, were they as
         far as you can tell propelled or moving on their own
         volition? - A. On their own volition, sir.
B
    0. You are sure about tnat? As sure as you can be? - A.
       Yes, sir, froca what I could see.

    Q. Yes, that is all I aia asking. You have already told me
       that everybody was in a carnival atmosphere early on.
       Did the mood change? - A. At this point I could sense
       that the mood of some of the people was changing into a
       more aggressive type of mood.  I think they were
       becoming frustrated at not being able to get into the
       ground.  The kick-off time was approaching and their
       frustration was turning to agitation.

    Q. You had nothing whatever to do with decisions as to
       postponing or not postponing kick-off, or anything like
       that? - A. No, sir.

    Q. That was not your responsibility? - A. No, sir.
D
    Q. Your task was just to try and .... - A. Control the
       crowd going in, sir.

    Q. Had you been at the ground in 1988? - A. I had
       performed duty at that ground on one occasion
       previously, yes, sir - not the previous semi-final.

    Q. So it was a different occasion? - A. It was another FA
       Cup match but not the previous semi-final.

    Q. Were you, just as a matter of interest, at Leppings
       Lane on that occasion? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Was it the Liverpool teara as well? - A. No, it was
       Everton that time, sir.

    Q.   You said at the time you had seven years experience, or
         so? - A. That is right, sir.

    0.    Did this crowd strike you in any way different to other
         crowds which you had come across, either before or
         since? - A. In the last 40 minutes of the time that we
         were there they were much more unwilling to listen to
         advice or reason than any other crowd I have ever dealt
         with, at a football match or similar venue.

    Q. Have you ever come across a situation where there are
       substantial crowds outside gates, outside turnstiles I
       ought to say, just before kick-off? - A. Yes, sir, on
       many occasions.  In fact, one occasion was shortly
       after this incident, about two to three weeks, I




H
                                            P. S. SMITH




performed duty at a football match at Tranmere in
Merseyside.  It is a football ground which gets an
average of 4,000 supporters but this particular game
was the last game of the season, which Tranmere had to
either win or draw to get promotion, and there were
15,000 at the game as opposed to the normal 4,000.
When it got to kick-off time we had somewhere in the
region of 5,000 people still outside the ground, and
there were only two turnstiles working for those
people.  We formed them into queues and they regained
in orderly queues, there was no problem, and the last
person got in at 4 o'clock, just as the second half was
kicking off.

So what is the difference then between that match,
because you have already said to me that you weren't
surprised at the fans wanting to move forward, and this
was normal for a football match, why did the people at
Tranraere apparently behave differently to norraal.

The only possible thing I can think of, sir, is that it
was after this incident at Hillsborough and perhaps
that was in the minds of the fans then.   Having said
that, the fans at the Tranraere game behaved as I would
expect them to behave at any raatch, as they have
behaved at other games. We have had games at Anfield,
Liverpool's home ground, where fans have not got into
the ground until half an hour after the kick-off, and
we have had no problem with them, they have queued up
and waited until they could get into the ground.   Why
they behaved as tney did on this occasion is something
I will never know or understand.

Are you saying there was, in fact, a very marked
difference between this crowd and normal crowds? - A.
When you say normal crowds, sir, these people were our
norraal crowd from Anfield. These people are people who
we police every other week at Anfield Football Ground,
but on this particular day for some reason they did not
act, react or behave as we would normally expect them
to do at our own ground.        ^

That is a good answer, thank you.

             Cross-Examined by MR. HALE

There has been evidence, Officer, and I suppose you
won't disagree with it, that it was a very hot day? -
A. That is correct, sir, it was.

And there is some difference of opinion between various
people about the amount of alcohol tnat had been
consumed, but on a very hot day would you expect people
                                                      46

                                               P. S. SMITH




 / to drink more than on a cold day? - A. Certainly, yes,
   sir.

               Cross-Examined by HR. PAYNE

Q. Sergeant, I wonder if you would help the Jury a little
   more, please, about your normal experience, your
   experience of other matches?  In particular, over the
   years that you have been attending football matches you
   have mentioned going away to Tranmere.  Have you gone
   away to other matches away from home? - A. I have, yes,
   sir.  I have performed duty at other football games.   I
   have performed one twice at Hillsborough, and helped
   out at Oldham's football ground in Manchester, but I
   have also been to other football grounds in Birmingham,
   London, as a spectator, but being a counted Police
   Officer I have observed how the crowd and the Police
   Officers work at those grounds.

Q. Against that background of experience I would like you
   to put yourself in the position you were at about 2
   o'clock on the afternoon of the match, when you were
   patrolling outside the ground. - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You observed that people seemed to be going through the
   turnstiles at a slower rate than you would have
   expected? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. was that the only thing you noticed which was in any
   way unusual? - A. The other thing that struck me at
   that time was the number of fans who were in the street
   drinking seemed to be more than I had experienced at
   any other ground.  At every ground you go to you see
   people in the streets drinking, but the scale on this
   day was more than I had experienced anywhere else.

Q. In particular looking at the turnstile entrance, as you
   were patrolling round about at about 2 o'clock, looking
   at that entrance to the Leppings Lane end of the
   ground, do you follow? - A. Yes.

Q. Did it seem to you that there was any reason why the
   crowd should not be able to form up in orderly queues
   to go through the turnstiles? - A. No reason that I
   could see.

Q. If they wanted to, that was? - A. If they wanted to,
   no, I could see no reason why they would not form into
   an orderly queue.

Q. If someone had said to you at 2 o'clock in about three-
   quarters of an hour's time there is going to be such a
   crush here outside the turnstiles that people are going
   to be in danger of their lives, as happened, at 2
                                                        47

                                              P.   S.   S t i ITH




/ o'clock what would your response have been? - A. I
  would have been amazed that somebody would have been
  able to tell me that, sir, at a football match.




               Q. I came as a complete
                                         P. S. SMITH


It came as a complete surprise to you what actually
occurred? - A. It certainly did.

           Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING:

In terms of ordinary mounted Police Officers1
procedure you had done fairly routine things that
day.  You had gone on a tour of the area, you had
started encouraging people with tickets to go into
the ground? - A. Yes, sir.

You tried to root out those who did not have tickets
but, as always, it was either a job on Monday or "my
mate is coming down with a ticket”? - A. That is
right, sir.

Then on that, Sergeant, the first of the never
experienced syndromes come up. You had not
experienced the number of people who were out on the
streets drinking? - A. I had not seen that number at
any other game that I had been to.

You and other Officers started working, if I may use
that expression, the crowd in terms of the queuing
and getting into the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

You in fact detached two Officers, one of whom we
have just heard, to go specifically to the front of
the turnstile and make sure it was one person gaining
entrance to one turnstile? - A. That is right, sir.

The statement would be obvious to you but of football
crowds as well, Officer, that the more you were
pushing and spreading people towards the wall of the
turnstile the less easy it is for an individual to
get in through the turnstile? - A. That is correct,
sir.

The time when that was not working and the Officers
had to come away? - A. Yes, sir.

Was that again an experience which was not familiar
to you, Sergeant? - A. I had not seen it before.

We are talking about very large Police horses? - A.
Yes, sir.

You have described your own horse as being a big
animal? - A. Yes, sir.
T2-
                                                                    49




                                                        P. S. SMITH


          Q. A decision was made to try and relieve some pressure
             at the back? - A. Yes, sir.
      B   Q. You did part of that as well? - A. I positioned
             myself by the perimeter gate, yes. Are you talking
             of the cordon now?

          Q. Yes? - A. Yes, I was part of the cordon.

          Q. It would be quite clear to everyone that here was a
             line of Police horses that were holding the crowd
             back? - A. I would have thought that was obvious to
             everybody, yes.

          Q. You can see beyond the Police horses into the funnel
             itself that there was a solid crowd there? - A. Yes.

          Q. So that there was not a lot of point in pressing
             beyond the Police horses because you could not go
             anywhere? - A. None at all.

          Q. Whatever criticism one may make about the funnel
             arrangement outside, whether it is good or bad or
             whatever, the fact of the matter was that it was
             clear that it was full and the Police horses were
             there to stop people who could go nowhere anyway? -
             A. Yes, sir.

          Q. The people outside, you have said, had no reason to
             be pushing because there was plenty of room behind
             them? - A. Plenty of room in Leppings Lane, yes.

          Q. Then an animal I think became frightened and the
             cordon was lost by that link in the chain? - A. Yes,
             sir.

          Q. Again, Officer - and we are talking about your
             experience as a mounted Police Officer - have you
             ever come across a situation of animals becoming
             frightened in that way? - A. Yes, it is not unusual,
             sir.  It depends mainly on the experience of the
             animal itself.  If the horse is one which has perhaps
             only been a Police horse for a 'year or even two years
             it can easily become agitated under extreme pressure.
             The older the horse the more steady he is going to
             be.

          Q. Rather like people sometimes? - A. Very much like
             people, yes, sir.
                                                               50




                                                 P. S. SMITH


     Q. At all events, the crowd then see that gap, the link
        in the chain being broken, and flooded through into
]J      that space? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. Even though they had nowhere to go? - A. Exactly.

     Q. Can you describe that event in words yourself, as to
        that flooding action and the action of the people
        going through? - A. As I have said before, football
        fans in my experience when they are queuing to go
        into a ground, if they see a space in front of them
        no matter how that space is caused then they will
        move into it. On this day we put up a cordon and we
        created space at the back of the crowds who were
        being pressurised in front of the turnstiles.  As
        soon as the horse moved from the cordon the fans saw
        the space in front of them, knew that they would get
        themselves closer to the turnstiles, which means they
        would be that much closer to getting into the ground
        and they moved forward.

     Q. Did they just take up the space and move forward in
        that calm way? - A. It wasn't calm, no.  It was in a
        hurried manner.

     Q. What was the result of it? - A. The result was that
        they came up against the back of the people who were
        already in front of them which intensified the
        pressure on the people who were already at the front.

     Q. You have talked about standing in a cordon.   Were you
        silent in that cordon or not? - A. No, I was far from
        being silent, sir.   I was doing my level best to give
        advice and guidance to these people and explaining to
        them that if they would only be patient they would
        get into the ground.

     Q. Is it during this time you have another of your
        nevers?  In that period of time, the last forty
        minutes, you had never met a crowd who were more
        unwilling to advice or reason? - A. I have never come
        across that from a football crowd, sir.

     Q. When the cordon was broken and the crowd began to
        flood through, did you try and get the horses back in
        to work the crowd as far as you could again? - A.
        Yes, we did our level best to ease the pressure again
        but again our pleas and requests fell on deaf ears.

     Q. With the pressure of that crowd were the horses
        themselves able to be encouraged to go into the




H
3" -
                                                                        51

       A

                                                          P. S. SMITH


                 crowd? - A. Some of them were, the better ones.
                 Others - you could see my own horse for instance, I
       JJ        could sense - were becoming a little bit agitated.
                 At that stage he was not as experienced as he is now
                 and I covTld feel he was becoming slightly agitated.

            Q. Have you ever come across that situation before,
               Officer, of Police horses being reluctant to go into
               crowds? - A. Not before, no, sir.

                 THE CORONER:   Mr. King, please do not start your
            cross-examination before lunch.

            Q.    I just want to ask a couple of supplementals and then
                 we will rise because I have got a little bit
                 confused.   You mentioned that you positioned yourself
                 across the perimeter gate in response to my questions
                 and the gate was then shut.    You noticed that your
                 colleagues had created a gap between the perimeter
                 gate and the back of the crowd within the turnstile
                 and in fact I think there was a small gap between you
                 and the gate as well? - A. Yes.

            Q. You then said that if a football crowd sees a gap it
               is going to move into it and that is what happened.
               The gate eventually opened and the whole thing joined
               up. My understanding was that that was before the
               cordon was formed? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.

            Q.    When Mr. Manning was asking you about the cordon
                 which was formed, that was something which happened
                 later? - A. That is right, yes.

            Q. I have forgotten to pursue that point.  What you are
               saying, if you like, is that having lost that
               particular battle - and this is not a criticism - you
               then formed a cordon to try and retrieve the
               situation again? - A. That is right, yes, sir.

            Q. Was a further gap formed at that stage behind? - A.
               Once the cordon was formed it remained in place for a
               few minutes - I cannot say how long - by which time
               people obviously entered the ground through the
               turnstiles and everybody moved forward which then
               created a small gap between the back of the crowd at
               the turnstiles and the cordon of the Police horses.
               When the horse moved the crowd surged forward into
               the gap which had been created.

                 THE CORONER:   Mr. King, if it is all right we will
            resume after lunch.




       H
                                            P. S. SMITH



I am afraid you have got to stay until then.  Please
remember you are still on Oath and do not discuss the
evidence you are going to give? - A. I won't.

I know you will not do that anyway? - A. I will be
too busy eating.

                (luncheon adjournment)

             Cross-Examined bv MR. KING;

Could I just ask you, Officer, one or two questions
about your experience at Anfield and compare your
experience at the Leppings Lane terrace end, the
turnstile area we have been talking about? At
Anfield there are turnstiles, are there not, which
are in straight lines? - A. Yes, sir.

There are walls adjacent to those turnstiles along
which people can naturally queue? - A. Yes, sir.

Would you agree with me that theturnstiles A to G
which we have been concerned with at the Leppings
Lane end - and if you want to familiarise yourself
again by looking at the model, Officer, please do? -
A. I have still got the photograph in front of me,
sir.

They are not in a straight line.    They are in   an arc?
- A. Yes, that is correct.

There is no natural wall leading from each turnstile
along which one can naturally queue? - A. No.

You would agree with me? - A.   Yes, sir.

Nor do we find a straight area leading back from
those seven turnstiles because, of course, the area
going back from those turnstiles gets narrower as one
meets that radial barrier on the left going
backwards? - A. Yes, sir.

And then wider again? - A. Yes, sir.

None of those features lend themselves to natural
queuing, do they? - A. No, it is not an idealdesign.

It probably does not surprise you to know that at
least one Police witness we have heard from with vast
experience of that end of the ground - and I am
                                         P. S. SMITH


referring to Inspector Sykes - his experience was
that when the area from the perimeter gates to the
turnstiles of A to G gets to what he called the
maximum, really forming separate queues is impossible
because of the natural layout of the area? - A. I
would say it is extremely difficult to do so.

It comes as no surprise to you that as soon as you
get a goodly number in that area the natural tendency
is for people to mingle together.  It is quite
natural, is it not, given the layout? - A. Yes, sir.

Would you also agree with me this far; that there is
a natural bottleneck situation at the Leppings Lane
end, that is to say, Officer, you have got access
from two directions from Leppings Lane and over the
bridge? - A. Yes, there are two access points.  I
accept that. As to whether I would describe it as a
bottleneck, it is not a bottleneck because you have
Leppings Lane itself which can be used.

I agree, if everyone is coming along Leppings Lane.
Tell me, which direction were you expecting the fans
to come from on the 15th April? - A. The bulk of the
fans I would have expected, from what I was told and
from my experience at that ground the previous year,
the bulk of them to come along Leppings Lane from
Halifax Road.

You say from what you were told, told by whom? - A.
By South Yorkshire Police on the day.

Was this at some briefing? - A. At the beginning,
yes.

Was your understanding that those Officers were of
that view, that the fans should be expected from that
direction? - A. I surmised that they were because
that is what they told me that we would expect.
                                  ✓
I will return to that feature in a moment, if I may,
when I come to the details of what happened.  Still
looking at the layout of the area between the
perimeter gates and turnstiles A to G, we have, do we
not, this radial fence which runs halfway from the
turnstiles and stops halfway along? - A* This is the
one on the right hand side as you look at it?

Yes.  Does that feature cause a problem from your
view when it comes to using horses in that area? - A.
It does, y e s .
                                                          54




                                            P. S. SMITH



Q. Could you explain to everyone and the Jury in
   particular what is the problem caused by that radial
   barrier? - A. The problem is that when you have a
   crowd of people who are in a crowd and you are trying
   to organise them into an orderly queue you must have
   somewhere for those people to move if necessary.  If
   you have a natural barrier on either side which
   prevents them moving then you cannot move them, it is
   as simple as that.

Q. So it is not an area in which you would have expected
   yourself to have used your horse? - A. I wouldn't go
   as far as to say that because my experience from the
   previous year when I did a match at this ground
   between Everton and Sheffield Wednesday, we used
   horses in that area.  It became congested on that
   occasion and myself and two colleagues (one of whom
   gave evidence here the other day) went into that area
   with our horses and formed the people into queues
   within that area.

Q. Where were you personally expecting to work on the
   15th April? - A. The only brief I had was that I
   would be out at the end of the ground where the
   turnstiles for the Liverpool fans were.  There was no
   instruction as to whether we were to go inside the
   perimeter gates or outside.

Q. You were not given any more details than that? - A.
   No.

Q. Just work at the end? - A. Yes, to cover those
   turnstiles.

Q. Having viewed the area, having looked round it before
   anybody arrived, where did you anticipate you would
   be working most of the time? - A. I personally
   anticipated I would be working outside the perimeter
   gates.  That is based solely on the fact that I know
   that my horse is not as steady as other horses that
   were there and if I had to put horses inside the
   perimeter gates I knew that I had better horses than
   mine that I could put in there.

Q. Of course, you only need the horses inside that
   restricted area, which you have agreed is not ideal,
   if it becomes congested? - A. Exactly.

Q. So it was fairly obvious to you, although I would not
   expect you to have planned this because you are just
                                            P. S. SMITH


  from Merseyside and were invited to help, that
  looking round the Leppings Lane end one should not,
  if possible, have a situation arise where the area
  between the perimeter gates and the turnstiles gets
  congested? You would agree with that, would you not?
  - A. It would be ideal not to have that, yes.

Q. There was no specific provision as such, was there,
   in any order you were given for controlling the
   numbers going into the turnstile area? You were not
   given any specific instructions as such along those
   lines? - A. No.

Q. There came a time when you decided you had to send
   two mounted Police Officers into the turnstile
   area? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Before then where had you been positioned? Before
   you made that decision where had you been positioned?
   - A. I was just outside the perimeter gates.

Q. Before you decided you had to make that decision,
   what function were you performing at that stage? - A.
   I was at that stage endeavouring to control the flow
   of the crowd through the perimeter gate into the
   turnstile area in an effort to prevent congestion
   being caused around the turnstiles.  I was watching
   the flow of the people through the turnstiles and
   endeavouring to allow a similar flow through the
   perimeter gate.

Q. Would the expression be that you were easing people
   into the perimeter area? - A. I positioned my horse
   across the gateway to, if you like, erect a barrier
   by using the horse and by using the horse in that
   manner control the flow of people going through the
   perimeter gates.

Q. I am not now talking about the position where you
   said, "I have got to send two Officers in".  I am
   talking about before then? - A. Before that even as
   well.

Q. Could you also use the expression that you were
   easing people in? - A. I was slowing their progress,
   if you like.

Q. To be fair to you, Officer, because you were not in
   charge you were not stopping people going in? - A.
   No, I was not stopping anybody.
                                         P. S. SMITH


The perimeter gates were fully open at that stage?
A. Yes, they were.

Subject to your slowing the flow there was nothing to
stop people going in at that stage? ~ A. No.

This is before you sent the Officers in? - A. No.

When you did send the Officers in, this was because
there was then, you noted, a build~up within the
turnstile area? - A. Yes, I could see that the people
going through the turnstiles were going through very
slowly.  A build-up was starting to be created in
that area.




                                /Q. In fact a crush
                                P. S. SMITH


In fact, a crush had begun to develop at that stage,
had it not, in the turnstile area? - A.   I think
crush is perhaps a little bit of a strong word.   There
were the beginnings of a severe build-up.  A crush to
me portrays people possibly being in distress and
there was no sign of that at that stage.  There was
just a build-up that was getting larger than I would
have liked it to have done.

Can I suggest to you that, in fact, a crush had begun
to develop before and, therefore, made you make the
decision to send those two mounted police officers in?
- A.   That was not the reason I sent them in.   I, as
far as I could see, could not see what you describe as
a crush.  I sent the officers in because the build-up
of the crowd was getting back towards the perimeter
gates, and I could see that that area was soon going
to be full of people, which was not an ideal
situation, and that is why I sent the two officers in.

Let me, if I may, take issue with you on that,
officer, as gently as I can.  I am grateful for you
coming to give evidence.  You, in fact, made a
statement, did you not, to I assume the Merseyside
Police on 19th April 1989, not long after the
disaster? - A.  I do not think it is a statement, sir.
It is not a statement of evidence.  I think you will
find it is a report.

I will not argue with you as to what I should call it.
Can I just show you, Iwonder if you could be supplied
with a copy of what I have described as a statement,
but it may well be a report, I know not.

     MR. KING:  Sir, I am supplied from behind with
these.  Can I show you what I have, sir.  It may not
be the same as yours.

     THE CORONER: I think there are technical
differences between statements, reports,
recollections.                  ✓
     MR. KING:  Sir, I was not trying to be technical
so much as a signed piece of paper.

     THE CORONER:   Shall we use your version, or do   you
want to use ours?    Ours is a different format, but   it
does not matter.    Which do you want to put to him?

     MR. KING:   Sir, if it is word for word the same,
I am content.

    THE CORONER: We will use yours.
                                                          58



                                     P. S. SMITH


          MR. KING:   The difficulty I am in, of course, is
     it is difficult for me to relate to the witness if I
     have only got one.

          THE CORONER:   It is word for word the same.

          MR. KING:  I would be obliged if I could have
     mine back then.

          THE CORONER: You will be able to see in a moment.

          MR. KING:   Has the witness now been supplied with
     a copy? I think he ought to see the whole three or
     four pages, according to how many there are, so that
     he has everything.

          THE CORONER: Do you want to pick him up, "At this
     point there were to the best of my knowledge...."?  Is
     that the bit that you are interested in?

          MR. KING: Yes, but I just want to be fair to the
     witness and let him familiarise himself with the
     document.

          THE CORONER: Yes.

Q.        MR.   KING: Officer take your time. I know not
     how many   pages you have got, but have a look through
     it.

          THE CORONER:   It is a different print to yours.

          THE WITNESS:    I think I have got the part you are
     on about.

Q.        MR. KING:  I will come to it in a second, but is
     the document you have been shown a document you
     signed? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   I do not know, is the document you have dated 19th
     April 1989? - A. It does not have a date on it.
                                      v'



Q.   I have one which I am happy to show you, if necessary,
     which is dated 19th April? - A. Yes.

Q.   I suspect you would not argue that it was around that
      time that you made that document? - A. Yes, that is
      correct.

Q.   That document sets out an account by you of the events
      of 15th April 1989 outside the Leppings Lane
      turnstiles? - A. Yes sir.
                               P. S. SMITH


Can I take you to the paragraph which, in my copy,
begins with a phrase "About 14.50 hours ..." which is
quarter-past 2.

     THE CORONER: The second paragraph on page 3.

     THE WITNESS:   Yes sir.

     MR. KING:  You refer first of all in that
paragraph to the arrival of the 500 or so supporters
who I suspect came by train? - A.   Yes sir.

Then you indicated that you noticed that entry through .
the turnstiles was slow? - A.   Yes sir.

Could you read from "I noticed that the entry through
the turnstiles was slow ...", if you could start
there? - A. Yes.

     "I noticed that entry through the turnstiles was
     slow in part due to the fact that supporters were
     being searched prior to entering the ground.  At
     this point there were, to the best of my
     knowledge, 9 Police horses in the area of the
     turnstiles and a further 2 Police horses in
     Leppings Lane trying to clear people from the
     roadway and adjoining areas. The crowd volume
     quickly built up and a crush began to develop
     around the turnstiles, in particular those giving
     access to the terrace area."

Pause there.  You then go on to describe the mood, do
you not? - A.   Yes sir.

You   describe the mood at that time as one of high
spirits, and then you describe in the next sentence
Constables Grunhill and Stanbridge entering the
confined area? - A.      Yes sir.

So in this document, in this report, statement, call
it what you will, made round about 19th April 1989, a
few days after the disaster, yotir account then was
that Constables Grunhill and Stanbridge entered after
the time, it appears, that a crush had begun to
develop round the turnstiles? - A.    Yes sir.

That is right, is it not, a crush had begun to develop
around the turnstiles? - A.   Around the actual
turnstiles themselves, but the volume of the crowd was
not crushing.

What do you mean by a crush around the turnstiles? -
A.   The fact that the people at the very front were
                              P. S. SMITH


crushed against the wall, or were squoze up against
the wall and were unable to enter the turnstile.

Clearly the area at that stage was, therefore,
congested? - A. No, the ^rea was not completely
congested because there was still space at the back of
the area between the back of the people and the
perimeter gate, albeit a small space.

All right, but something was causing a congestion
around the turnstile area? - A.   Yes.

Sufficient for you to be so concerned as    to send two
constables in? - A.   Yes.

Could you see what at that stage was causing that
congestion around the turnstile area? - A. The people
who were in there, sir.

The fact is that there were already too many people in
the area, were there not? - A.   The area was not
full.

It may not be full to the brim, but there were too
many people for easy entry through the turnstiles,
were there not? - A.   I would argue with that, sir,
because there were not too many people.   It is the way
those people were behaving that was causing the
problem, but not the numbers of people.

With respect, officer, at this stage - and I go back
to your account in your statement/report - you
describe, at this stage, "The mood of the crowd at
this time was one of high spirits all good-
humouredly"? - A. Yes sir.

You were not making any criticism of the crowd at that
stage, were you?

     MR. PAYNE:  I am sorry to interrupt, but it must
be very difficult for the Jury to follow this without
actually having the statement inf front of them.  There
is a danger in selecting short passages out of the
statement without the witness having read through the
whole passage in which these bits appear, and if my
friend is going to go on like this, I would be
grateful if he would let the witness read out the
whole passage so that the Jury can see the whole of
the statement.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Payne, I take your point because
I think it is right.  Let Mr. King develop the point
that he is trying to establish.  There is more in this
statement, you are quite right, than has been
                                                   61



                                P. S. SMITH


/ selected, and if need be we will refer to it, but I do
  not think they need to see the statement because the
  witness has told us.  I want the Jury to hear what the
  people are saying, not necessarily what they have
  written previously, though I accept that it may be
  proper to cross-examine them on that in order to
  establish the correctness of their recollection now,
  or the veracity of their account, and I am not
  interested in that sense what happened at the other
  Inquiry, though again we have used some of the
  transcripts in order to do what I have just outlined.
  I think you are able to follow, or am I wrong there?
  You can follow what this witness is saying and I think
  you can understand what Mr. King is putting to the
  witness, can you not? Mr. King.

      MR. PAYNE:  I am so sorry, I do appreciate your
 attempts to try to make it comprehensible, but without
 being able to see the whole context of what is being
 put, it must be very difficult for the Jury to see the
 context of what the witness is saying.   What I would
 respectfully suggest is that perhaps Mr.' King might
 invite the witness to read through the whole of this
 passage and then he can go back and ask questions
 about odd bits, but the Jury will then have in their
 mind the whole of the passage that he is dealing with.

      THE CORONER: Mr. King?

      MR. KING:  Sir, there is a matter I would like to
 raise in the absence of the Jury.

      THE CORONER: Would you like to leave us, Members
 of the Jury.  The witness had better leave us as well,
 because we do not want to influence his evidence.

    (In the absence of the Jury and the witness)

      MR. KING:  Sir, I would like to think I am not
 without some experience of dealing with witnesses.  My
 learned friend knows quite well that there is an
 opportunity at the end of any c^dss-examination for
 any matters which he feels, if this were his witness,
 which as I understand it is your witness, sir.

      THE CORONER: Yes.

      MR. KING:  To be put right.  But., sir, there does
 come a time in the middle of cross-examination when
 one is dealing with contentious matters, that for my
 learned friend to interrupt and to seek to invite
 myself to present the cross-examination in the way
 which he wishes me to present it, becomes not only
 counter-productive from my point of view, but also has
a serious deleterious effect on that cross-
examination.

     Sir, all I would say through you to my learned
friend is that he does have the right at the end of
cross-examination to make whatever protest he wishes.
There may be times when a protest is obviously
necessary in the middle, but to take the issue which
has now just arisen, it is not that sort of case.    It
may well be from his point of view that he would like
the statement in front of the Jury.   It may well be
for whatever reason he would like the witness to deal
with it in a certain way but, sir, all I can ever so
gently say is my experience of the last week or so is
that it is becoming a tendency that whenever cross-
examination is developing at a point when it may not
be to the liking of those whom my learned friend
represents, there comes a point when there is the
interruption on the lines indicated.   I am not
objecting to his right to interrupt where it is
necessary but, sir, the one we have just had, in fact
in my submission is not necessary.   It is for you,
sir, to interrupt if you feel I am doing wrongly, or
indeed my learned friend at the end of cross-
examination.  That is all I wish to say.

     THE CORONER: On the whole I think, Mr. King, my
sympathy lies with you in this matter, and forgive me
for saying that, Mr. Payne.

     MR. PAYNE:  I did not rise to answer my friend
because I was not sure whether you wanted to hear me,
but I would like to be heard if there is going to be
decision made about this.  There is something I would
like to say.

     THE CORONER: Please go ahead and say it.

     MR. PAYNE:  In the absence of the Jury, the
cross-examination which is being developed at the
moment is completely unfair to the witness and
misleading to the Jury.  I am sdre my learned friend
is not doing it intentionally, but it certainly has
that effect, for this reason, that my friend refers t
his experience in criminal trials and I would be
surprised if it matches mine.  I should think we are
probably about equal in that respect.

     MR. KING:   I ought to indicate I did not mention
criminal trials.   It may be obvious I have very
limited experience of criminal trials.

     MR. PAYNE:  In that case then, I am referring to
experience in front of Juries, and certainly in a
situation like this, where a witness is being cross-
examined on a statement, normally - I am not
complaining about these proceedings here because one
knows what the rules are - the Jury would have the
statement in front of them so that they could follow
exactly what was being put to the witness and they
could see for themselves the context in which the
cross-examination was being developed.

     Now what is happening here, because of the way in
which these proceedings go on, is that the Jury are
deprived of being able to see the context of the
questions.  So that quite unintentionally, as I am
sure my learned friend is not intending to steal a
march, or anything like that, but quite
unintentionally the result is that the Jury are being
given a false impression and a misleading impression
about what this witness has said.

     I certainly do not apologise for my interruption
because the Jury cannot see almost immediately after
the passage that my friend is referring to the witness
goes on to say exactly what he has been saying
earlier, namely that after the two policemen had gone
into the confined area, suddenly there was a large
influx of supporters into the turnstile area and a
serious crush began to develop.




                              /Now the Jury need
  /  Now the jury need to see that that comes after^ the
two policemen were sent into the area because that is
what this witness has been saying all along and they need
to be able to see the context.

     I am not rising on a small point.   There is a point
of principle that the jury ought to have copies of the
statement if cross-examination is going to go on it, and
then there is a point of particular fact that in this
case they ought to see the context in which the cross-
examination is going ahead.

     Sir, having said that, and both my learned friend
and I are conscious that it is not in anybody's interests
that we engage in public combat and neither of us is
anxious to do that and we are both anxious to try and
help you, sir, to proceed in the fairest way to all
parties with these Inquests.   I am sure in saying that I
speak for both of us.   In trying to resolve this
particular point, and I know it is difficult for my
friend when the evidence is given in a particular way
because he can't always anticipate that he is going to
need to make use of a statement.   However, in general,
may I suggest for myself as well as him, that if we are
going to need to refer to statements then we ought to
give the witness the opportunity to read out a passage
both before and after the passage we particularly intend
to refer to before then asking questions about it.

     Also may I say while I am on my feet, I understand
Mr. King's point about not wanting the cross-examination
interrupted because it damages the thread of what he is
trying to put and I sympathise with that and I understand
exactly what he means, but there are times when it has to
be done because of this context point when the jury does
not have the statement in front of it.

     MR. KING:   Sir, before you say whatever you are
going to say, I do have to say I am quite astounded by
the submission that what my learned friend has put
forward shows that the context is such that whether
wittingly or otherwise I was misleading the witness.     I
agree entirely with what is said here and I was going to
develop it, that this witness was saying   in this
statement that a crush began to develop.   He sent the
officers in and then I was going to go on because in this
statement he says, "I stayed outside supervising the
entry," not preventing the entry or stopping the entry,
"supervising the entry" and then the large influxand   a
serious crush.   I wasn't misleading the witness. I
didn't indicate that the crush didn t develop to more
serious proportions.  What I was seeking to develop and
                                                                   65




    establish was that there was a crush developing of any
    scfrt before the police horses went in.

         Sir, with respect to my learned friend I still say
    it was wholly unnecessary the intervention, but so be it,
B   sir.

         THE CORONER:   I think when I said my sympathies lay
    with Mr. King, the point I was trying to make was that I
    am very conscious that everybody has got very strong
    interests in these Inquests and obviously it is both your
    tasks, and, indeed, everybody else's task to try and make
    sure that as far as possible I conduct this correctly.
    I realise in the end it is my responsibility but you want
    to make sure that I don't allow a particular line to
    develop which would be wrong, shall we say.   I
    understand that.   The reason why I said my sympathies
    lay with Mr. King was simply that I realise it is very
    easy to break the train of thoughts, to distract an
    argument and it is then sometimes exceedingly difficult
    to pick that point up.   In that sense - and I think you
    would agree if the boot was on the other foot if you were
    developing a line - it is easier to continue.
D        I can understand the point you are making about the
    context.   It is a very dangerous thing, in general
    terms, not necessarily with regard to this statement, to
    pick put three lines, or two words, or whatever and
    saying, "This is it."

           In fact while you were doing your cross-examination
    two things had crossed my mind. The first one is that if
    you cross-examine on the use of the word "crush", as
    indeed you did because this is what you were doing.               He
    was
    Wd 9 saying,
         S a y X Llg y "IJ- U
                            didn't
                              1U1I U think
                                     UllXHlN there was a crush.
                                                         ^        I
    thought there was a situation developing which needed
    intervention," and you were saying, "Yes, but you did use
    the word 'crush'."              Whether this is actually going to
    make very much difference to us in the final analysis I
    don't know because we don't know quite which way the
    witness it going to go.               However, on the other hand, if
    you are going to pick him up and say, "You used the word
    'crush' at such and such a time and therefore that must
    be right," then I think it is also necessary to say if he
    is right in that then he must also be right, for example,
    when he says they began to organise the crowd into
    orderly queues.

         I certainly would have picked that up in my re­
    examination if you hadn't picked it up yourself.   You
    may well have done because you may well have moved on to
    that, which is why I was quite happy at this stage to
    leave matters where they were and see where we go.
     Is that what you are saying?
 /
     MR. KING:   Absolutely, sir.   I had hardly started
if I may say so.

     THE CORONER:   What I am exceedingly reluctant to
do, as you already know, I am exceedingly reluctant to
start reading pages and pages of statements, transcripts,
what have you, in order to cover every eventuality.    I
accept we mustn't be unfair.   I have no doubt in my mind
about that, which is one of the reasons why I keep coming
back because if something has happened it is only right
that somebody else should have an opportunity.

     However, by and large - it might have been better if
you had got him to read the next three or four lines but
I don't think, so long as we don't overlook it, too much
harm will come of it.   It may be that in some case there
may be some witnesses where it is absolutely vital that^
the context is read.   I am not sure I am convinced it is
necessary and I am not sure, with great respect,
Mr. King, whether the point you are making, namely, that
he is now distinguishing between the word - you know,
that he used this word crush" in his statement, that he
didn't use it in evidence before me today actually makes
that much difference.

     As you know, I have tried not to stop you because I
don't want you to feel that you are not being given an
opportunity, as indeed everybody else, to develop their
points.

     MR. KING:   Sir, in the absence of the jury may I
make it absolutely clear that the point which I am
seeking to establish with the various witnesses and using
this one because he gave evidence in a certain way, is
that the measures taken to prevent entry into the
turnstile area to relieve congestion were too late and
that in fact a situation had already been allowed to
develop which should not have been allowed to develop
before those measures were taken.    I say that frankly
and openly to you, sir, and it won't come as a surprise
to my learned friend because, of cotirse, that is one of
the matters which was exhaustively looked at in the
Taylor Inquiry, so it isn't off the top of my head a
flying a kite without any substance to it, which whether
that substance emerges in these Inquests is a different
matter.   It is a serious point.

     Sir, I am more than happy to have the witness read
out the whole of the paragraph to wherever my learned
friend wishes it to stop if that would help him.   My
only point is that I wasn't seeking in any way to mislead
the witness.
        THE CORONER:   I think Mr. Payne accepted that in
fact.     In fact he has never suggested it.

      MR. KING:   I accept that from my learned friend,
but if one were allowed to see where it happened and then
if I sat down and it was grossly unfair, then by all
means stand up and say it was unfair and the reasons for
that.    I am giving nothing away when I hear a whisper to
my left saying that the cross-examination to my left has
already been stolen, if I can put it that way in
redressing the balance!    This is what is happening along
the line. There are in fact here the police represented
under six or seven different flags and the club is^
represented.    There are more than enough opportunities
to put right any injustice, if that is felt to have
happened.

     MR. HALE:   I hesitate to prolong things.    My
concern is slightly different and that is the same
points, as you have mentioned before, are being made over
and over again and we can all do that.   I have got some
wonderful points that I could put to every single
witness.   I am content that when they have been made
once, or perhaps twice at the most, I know you have got
them in mind, I am sure the jury have got them in mind,
and I don't see the point of flogging them with every
witness that comes in.

     That is what concerns me because now Mr. King opens
up this report naturally I am going to look at the last
paragraph of it, as I looked at the last paragraph of the
last report and the temptation is very great at least to
get up and do that.   Other people may want to do others.

     All I am asking, before we get into this sort of
area, that one looks at the end result and give the other
people here some credence for the fact that they will
come back.   It is like scoring a goal early in the match
and they all fall over each other and start kissing each
other and they think they have won it.   They don't
realise the other side might have three or four more
goals up their sleeve.

     I would only ask that they look at the whole
document and see whether it is really worth while picking
out these very small points.

     THE CORONER:    I agree with you there as well.     I
do find it quite difficult.    Poor Mrs. .McBrien is the
poor lady to whom I keep on saying, "No, you can't ask
that question," but in a sense you can see there is a
problem.   It is just that these lawyers are trained to
ask questions.    It is much more difficult to pick a hole
in them, if I can put it like that, but I agree with
                                                          68




Mr. Hale, it is very easy to repeat, and we do repeat
f£om time to time.   My concern is that if I get too
strict it would speed things up but it would deprive a
certain element of satisfaction from the proceedings.
Now satisfaction is not the be all and end all of these
proceedings but it is a factor tha.t people should feel
that they had an opportunity to develop the argument in
the way in which they want to develop it.    That is my
dilemma.   I think I am learning and I am sure we will
improve as we go along.

         Mr. King, obviously we have got to start this bit of
the cross-examination again because all of us will have
forgotten where you were leading to.       Theofficer I
think should begin to read the passage again.       If it
makes no difference to you, and if you were going to
develop the line, then why don't you get him to^read down
to the end of the paragraph which is, I think, "...under
the influence of alcohol. '      Would you agree that that
1 s •• •

     MR. KING:   Sir, if I am going to do that then^ sir,
the natural description of this area would be from At
this point..."    It would go down to where he said,
"...serious crushing was now taking place."

     THE CORONER:     Yes, to the word "develop” .     Are you
happy with that...

     MR. KING:      I am sorry, sir, to the word...?

     THE CORONER:   "Suddenly there was a large influx of
supporters into the turnstile area and a serious crush
began to develop."

     MR. KING:   Yes.      If you want to go beyond that,
sir, I don't mind but    I submit one would have to go as
far as...

     THE CORONER:      No, I don’t want to go further that
we have to.

     MR. KING:      I am happy with that.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, I think that would meet
your thoughts on the matter, wouldn't it?

     MR. PAYNE:  Yes.    Sir, I would submit that a
further two sentences would be appropriate, but I accept
your ruling, because then he is going down to the
development of the gap of about ten feet and I expect
that is probably a new topic that Mr. King is going to
explore next.   I would suggest it should go down to,
"...regain some order."   That is two further sentences
after where you stopped, sir.

     MR. KING:   Sir, the only danger of that - I am very
happy to do it, and I wasn't going to cross-examine on
this particularly but someone else can, this statement
has the line of horses being spread across the turnstile
area before the iron gates being shut, when, of course...

     THE CORONER:   I know this is the difficulty and
that is one of the reasons why I would prefer to call the
witness.   We could read these after all, without...

     MR. KING:   Sir, that might be important to
somebody, I don't know, but, sir, I am very happy to do
it.   I am not objecting to it.   I will ask him to^read
to, "slowly were able to regain some order...a gap."

     THE CORONER:   Yes, OK.   We to try and do it in
reasonable amity as far as we can.

     (The jury and the witness returned to court)




           Q. MR. KING:   I was asking you
                                                                70

                                                      P.     SMITH




    Q.    /   HR. KING:   I was asking you questions in relation
         to the situation before you made the decision to ask
         the two mounted Officers to go into what I describe as
         the confined area in front of the turnstiles? - A. Yes,
B        sir.

    Q.    And Iwonder if to help you, to help us all, if you
         would be so good as to look again at your
         statement/report, and perhaps read out to us the
         paragraph beginning, "At this point there were to the
         best of ray knowledge nine Police horses        - you see
         that sentence? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.    I know you have started there already but we can take
         it up again there, and if perhaps you could read all
         the way down, follow it with me if you will, to the
         second mention of Constables Grunhill and Stanbridge,
         where it says, ".... slowly able to regain some order."
         Do you see that? - A. Yes, sir.

    0. If you would put your mind with the full-stop there, if
       you could perhaps read, therefore, from where I
       indicated at the start, "At this point ...." down to
       the words "... to regain some order", would that be
       possible? - A. "At this point there were to the best of
       cw knowledge nine Police horses in the area of the
       turnstiles and a further two Police horses in Leppings
       Lane trying to clear people from the roadway and
       adjoining area.

         "The crowd volume quickly built up and a crusn began to
         develop around the turnstiles, in particular those
         giving access to the terrace area.  The mood of the
         crowd at this time was one of high spirits, what may be
         described as a carnival atmosphere prevailed, with many
         people singing and chanting, but all good huniouredly.

         "Constables Grunhill and Stanbridge entered the
         confined area in front of the terrace turnstiles and
         began to organise the crowd into orderly queues.    I
         stayed outside the confined area supervising the entry
         of supporters into the North and We'st Stands.  Suddenly
         there was a large influx of supporters into tne
         turnstile area, and a serious crush began to develop.
         Many of these supporters had arrived at the turnstile
         area frora the opposite direction from wnich we had been
         told to expect them and some of them were obviously
         under the influence of alcohol.   Serious-crushing was
         now taking place and a line of horses was placed across
         the front of the turnstile area to prevent further
         access to tne turnstiles.   Constables Grunhill and
         Stanbridge remained within the confined area of the
         terrace turnstiles and slowly were able to gain some
         order."




H
Could you pause there? Officer, can I then ask you
again about the situation which had begun to develop
around the turnstiles of A-G before you made the
decision to send Constables Grunhill and Stanbridge in?
- A. Yes, sir.

You had agree with rae - perhaps you do or perhaps you
don't - tell me tnis, how would you describe that crush
around the turnstile area which had begun to develop?
Put it in your own words. - A. what I terra a crush and
what you may term a crush I think are two different
things. A crush around a turnstile area is a phrase we
use to describe the fact that the people who are
nearest the turnstiles at the front are being
pressured, if you like, to the extent that they are
unable to enter the turnstile area because of the
pressure of the people behind them, but a crush can
develop around the turnstile area with a relatively
small number of people.   It develops not because of the
number of people but because of the attitude of the
people who are trying to get into the turnstile.   I
have had at our own grounds, at both Anfield and
Goodison, have had crushing round the turnstile with as
little as 25-30 people in an area where there are no
barriers on either side, but because of the attitude of
the people pushing against one another, trying to get
into the turnstile, what I term as a crush develops.
In other words, the pressure at the front is suca that
the nian at the front cannot physically get into the
turnstile, and on this occasion when I say a crush
developed in the turnstile area that is what I am
saying.   It was not the fact that that area was blocked
solid with people, because it wasn't, it was the
attitude of the people themselves in trying to get as
close to the turnstiles as they could, which created
that pressure at the front which prevented the people
at the front from getting into the turnstiles.

We have heard, and the Jury will reraeraber, from
Constable Grunhill the situation when he entered, so we
have your evidence on that. All I want to take you to
task on, if that be the case in you'r evidence today, is
how it coraes about that if it was the attitude of the
crowd, and not nuabers, which were causing this initial
crush, that in this report immediately after you are
describing the beginning of this crush, you describe
the mood of the crowd as one as being "good
humouredly"? - A. Again, they don't have-to be
aggressive to cause a crush.   People can be good
humoured, in so much as they are singing and chanting,
but at the same time they are moving forward towards
the turnstile, and it is that forward nionientuai which
need not be in an aggressive manner, it is that forward
momentum that creates the pressure at the front of the
                                                          72

                                                P. S. SMITH




   crowd, which creates what I have described as a crush.
   It is not necessarily an aggressive move by the people.

Q. How much space do you say was there at the back of the
   crowd already in the turnstile area and the perimeter
   gates at the time this crush was beginning to develop?
   - A. I would say something in the region of 6-8 feet at
   least.

Q. I can't develop that with you any further and I don't,
   would you agree with me, however, to this extent that
   the congestion of a turnstile area, if that happened -
   I understand you are saying had not happened - but if
   it had happened by the time you had sent the horses in,
   if it tiad happened by that time, that was really
   sometfting which would not be anything to do witn you,
   because you would just be an Officer visiting, but that
   is something which anybody who is planning the control
   of a turnstile area should seek to prevent? - A. Of
   course we seek to prevent anything like that happening.

Q. Would you agree with me that looking at the layout of
   the turnstile area between the perimeter gates and
   Gates A-G that the most obvious one point where one can
   control the numbers entering the turnstile area is at
   the perimeter gates? - A. That is the obvious point if
   you wish to control the number of people passing into
   that area, yes, which is what I was, in fact, trying to
   do.

Q. I understand that. You had the misfortune of trying to
   do it with the gates fully open, didn't you? - A. Yes.

0. You weren't in control of the decision as to whether or
   not the gates should be open or shut, that was nothing
   to do with you, was it? - A. No, to try and shut the
   gates would have been folly in my mind anyway, because
   they would only have been forced open.

Q. At the stage it had developed in the crowd which you
   described .... - A. At any stage, sir, with mv
   experience and knowledge of football crowds, if you try
   and shut a gate in front of them they will open it.

Q. I dare say if you have a crowd of people who see an
   open gate and it is shut in their face, that is their
   reaction.  I am not saying that to you.   Bear with ;ne a
   moment, please. - A. Yes, sir.

Q. As far as you were concerned the system which was being
   operated, and you were part of it and you had nothing
   to do with the planning of it, was that the perimeter
   gates were wide open and the Police horses were in
   front of it? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                                 73

                                                    P. s. s :i i t h




    Q. There carae a tine much later on when the crowd had
       grown to unmanageable proportions that an attempt was
       made then to try and close the gate against the crowd,
       because you helped or tried to do that? - A . Yes, sir.
B
    Q. Your experience is that if you try to close a gate
       against a crowd of that sort of size and temperament,
       that it is not unexpected that that is not successful.
       That does not come as a surprise to you in view of your
       previous answer? - A. I accept your point that they
       will resent the fact that you are trying to close a
       gate on them, yes.

    Q. Not only that, if there is already a body, a large body
       of people who are trying to come towards the gate, the
       effect of closing the gate is simply to put a crush at
       the front of the crowd by the gate, isn't it? - A. Yes,
       but when we tried to shut the gates what we had done
       was we had stopped the crowd by using horses, then we
       closed the gates.

    Q. You had stopped the crowd as far as those entering the
D      turnstile area was concerned? - A. Yes.

    Q. You had not stopped the crowd coming onto the concourse
       in front of the perimeter gates, had you? - A. No.

    Q. All I ana putting to you is that it must be feasible to
       have a system well before crowds arrive in any great
       numbers, to have the perimeter gates closed, or just
       partly open, and allow people in through the perimeter
       gates in a more restricted manner than when you have
       them left wide open? That is possible to have as a
       system, isn't it? - A. In an ideal world, yes, sir.
       With ay knowledge of football supporters, I would say
       no.

    Q. I am not talking now of when there is a great crowd
       there - before anybody has arrived, just the system.        I
       won't develop that any further with you, Officer,
       because you weren't in charge that day anyway, were
       you? - A. No, sir.

    Q. You talk about the numbers of people who one can get
       through turnstiles, and you spoke about your experience
       at Tranraere and so forth. You yourself, I assume, have
       no knowledge of the rate of flow which these particular
       turnstiles could accommodate, have you? - A. I don't,
       sir, no.

    Q. And you would agree that it depends on how many can go
       through a turnstile as to how quickly one can push a
       crowd through, that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.




H
                                             P. S. SMITH




Thera are other factors.   It depends on the ability of
the turnstile operator.

Yes, but you would also agree with me that those are
factors, knowledge of those matters, are very important
when one is looking ahead to plan how we are going to
get a crowd through turnstiles in a given time? - A.
Yes, that would obviously come into it.

Again, I don't ask you any of those questions because
you have no knowledge of this? - A. No.

I have no further questions, thank you.

          Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE

Sergeant, can I just go back to the time when you sent
PCs Grunhill and Stanbridge into the area by the
turnstiles? You have already given evidence was that
the reason for that was you had perceived a problem, to
use a neutral word, and they were going to go in - I
think the words you used were, "They began to organise
orderly queues"? - A. Yes, sir.

Were you able to see them operating from your position?
- A. Yes, sir.

I know you were in Court and heard P.C. Grunhill giving
evidence, but from what you saw on that day at that
time, were their actions effective to ensure that
people were going through into those turnstiles? - A.
Yes, they were effective initially, sir.

Thank you very much.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Sergeant, you said it appeared that the fans who were
going through the turnstiles were moving very slot*ly? -
A. That is correct.

Much slower than you would normally^expect.  Was that
because more fans than the Police Officers could cooe
with were being allowed into that area, so that the
queues were lost in tnat way? - A. I would not say so.
One of the reasons that I noted was the fact that a
number of the fans were being searched as they went in.
This has the effect of slowing down the crowd as they
are going in. There may have been other factors which
I am not aware of but tnat is certainly one factor tnat
I am aware of, that the numbers of people outside the
turnstile had no real effect on the speed tnat they go
through.  It is down to searching, the ability of the
turnstile operator to operate his turnstiles at a
reasonable speed, whether it is an all ticket match,
whether it is cash. There are a number of factors that
will slow down the entry of fans into the ground, but
on the day the only reason I could see that would
contribute to it were the fans who were being stooped
and searched.




           /Q. You said that .
0\
                                                                   76




                                                     P. S. SMITH


         Q. You said that fans will take advantage if they see a
            gap anywhere and they will move forward through that
     B      gap? - A. Yes, that is correct.

         Q. As you were on a horse would it not be easier for
            fans just to move under a horse? There wasn't a
            barrier in their way and you would not be able to see
            them when you were up above. You would not be
            looking directly at them? - A. I would be looking
            down at the fans who were around me, yes.

         Q. Some get in that way? - A. There were people who went
            underneath my horse, yes.

         Q. Was that quite a considerable number, would you
            say? - A. I wouldn't say so, no.

         Q. Did you notice if ticketless fans were being turned
            away at the perimeter gates? - A. I don't know.    As
            I said earlier on in my evidence it is very difficult
            to know if a fan has a ticket or not.   If you ask him
     D      if he has got a ticket he will either say yes or he
            will say, "Not at the moment, it is on its way".   He
            will never admit to actually being there without a
            ticket.  Now you have mentioned that, that is another
            problem that slows up the fans at the turnstiles,
            people at an all-ticket game will turn up without a
            ticket, they will queue and when they get to the
            turnstile they will offer the turnstile man money.
            An argument will obviously develop then because he
            doesn't accept it and that stops the flow of people
            going through the turnstiles.   I am sure that that
            was one of the problems on the day, that that did
            happen on occasions.

         Q. Did you notice any ticketless fans trying to bribe
            the turnstile operators? - A. I was that far away
            from the turnstiles that I wouldn't have seen that
            happening but from my obvious knowledge of such
            games, which are all-ticket and important games, it
            is something which does happen.

          Q- Shouldn't they have been stopped further back? Why
             would they be right at the turnstile area? - A.
             Because how do you stop them? Unless you have one
             Police Officer per fan it is very difficult to stop
             every one of them and examine him as to whether he
             has a ticket or not.

          Q. Could portable barriers be erected manned by Police
             Officers and nobody without a ticket be allowed




     H
                                                          77




                                            P. S. SMITH


  beyond that point? - A. I don't think that is a
  feasible proposition.  The more barriers you erect
  the more problems you are going to create.

Q. Do you not think they have to be stopped from getting
   too close? - A. I think ticketless fans should be
   stopped, yes, but I don't honestly think from my
   experience that there is an ideal solution to it.

Q. How is it normally done? - A. I am afraid it is not
   normally done.  It happens at a lot of games.  As I
   said, a lot of big games which are all-ticket games,
   the likes of the Cup Final for instance, people turn
   up without tickets.  They can be prevented once they
   get to the turnstiles from getting in without a
   ticket but it is very difficult to sort out before
   they get there who has tickets and who does not.

Q. Don't you think that would have caused the congestion
   if they hadn't been sifted out before? - A. My own
   opinion in fact is that I don't think there were many
   fans there without tickets, no more than we would
   normally expect at a game of that size.

Q. We have had quite a bit of evidence in this Court
   about...? - A. I am sure we have had evidence of it
   but the numbers, I don't know what numbers have been
   quoted, but I wouldn't have thought the numbers were
   any more than one would normally expect for a game
   like that without tickets.

Q. Do you think that people would willingly accept
   missing a large part of the Semi Final after
   travelling so far to see the Semi Final and
   considering the cost that it involved for them? You
   said at one game, the Tranmere game, people didn't
   get in until four o'clock. Would people willingly
   accept missing so much of the game? ~ A. They
   certainly did at that game.  The only complaints I
   had at the Tranmere game was tha t vthey still had to
   pay the full admission price to get in and see half
   the game but they willingly accepted they would have
   to wait until they could get in safely.

Q. As you said, that was probably because of
   Hillsborough.  That happened afterwards? - A.
   Possibly but prior to that we have had situations at
   our own two grounds at Everton and Anfield where the
   fans have got in some half hour after the kick-off
   because of the crowds at the game.  They have queued
   up in an orderly fashion and waited until they could
0*                                                                  78




                                                      P. S. SMITH


           get in.  They have not been   happy about missing the
           game I accept that but they   have queued in an orderly
     B     manner until they could get   in and on occasions it
           has been half an hour after   the game started.

                       Cross-Examined bv MR. RUSSELL:

         Q. At the time that you sent in Constables Blundell and
            Stanbridge, can I just deal with the area in which
            they went to work, namely the outside turnstiles A to
            G? At that time, as I understand your evidence, the
            crowd was confined on three sides by physical
            barriers, is that right? — A. That is correct, sir.

         Q. The turnstiles themselves, the left hand barrier,
            Gate B, and on the right hand side what has been
            called the blue railing? - A. That is right, sir.

         Q. At the time you sent in those Officers there was
            still space at the back? - A. Yes, sir.

         Q. What was there to stop those people joining at the
            back from standing off? - A. Nothing.

         Q. Rather than adding to that pressure within that
            confined three sided space? - A. Do you mean what was
            to stop them moving backwards?

         Q. Either moving backwards or not moving forwards? - A.
            Nothing to stop them, sir.

         Q. Your explanation of why they did move forward you
            have expressed as being an attitude which was
            displayed that day? - A. Yes, sir.

         Q. That was at one stage and then a little later on
            after the cordon was set up you describe a further
            gap being created between the back of the crowd that
            led up to the turnstiles, that is, the crowd in the
            turnstile area and the perimeter gates? - A. Yes,
            sir.
         Q. At that stage was there any encouragement or advice
            being given by anybody to the people in that crowd in
            the perimeter area? - A. Yes, sir, they were being
            advised to move backwards into the space that had
            been created so relieving the pressure at the front
            of the crowd near the turnstiles themselves.

         Q. What effect did such advice have? - A. None, sir.
                                                           79




                                             P. S. SMITH


Q. You were asked about a system which could have been
   in place to have provided checks on the progress of
   supporters to the ground at,places remote from the
   ground and from the perimeter gates themselves? - A.
   Yes, sir.
Q. As I understood your evidence, you said that it would
   be possible in an ideal world but not feasible with
   football supporters? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Do I paraphrase your answer correctly? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Why do you say it would not be practicable with
   football supporters? - A. For the reasons I have
   given earlier on about the way that they behave in
   the'crowd.  They have it in their mind that they want
   to get into the football ground and that is their
   paramount aim.  If they are hindered in any way from
   that aim then we can end up with problems.

Q. Is the fact that the football supporters might or
   would on your observation that day have consumed
   alcohol in some numbers affect the success of putting
   up barriers to prevent the progress or check the
   progress of football supporters making their way to
   the ground? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. In what way? - A. As alcohol affects anybody, it
   affects your judgment.

Q. You have been asked about what it was feasible to
   plan for this operation.  Can I ask you briefly as a
   general question, would what you plan depend to an
   extent on what your experience had been at similar
   fixtures in previous years? - A. Most decidedly it
   would.  All planning is done on previous knowledge
   and information that is available to hand.

                   Further bv THE CORONER:

Q. I know you were not at the 1988 Semi Final but you
   were at Hillsborough on a previous occasion? - A. It
   was the same year, sir, 1988.

Q. Was it a large crowd on that occasion, can you
   remember? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Can you remember whether those perimeter gates were
   open or shut at that time? - A. They were open, sir.
                                          P. S. SMITH


Is it in your experience the purpose of a turnstile
to assess, if you like, the status of the person who
presents himself either by presenting a ticket or
presenting money to authorise that person to go in? -
A. Yes, sir.

That is the purpose of the turnstile? - A. Yes, sir.

If one were to in fact do what has been suggested to
you, namely weed out at some distance point everybody
who was not entitled to enter the ground, because you
would exclude everybody who has not got a ticket in
an all-ticket match, what is the purpose of the
turnstiles in that case or can you not answer that
question? - A. The turnstiles do have another purpose
and that is to monitor the number of people entering
the ground because the ground has a safety capacity.
Turnstiles on all modern grounds are connected to a
computer and it is not only to assess the status of
the person but to monitor the numbers going in.

         Further Cross-examined bv MR. KIN G :

Do turnstiles also in your experience, Officer, have
this function; that they can be so designed as to
control which part of the ground those going to a
particular turnstile have access to? - A. Yes, sir.

       Further Cross-examined bv MR. CATCHPOLE:

On the question of turnstiles, it is common sense to
say that turnstiles slow down the progress of fans
into the ground? - A. Yes, sir.

They do so by letting individuals in rather than
large numbers of people at any one time? - A. Yes,
sir.

That, of course, can have its own safety function? -
A. It can indeed.                 ^

In that it means the people enter at a walking pace,
a very slow pace? - A. Yes, sir.

You agree with that? - A. Yes, sir.

                Further bv THE CORONER:

Mr. King put to you and you agreed - and I am sure
you were absolutely right - that if you have a crowd
approaching with open gates and then they are shut in
                                            P. S. SMITH


  the face of a crowd, that crowd is not going to be
  very happy particularly if they know that time is
  pressing? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And they may well want to get through those gates? -
   A. Yes, sir.

Q. Paraphrased that is what you said? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I was not quite sure whether you would have gone back
   a stage further.  Imagine a situation where the
   situation was such, the converse of this, that the
   gates were shut before there was a substantial crowd
   so that they approached the ground, there were the
   perimeter gates, and beyond them they could see
   turnstiles which were open, what effect would that
   have on the crowd in your experience?   If you have no
   experience I would rather you did not answer? - A. I
   do have experience, sir.   In my experience, sir, if
   they saw a locked gate in front of the turnstile that
   they wanted to go to they will endeavour to unlock
   that gate.  Can I just quote you an instance that
   happened some months after this, sir, which might
   throw some light on what I am trying to put across as
   regards the attitude of football supporters in
   general?

Q. Yes. - A. I performed duties about three or four
   months later at Goodison Football Ground, the home of
   Everton.  It was the Derby match against Liverpool.
   It was an all-ticket game and all the tickets had
   been sold, 40,000 people.  Shortly after the kick-off
   we had a crowd of some 300 to 350 people without
   tickets who were wandering round this ground and on
   four separate occasions they tried to force exit
   gates into the ground and tried to gain access to a
   ground which was already full.  This is only some
   four months after this incident had occurred.

     THE CORONER:   Does anybody want to ask any further
questions arising out of what I have asked and what the
Officer has said?

           Further Cross-examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Is it not the Police Officer's duty to .ensure that
   these people do not get into the ground? That is
   what you are there for? — A. It is indeed and that is
   what we try to do but we can't stop them coming to
   the ground. We can stop them going into the ground
                                         P. S. SMITH


without a ticket but we cannot stop them coming to
the ground-




                                   /MRS. McBRIEN
                                                        3


                                  P. S. SMITH


         MRS. McBRIEN:   Right,   thank you Sergeant.

         THE CORONER: Yes, Mr. King.

B           Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

    Officer, what I was trying to put to you is the scene
    before you have a large aggressive crowd as you have
    put it? - A. Yes, I know that.

    Shall we say before half-past 2, twenty-past 2,
    whenever it was you decided things changed, and I am
    putting to you a system whereby anybody walking up
    Leppings Lane would see that the perimeter gates were
    the natural barrier into the turnstile area, maybe
    with Police horses in front of the closed gates, maybe
    with one or two of the gates open with someone on
    them.   So it was the system which was there in
    operation as they arrived.   Are you saying, and can
    you honestly say, that if that were in operation, that
    sort of system,   a normal crowd before the crowd you
    have described arrived would have been so aggressive
D   as to force their way in? - A.    It is not a matter of
    being aggressive, sir.   They would see that there was
    a barrier preventing them from going in and they would
    not like that.   They would like to dispense with the
    barrier, and the more barriers of that type that you
    put up in front of them, the more aggressive they are
    likely to become and the less able we would be to
    Police them because, as has been said on many
    occasions, we need the crowd's consent and the crowd's
    co-operation to Police them, and if we put barriers in
    front of them we will rapidly lose that co-operation.

    Are you saying, as the logic of that, that really it
    is unpoliceable, the control of a determined crowd
    into a turnstile area? - A.   No, it is not
    unpoliceable, sir.

    How do you stop a determined crowd from entering? - A.
    By aggressive policing, but that is not xdiat policing
    a football match is about.      ^

    You say that is the only solution? - A.   The only
    solution to an aggressive crowd is what I would term
    aggressive policing.

    So where there is the issue, and I am.putting to you
    is your evidence to this Inquest that a crowd would be
    naturally aggressive if the system were always in
    operation from the moment the match arrangements
    started? - A. There are degrees of aggressiveness.
    They x^ould be naturally upset, if you like, if
    barriers were put in front of them, and the longer the




H
                             P. S. SMITH


' barriers were put in there the more their mood would
  c h ang e.

      MR. KING:   I will not take it any further with
 this witness.

      THE CORONER: Thank you very much indeed.   I very
 much appreciate you coming and helping us today.   The
 next witness is going to be Mr. Hand-Davis, but I am
 reluctant to start with Mr. Hand-Davis because it is
 clear that we will not complete him.  I ara not sure
 whether we will complete the next officer, but we
 stand a much better chance, I think.

            ELIZABETH JAYNE WILSON Sworn

                   By THE CORONER

 You are Elizabeth Jayne Wilson,    is that right? - A.
 Yes.

 Jayne is with a 'Y1, is that right? - A.      Yes.

 P.C.3186? - A. That is right.

 You are a mounted officer, I think, with South
 Yorkshire Police, is that right? - A.   Yes.

 How many years/months experience had you had on 15th
 April 1989? - A. I believe it was about 9 years at
 that time.

 Nine years? - A. Within the mounted section.

 So quite a bit personally? - A.     Yes.

 The horse that you rode was not quite as experienced
 as you, that is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

 It was a newish recruit,   if I can put it like that? -
 A. Yes, a very new one.

 That presents difficulties, does it not, when you use
 it in crowds? - A.  Yes, certainly you would have to
 be cautious where you would put the horse.

 So I think was it a decision then that you would sort
 of try and keep out at the periphery rather than more
 in the centre of things? - A. Yes.  The problem is the
 horse had obviously never seen anything of the crowd
 capacity which was expected and if I had put him in a
 position that he would not have been able to get out
 of, he could have reared, or spun, or caused injury
f -




                                         E. J. WILSON


                to members of the public so it was thought better to
                stay on the roadway.

          Q.    You were at the Leppings Lane end,   is that right? - A.
      B         That is correct.

          Q.    When did you first take up your position in the
                Leppings Lane area? - A. It was very early on, perhaps
                12 o'clock, something like that.

          Q.   At that time where did you sort of go, if that is the
               right word? - A. All on the Reception Area as well as
               the escort of the Merseyside officers to acquaint them
               with the area.  We would pair off, have a little walk
               round, stand in the Reception Area, walk off again and
               return again, and there was no problem whatsoever.

          Q.   Of course, it was nice and quiet at that time,
               relatively speaking, was it not? - A.  Yes.

          Q.   As time passed, of course, fans began to arrive in
               greater numbers, which is what you would expect, and
      D        where did you place yourself then? - A.  Well, owing
               to the fact that I was on my own at that point, I kept
               walking from the Reception Area of Leppings Lane on
               the corner to Catch Bar Lane and back.

          Q.   When you say the Reception Area, perhaps you   had
               better tell me what you mean by that? - A.     The whole
               of that 3-cornered area from the edge of the   road to
               virtually up to the perimeter gates.

          Q.    That is the Reception Area? - A.     Yes.

          Q.   You were walking from there? - A.      Yes, you were able
               to walk quite freely from there.    At every match that
               I work at that ground, people have a tendency to
               collect outside the shop on the left-hand side and
               also on the corner of the bridge at the other side,
               which of course does a little bit hinder people in
               trying to get along the footpath and make access to
               the turnstiles, so it was just a ’"case of very
               frequently walking around, advising people to move on
               a little bit and move away from that position.

          Q.   On the whole did they go when you asked them? - A.
                Yes, there was no problem at all.

          Q.   I think you found them at that point to be good-
                humoured and no particular problems? - A.   No.

          Q.   What time are we talking about, about? - A. I would
                say there was roughly no particular problem at all up
                to quite onwards to 2.15.  We were aware that the




      H
                            S. J. WILSON

/

    train was going to be coming to Wadsley Station
    anywhere about that time, and as for every other
    football match, the people that work Leppings Lane
    mounted section there, we would ensure that the
    Reception Area, for example as I said earlier, between
    the road and the gates, is sufficiently clear so that
    they can have access along the footpath and through to
    the gates and onward into the turnstiles, and it was
    clear and free at that time.

    When the train contingent arrived is what you are
    saying? - A.  Yes.

    So let us assume that that was about 2.15 or
    thereabouts.   It may not have been quite as late as
    that, but let us just take it at that.   Where did you
    then place yourself? - A.   As I saw the train escort
    arrive, I was able to see right along up towards
    Leppings Lane to where there was, in actual fact, a
    fish-and-chip shop on the corner, so I could see that
    the escort was at that point and it was a case of
    together with, I think I was with, Sergeant Thomas and
    Sergeant Smith, we kept this total area clear.   As I
    say, we just kept moving crowds of probably half-a-
    dozen people, or a dozen people at a time, asking them
    to go into the turnstiles and if they had not got
    tickets then to totally remove themselves from the
    area.

    How many, in fact, removed themselves from the area? -
    A.  Well, we were forever walking the horses in a
    circular kind of effect, and so we would move them
    from one corner and see those people either into the
    turnstiles or to the road to the bridge area, and then
    as you would return there would be some more to move
    on again.  It was a continual process.

    Did you find any evidence of people who were there
    without tickets, as a matter of interest? - A.  Again
    a couple of people would go in, and others would just
    move to another point and stand somewhere else, or
    they would say, "Oh, I've come on the bus", or "I've
    come on the train, I'm waiting for relations or
    friends", and they would position themselves somewhere
    else.

    I see.  Were they at that point well-disposed towards
    you? - A. Yes.

    I do not mean were they falling over themselves, but
    you were quite content and happy with those people? -
    A.  Yes, they were quite all right.
                          E. J. WILSON


What happened then, as far as you were concerned? - A.
The thing that stuck out in ray mind was the number of
people who did come up and ask me that they were
uncertain as regard to what they were looking at on
the ticket as to where to go, and I couldn't tell you
how many people did, in fact, ask me but I would say
it was well over 100 people would ask, "Where do I go?
I don't know what I'm looking at on the ticket", and
they were looking at a gangway letter rather than a
turnstile number entrance, and that was causing a lot
of confusion.  By them asking you on the perimeter
area where to go it was very good, but if people had
got beyond the perimeter gates and into an actual
queue and were in the wrong time, or the wrong
position, it would be very difficult for them to get
out, to go back into another area.   That was
definitely causing a problem, but certainly up to the
train arriving and a good half of those persons going
into that area there was no trouble at all, and when
that seemed to be going smoothly I then turned my
attentions on to going over the bridge area and Catch
Bar Lane to the traffic lights and the cross-roads
there.

So once the passengers from the train had arrived, all
these people who were asking you were asking you
before that, or at around that time? - A.  Round about
that period.

You were able to guide them? - A.        Yas.

Interestingly you said they were confusing the
turnstile number with the gangway number? - A.  Yas,
the gangway being on the actual standing area inside
the ground.

That is what I am wanting to ask you about.   Does this
mean that most of these people who were confused were
actually people who were going to the stands, in other
words to the seated section as opposed to the
terracing which is actually the standing section? - A.
That I could not tell you.  I was just merely looking
as regards the fact that whatever the letter was on
the ticket for the gangway was not the place where
they wanted to be.

The reason why I ask is that the terracing does not
have any gangway. - A. Yes, I see your point.

You see the point? - A.    Yes.

So what I am trying to find out is whether it is the
people who had - it is very confusing - tickets for
the seats who were the confused lot, or whether it was
                            E. J. WILSON

/

    everybody who just did not know what on earth to do? -
    A.  It was a very large proportion of people who asked
    me and I had to point out that that was not the letter
    that they were looking for on the ticket.

    I understand.   So you then actually moved away from
    Leppings Lane, the Reception Area, you were going up
    the hill towards Catch Bar Lane? - A. Yes.    As the
    train escort seemed to be proceeding quite well, I
    managed to get myself a partner, a policewoman from
    Nottinghamshire, and the two of us were then able to
    cover up and down the bridge because it was quite to
    my shock the amount of people coming from the
    Middlewood Road area along the bridge area there.




                                   /Q. That means that...
                                                                  89




                                                         E. J. WILSON



     Q. That means that you weren't expecting     that many coming
|J      down that hill? - A. No.

     Q. Had you been given any guidance as to   where the people
         were likely to come from - A. With working the ground
         there regularly it's a general fact that you know to turn
         your attentions to a train arrival and once that is
         satisfactory then you would obviously look for what tnere
         is to do next and perhaps use your own initiative as
         regards that, but because I was detailed and I knew my
         job was in the perimeter area, the Middlewood Road/Catch
         Bar Lane/the bridge area, that is usually for people just
         making access in their own vehicles, but I never
         anticipated at all that number of people to sudden influx
         within the last thirty minutes.

     Q. That's my next question:  what time would you say the
        people were coming down from the Middlewood !ioad/Catch
        Bar Lane area? Do you know?    If you don't know,
n       don't... - A. It was a steady flow, but after the train
        escort it was really enormously heavy.  Within a few
        minutes it was really a drastic change.

     Q. So you definitely noticed a substantial change in the
        people coming down? -A. Yes.

     Q. So you were caught by surprise with regard to that.         You
        were with your colleague from Nottingham and you
        continued against the flow of traffic up towards the
        traffic lights, is that right, or w h a t d i d you do? - A.
        Yes, I moved the full length of the bridge up to the
        traffic lights and back but as I turned my attentions up
        there I saw there was a very small number of foot
        policeman who were waving their arms, they seem to have
        trouble at this traffic light area.      It didn t take me
        long to realise the fact there had been some form of
        fight or skirmish up there so we then galloped up there
        to give assistance to them.   When a fight takes place
        everybody wants to run and see what, is happening.       If
        everybody had run there it would have struck panic and
        everything else so it was a case of dispelling that
        situation as quickly as possible.

     Q. In fact you succeeded admirably in doing that? There
        wasn't any problem with regard to that? - A. There was a
        later problem on the bridge when something else either
        had rumbled, had started, or was about to start.

     Q. Was this before the match began? - A. Yes, it would be
        not long...    It would perhaps be approximately between
        2.30 and 2.40.




H
                                                             90




                                                    E. J. WILSON


    Q. What you are saying is there were two incidents... - A.
       On that stretch.
B   Q. ...on that stretch in which you were involved trying to
       contain? - A. Yes.

    Q. In the meantime other people were coming down the road,
       is that right? - A. Yes, it seemed to be for virtually
       the entire length of the bridge and the majority of the
       width of the pavement that people were standing about
       waiting.   Whether they were people waiting to go to the
       ground, waiting to meet friends, waiting for any other
       reason, I really don't know.   Then there were moving
       pedestrians on quite a lot of the roadway itself and
       there was also at one point I remember a double decker
       bus actually in the middle of the bridge area which had
       to stop.   There was no way of him getting through
       whatsoever and that was another point that I attempted to
       try and make a tunnel through the people for him to go up
       towards the traffic lights.
D   Q. He was going away from Leppings Lane up the hill, so to
       speak? - A. That's right.

    Q. When I say Leppings Lane, I mean the Leppings Lane
       entrance. - A. Yes.

    Q. Did the atmosphere in the crowd change in any way? - A.
       Yes, it did.   It was quite surprising for the fact that
       from people smiling and happy and everything else towards
       you, by this time you were were able to smell a very
       strong smell of alcohol all along the roadway itself, not
       just from a few people but it was a complete stink of
       that alcohol all along the way of the bridge.     It was
       quite evident that people standing along there were
       drinking from cans, not just cans of beer but also the
       enormous plastic bottles, two litres of beer.   These were
       strewn on the floor aswell.   People were walking around
       with four and six packs of beer on their hands.

    Q. This would be at about what time? - A. Again between 2.30
       and 2.40, within that ten minute period.

    Q. Did you then hear a call for assistance? - A. The main
       thing that I recollect, while trying to do my minimal
       efforts as regards keeping things quiet on the bridge and
       stopping people running, stopping any panic, I kept
       glancing back looking towards my Inspector or the
       Sergeant.   It was very apparent that the traffic on the
       radio was extremely busy and there would be no way of
       getting any particular message through, so I kept looking
       over waiting either for a hand signal or a tapping on the
       head or something like that, which is usually our signal
       to look for assistance to other officers.



H
                                                          91




                                                E. J. WILSON
    ✓

   I did in fact hear Sergeant Thomas' voice but he was
   unable to get his message through.

Q. You mean on the radio you heard this? - A. Yes.   I don't
   even remember if he was even able to say his name or his
   number, I recognised his voice in particular, to what he
   was trying to say.

Q. How did you recognise that your help was needed? - A.
   Well, I could see there was a very extreme build-up at
   the turnstiles and on returning from the upper reaches of
   the road towards the traffic lights.   I also saw that a
   Land Rover had come down into that area and it was quite
   apparent he was going to attempt to appeal to people, to
   try and give a calming effect or try and do something as
   regards the build-up in the area and he couldn't get the
   vehicle anywhere in the back of the crowd, so myself and
   the other policeman I was with attempted to make a V
   cordon to try and push the crowd outwards a little bit at
   a central point to allow the vehicle to get in, but they
   just packed themselves solid and tightly and restricted
   any of our access at all.

Q. Are we talking about what you have termed the reception
   area at this stage? - A. Yes.

Q. You are not talking about within the turnstile area
   between the perimeter gates? - A. No.

Q. You are talking about the area bordered on the one side
   by the perimeter gates and on the other side by Leppings
   Lane? - A. That's right.  It was impossible for the Land
   Rover to get through and it was impossible - I think
   perhaps I was the closest person to whoever was in the
   Land Rover and it was impossible to hear what he was^
   saying because of the volume of the crowd and the noise.

Q. Where did he come from?   Do you remember where he came
   from?   Which approach did he use?   Did he come down
   Catch Bar Lane or up... - A. I think he may have come
   from along Leppings Lane, but I really wouldn t...    I am
   just guessing that.   I really don't know.   I just saw
   him in the centre of that area there on the road surface.

Q. At this point were you on the periphery of the crowd,
   because it sounds to me as if you approached the crowd
   from the back, or at least you came down with the crowd?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. You were trying to force your way into the crowd to let
   the Land Rover...   Have I understood you correctly? - A.
   That's correct.
                                               E. J. WILSON


At the periphery of the crowd where you were initially,
was there space for them to expand backward at that
stage? - A. Yes, there were many yards of space for the
crowd to come back but they were all looking forward
realising they were going to be late into the ground.
All they wanted to do was get forwards and disregard
anything behind them.

I want to get back to the Land Rover for a minute or two.
Did you eventually get it positioned somewhere or other,
or did you lose track of it? - A. The Land Rover got
slightly further into the crowd, not very much at all.
It didn t succeed very much at all.   A couple of minutes
after that I saw that quite a small but a sterile area
had occurred by the perimeter wrought iron gates and by a
hand signal from my Inspector who waved to me I assessed
they were going to try and make a nose to tail cordon
with the horses to try and stop any further pushing from
the crowd.   A small area finally arose and I was able to
get into that position and join in the centre of this
line up and ended up then in front of the Land Rover.

You have already said when you were trying to manoeuvre
this Land Rover that you couldn't distinguish what he was
saying.  Did you distinguish what he was saying at any
point? - A. Quite frankly, no.

You joined the cordon because you were called over, so to
speak? - A. Yes.

How long did that cordon hold - about? - A. Difficult yet
again to answer that but I would have thought at least a
couple of minutes.   It may have been more than that.
It held a little bit longer than what I anticipated under
the strain we did have at that time.

You were outside the perimeter gates with this cordon,
weren't you? - A. Yes.

So what was the strain you were under? - A. It was the
fact that the people we were trying to stop from pushing
beyond us were pulling at the horses' reins, smacking
them in the face, pushing under their necks, some of them
slaping them on the backside in the hope that the one
behind would get upset and move out of the way.     Many
people tried to push under their necks and all you can do
then is fractionally move forward to stop that entry but,
of course, it would then make a gap behind so it was a
catch 22 situation.   I was aware.the line had b r o k e n a
few horses further behind and that many people had tried
to spill in through there but I think that was regained
and we kept it.   Time again I have no idea, but we held
the line a lot longer which created an even more sterile
area and then from then as things seemed to alleviate and
                                                           93




                                                   E. J. WILSON


     slow down we then turned the horses to face away from the
     ground and people then filtered between the horses.

Q. Did you notice any of the perimeter gates open? “ A. You
   may not have done because they may not have been in your
   view. - A. When I was in the line up I was facing the
   shop and then facing people to my left so I was looking
   away from there, but the only one gate I was ever aware
   of that had been attempted to be closed was the one that
   Sergeant Smith has spoken about earlier, the small one.

Q. C.258, can we put that up?   I think I used the word
   "perimeter".   I did not meant that, I meant the^
   concertina gate.  Did you see any of the concertina gates
   open? - A. No.

Q.    Do you recollect any of those gates being shut, open, or
     otherwise? - A. They only one that was closed was the one
     to the centre of your picture.     That one.

Q. That is the one you remember? - A. It was as a result of
   that on that I was enabled to get my horse through, which
   as those people moved somewhere or other that I was able
   to get through into a gap.

Q. And join the cordon? -A. Yes.

Q. In your statement you mention that you formed the
   impression that the kick-off would be delayed, is that
   right? - A. That is correct.

Q.    Can you remember what led to that? - A. I don|t think it
     was anything I heard over my radio.   Whether it was
     involved in people shouting, but I was under the
     impression that either a request or consideration was
     being given to delay the kick-off, I felt for thirty
     minutes or so, or perhaps fifteen minutes.

Q. That was the impression you formed? - A. This I passed on
   to the crowd when I was in the cordon of line up, and for
   quite a lot of people it did have an impact of settling
   them down and stopping them panicking.   As I was trying
   to get that message over it was then quite apparent from
   an uproar inside the ground that either the players were
   out or the game was about to commence.   As noise
   proceeded from the inside it incited the people on the
   outside and they then started pushing arid became
   aggressive and doing all they could to get past us.
                                                                 94


                                                    E. J. WILSON




    O. So you found, in fact, that the people who were within
       earshot of you did cool off or calm down, or whatever
       the word is, when you told them that, but you lost it
B      when they heard the road? - A . Yes, the noise.

    0. Then I think you have already explained that you turned
       the horses facing the people? - A. Yes, for the filter
       system.

    Q. To try and put some control .... - A. Yes.

    Q. Were you communicating at that stage with the people,
       or attempting to communicate? - A. Yes, attempting to.

    Q. Did you get any response at all at that stage? - A.
       From some but certainly not from others.

    Q. The people who were coning past you, with whoa you were
       communicating, were they moving voluntarily or were
       they so pressurised from people behind that they really
       had to go through or past you, whether they wished to
D      or not? - A. You would find that initially one or two
       people would get by you quite easily, and then other
       people would then come through with force.  It was
       always other people trying to get through as quickly as
       they possibly could because they knew that the match
       had started.

    Q.    I think you have misunderstood the question. When you
         say with force that could mean one of two things.  It
         could mean that people were forcibly coming through, or
         it could mean that they were forcibly being pushed
         through by others? - A. lio, I would not say that.  I
         would say the circumstances would be that they were
         able to filter through reasonably normally.

    Q. Your horse behaved admirably it sounds, would that be
       right? - A. Thankfully, yes.

    Q.   You did not, in fact, enter the stadium did you? - A.
         No, not at all.

    Q.   Did you hear a radio message that something had
         happened, that there mignt have been something going on
         in the stadiua? - A. Yes.   I don't know again whether
         it was a radio message or by some word of raoutn froo
         someone close to me, but I knew tnat there was
         something wrong.

    Q. What impression did you form of the content of that
       message? - A. Initially I felt taat there had been a
       pitch invasion.




H
                                                 E. J. WILSON




But you had nothing to do with tnat side of things?
You had other duties but I don't think we need concern
ourselves with those.  I think we will start the cross-
exaraination tomorrow. It is about 4 o'clock and tnere
is no point in beginning because we are clearly not
going to finish. - A. Okay, sir.

At least I a ssume we are not going to finish.  Remecnber
you are on oath so you must not discuss the evidence
until after you have finished.   You know all the rules
about that, don't you? - A. Yes.

      THE COROMER:   Tomorrow it is 10 o'clock in the
morning.   As far as witnesses are concerned, we will
finish with this young lady and then we will have
Inspector Hand-Davis, then Police Sergeant Thomas and
P.C. Kerry - these are all mounted Officers - and in
addition to that we have warned very, very
provisionally two other people, somebody called Kenneth
Rawlinson - he is a supporter whom we lost further back
because he was ill so we are just slotting him in, and
then somebody called Brian Sayles who is a turnstile
operator.   Whether we get to thera or not, time will
tell.

     MISS ADDLEMAHH:    Sir, before we go I rise as a
matter of courtesy to inform you that unfortunately I
will not be attending for the next three days.   That is
due to an unavoidable commitment.   I anticipate there
is a possibility, and I put it no higher than that,
that my instructing solicitor, *Mr. Holroyd, may be in
attendance in ray stead on Wednesday, but apart from
that there will be no representation for the next three
days.

     THE CORONER:   well, we will miss you but look
forward to seeing you when you are free.  Thank you for
telling me.  Are any of you going to want to discuss
anything with me?  You are.  Ladies and gentleaen,
leave us then and we will deal with whatever naeds to
be done but you can go home.

            (In   the absence of the J u r y )

     THE C0R0RER:    Vie can let this witness go as well,
can't we?

     MR. KING:Sir, I know the witness yet to come is
still in Court. It might be advisable if that witness
was also not here either - that is Inspector Hand-
Davis.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.  Would all the witnesses
leave, please - all the potential witnesses.
      liH. KING:    Sir, as you know, one of the matters I
have been investigating with witnesses today is the use
of the perimeter gates as a means of controlling entry
into the turnstile area, and sir, you very properly
questioned the Officer before last on that matter.
Could I just refer you to a part of the transcript - I
don't know if you have it with you - of Inspector Hand-
Davis at the Taylor Inquiry?     I don't know if you have
it with you.     It is page 58, sir, at letter C.  If I
read out what I wish so those who have not got it can
hear ae, it is really the content of a question which
was being put to Mr. Hand-Davis by Mr. Glasgow, who of
course represented the football club, and he says this
at C:

     "0.  We have seen a film, or bits of a film, of
     last year, Mr. Hand-Davis, and I wonder if you
     could throw your raind back to the 1988 game.  It
     looks very much as if those perimeter gates were
     closed right through the whole period that we have
     been discussing in the equivalent year at the
     equivalent time, and only two gates were opened so
     that people could feed through under rather closer
     control, and I simply wanted to ask you whether
     that is something that is possibly more sensible
     in trying to limit the number of people pressing
     on the turnstiles.”

Sir, all I want to raise is, I don't have access to
that film and I am not sure to what that is a
reference, but sir, it does appear to rae - and Mr.
Glasgow was no mere participant in the Taylor Inquiry,
he clearly represented the club and had access to a lot
of material - and sir, if there is a film wnich shows
that, certainly I would be interested in it and would
invite the Inquest to be interested in it. I don't
know, sir, if you know of any part of a film to which
that is directed.                 ^

     THE CORONER:    I don't know what he is referring
to.  fir. Catcnpole, do you know wnat he mignt be
referring to?

     MR. CATCHFOLE:    Sir, it was a long time ago, but
I think it is referring to the film, that part of a
compilation.   We had a split screen before and as I
remember it there were, I think it was the Police video
that we all had access to, which was a still frane
going through.   Although when fir. King asked rae earlier
I said I did not remember exactly what was going on, I
seem to remember that there are shots where it appears
- the film is very bad quality - where the gates that
v/ould lead down normally to the access roads appeared
to be closed throughout, and from what you can tell it
is only the other gates that are open.   That is only a
vague recollection but I remember it being discussed at
the Public Inquiry.

     THE CORONER:    The chances are if there is a film
we have got it somewhere.   I cannot say that I have
looked at it.   The reason why I asked the question,
perhaps I ought to tell you, one of the things that has
occurred to me while I have been listening to the
evidence and also to the line of questioning is this,
that yes, there are outer perimeter gates, and yes they
were open and yes, they could be shut, and indeed they
were shut at different periods of time.   The question
that I ask rayself is what is the actual purpose of
those outer perimeter gates, because if the purpose of
those perimeter gates was to act as regulators to the
turnstile area, then of course that line of questioning
is exceedingly relevant, but if the outer perimeter
gates, if the intention of those gates was merely to
seal off the ground from the road, then the fact that
they were open is what you would expect, and the fact
that people attempted to shut them is a response to a
situation.

     So I don't know the answer to this question and we
may have to wait, in fact, until we get right to the
end when we get to the club representatives, but it is
a point which has occurred to rae, and that was the
reason why I asked this witness whether he could
remember - I have forgotten who it was, it was Sergeant
Wilson, I think - whether he could remember whether the
gates had been open on, not the 1988 match because he
was not there, but at a match in 1988 when he was
there, which I think was an Everton match.

     I can see what you   are saying with regard to the
case, but of course the   purpose of those gates and what
they were designed for,   and what was the intention of
now they should be used   may be a very relevant factor.

     MR. KING:   Sir, as you know, we have heard a body
of evidence as to planning which has been introduced,
the planning for the day and the Police Operational
Order has been introduced.  Sir, the Jury are not here
and the witnesses are not nere ....

     THE CORONER:   That is why I have E ien tion ed i t
because I thought it was an opportune rnoraent ....

     HR. KING:   As you know, sir, one of the matters
raised in Lord Justice Taylor's Report even, let alone
in the course of the Inquiry, was the absence of
                                            E. J. WILSON




provision in the Order and the planning for controlling
the entry of the crowd into the turnstile area, and
sir, I can cite you numerous paragraphs in relation to
that, if you want to look at them, as to how that
criticism and how that thought was developed on the
basis of the evidence which was produced to the Taylor
Inquiry.  Sir, it is at paragraphs, for example, 210,
211, 212, 223, 224 and again at 273 of the Report.
Sir, I only mention that to show that I as not, I
repeat again, flying a kite on the basis of some whini
of mine.  It was a matter which, in my submission, is
relevant, and on the basis of the material as I have it
before me ....

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I could not have referred
you to the paragraphs but I was aware that this matter
had been canvassed, and not for one moment did I think
that you were flying a kite.   I think that it is
relevant but what I cannot resieoiber is quite how these
paragraphs are worded, and as I say it is really
listening to the evidence and to the line of
questioning, that the question that I have raised has
occurred to me, namely yes, you can see in some
respects they are an ideal barrier, if you like,
between the road and the turnstiles.    It is just
whether or not that was their primary purpose, or
whether they came to be used in that way, but I am not
intending to stop you asking that question,    We will
have a look and see whether this film is (a) available,
(b) whether we can find the scenes, and (c) whether
having found them they are worth looking at, and we
will see where we go fron there.    Is that satisfactory
to you?
                                                        98




       MR. KING:   Thank you, sir.
   /


     MR. PAYNE:   I wonder if I may just be allowed to say
that, of course, what is important is not what is in the
Taylor Report but what is in the evidence given before you
which you are now calling, sir.  I hardly need to say this
but I do say it, since my learned friend has correctly
pointed out that the Jury is not here, that it is the
evidence which is given before you which is important.   I
agree it is an important matter to explore and for our part
we think the evidence which has been given about the
impracticability of putting barriers further back to
restrain the crowd a distance away from the ground and the
effect that that would have had is very material.  We are
sure that the Jury and indeed yourself, sir, will have that
point very much in mind.

      THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I think we are all agreed on
that point.   What I had understood you to say is that you
were not introducing things which came off the top of your
head.   They have already been explored and if you think
they are important to establish how the deceased came by
their death then we need to reintroduce them, so to speak,
because we are not using the Taylor Report, which is your
point, is it not? I am not arguing about that.    My only
point really is that it does go to the issue of planning as
to whether what the original purpose of those gates was.
In other words, did somebody sit down and say, "These are
perimeter gates which we are using in order to control
inflow to the turnstile areas"? In which case you can
develop a line down that way or do people say, "These
perimeter gates happen to be there but they have got
nothing whatever to do with ingress into the stadium", in
which case you would develop a different line? There may
be other questions and that is the point I am raising.    I
am raising it without the Jury because it is a convenient
way for me, in a sense, to indicate to you some of the
issues which have occurred to me in the way the evidence is
developing.   I am not saying it is important.

     MR. PAYNE:    As to the function of those gates and
their design function, sir, that is something which I do
not  think any witness so far is capable of speaking to.

     THE CORONER:   I think that is right. This is one of
the problems we have got because of the way, if you like, I
constructed the Inquest.   We have not got to that yet.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Certainly I am happy to try and find
out what the original purpose of these gates were.   In fact
I believe, and my recollection is, that they have been in
existence for a very long time, certainly going back as the
1966 World Cup when that end of the ground was rejigged.
Whether there are any records which would help this Inquiry
                                                         99




as to what the original purpose was I am not certain.  I
would very much doubt if there is anyone who can give oral
evidence as to their original purpose.  Obviously the
practice which has been adopted or not over the years is
something that people can give evidence about.  There has
been Police Officers and no doubt there may well be fans
but that is a different matter.  If you are saying we
should have a scout round the archives and see what we can
come up with....

     THE CORONER:   No, I am not really saying that.  When
I said the “original purpose” perhaps I was misusing the
term. What the original purpose was is neither here nor
there but what they have been used for in the more recent
past is, of course, a very relevant factor.  Putting it
very crudely if my house has a front garden and it happened
to have a front gate on it, that is a gate but the purpose
is to have a demarcation between my garden and the road.
It is not in fact intended as a means of preventing ingress
into my house.  That is the job of my front door.

     MR. PAYNE:   I thought you were going to say your
alsatian dog.

     THE CORONER:    That is the point I am making.  I could
control it, and some people do, of course, by having
beautiful iron gates which operate electronically from a
distance.  That is really the difference.   Is this a gate
which is intended to control ingress into my parkland or is
it a garden gate in front of my house? That is really the
point, is it not, which you are trying to explore and which
I am thinking about?

     MR. KING:If the Inquest     started with the proposition
that there was   a large mass of people for whatever reason
between the perimeter gates and the turnstiles, thus
leading to a situation where Gate C was opened, if we
started there it may be that none of my questions would be
relevant.  In fact, sir, we have gone further back because
quite properly   - and I make no objection to this - you have
investigated how it came to be that such a large mass of
people came to be there. We have heard all about lateness
of arrivals, turnstiles, the behavioujr of the crowd and so
on.  If we are going to go into that then, sir, it is only
right and proper we should also investigate a different
side of the picture which is the control of people into
that confined area.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I am not objecting.   Please
do not think that I am taking an objection to that.   I am
definitely not. All I am trying to say is that one of the
factors one is thinking about in relation to these gates
is, what are they? Yes, we have got to explore it but are
they my front gates or are they parkland gates, using that
                                                           100




illustration which has only just occurred to me?      It may
probably defective once you come to analyse it.

     MR. KING:   Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:   We are spending an enormous amount of
time on an area - and again we are not talking here with
any Jury present - where the deaths did not occur.    I do
not think anybody is arguing that the deaths occurred
outside these gates but I feel, and I hope I am right in
this, that we cannot understand how the deceased came by
their deaths unless we can understand to a certain extent
at least what the position was further back.  Rightly
wrongly, in a sense we are committed now even if I am
wrong, it would be almost impossible to retract so to
speak, I felt in order to comprehend events inside the
stadium we have got to understand the events outside.   It
sounds to me as if you are probably agreeing with me
because, as I said, I do worry a little bit about the
length of time we are spending on this but if we are going
to do it then in the end we have got to do it properly or
as properly as we reasonably can.  I hope that is agreed as
well.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I think it is a matter of common sense
to keep out unauthorised persons and that perimeter gate
will be the ideal place to do it.  It is the perimeter of
private property.  That is the outside edge of their
property.  I think it is common sense.

     THE CORONER:   I understand that and that is to a
certain extent what you are thinking, Mr. King, as well.
There you have got gates. They are the demarcation of an
area and they can be used for control.  Should they be
used, how should they be used, and how should one have
planned for their use?

     MR. KING: We are dealing with questions of what is
obvious and what is foreseeable.  In a sense, sir, without
wasting too much time, one could have started the Inquest -
and I am not objecting at all - at the point where Gate C
is opened or just before and said that for whatever reason
there was a large crowd outside which^was trapped.    Having
gone further back, sir, we are investigating why they are
trapped.  We have had an awful lot of evidence as to other
aspects and my concern is not simply for the control of
unauthorised persons but  the authorised ones as well.

     THE CORONER:    Yes,    you will include that.

     MR. PAYNE:  You mention the question of the how,which
is the central question,  and you mention the matter of the
last two or weeks or so of evidence which has been given, a
large part of which has been concerned with what happened
                                                           101




    outside the turnstiles.  For our part we would accept, and
    our submission would be, that all that evidence is highly
    relevant to the question of how.

         THE CORONER:   Relevant did you say?
B        MR. PAYNE: Relevant certainly because it is indeed,
    as a matter of fact, the people who were largely comprised
    in that crowd who were shortly afterwards the same people
    in the pens.

         THE CORONER:   That was my feeling.  I took the
    decisions on where to start, so to speak, the evidence
    without consultation and that was the conclusion I reached,
    that the Jury could not deal with the how unless we dealt
    with it from fairly far back.  It has taken longer than I
    anticipated but that is just how it is. Yes, Mrs. McBrien,
    you are right.  I can understand what you are saying and we
    will carry on.  I was really just sharing my thoughts with
    all of you because this is obviously a matter I am thinking
    about all the time as well, as I am sure we all are, and in
    the end the Jury are going to have to decide.  Ladies and
    gentlemen, unless there is something else shall we go home
    or wherever we have to go to and we meet at ten o'clock
    tomorrow.

           (The Inquests were adjourned until 10 o'clock
                       the following morning)




E




F




G
