                                                                                       M IR .15




 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised                               Number



 Title
 (Include source and any document number if relevant)


 Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                               Receiver

v^r
                                                                                                                  Indexer
 Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                      o

 No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                           Statement Reader
 Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                  Indexer
 Indexed as indicated

 No(s) of actions raised

                                                                                                           0 /M         SIO
 Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                  Indexer
 Further action No(s)


 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


             CARL WILLIAM RIMMER




                       Before

DR. S.L. POPPER,    LL.B, B.MED.Sci,   B M , B S . MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                         At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                         On

                   3rd May,   1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                            INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT



                        PROF. JAI'IES TJT-TDERT7OOP Galled

                              By THE CORONER       .................. .

                    B   oeetcer              elizaeeth e w n s c.-aiod

                              V^r THE CORONER            ............. .

                        POLICE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                              r>y 'j'HE COROT'’
                                              E R ...... . .      .....<




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                         rd May    1990


                              IH0IT5ST INTO THE DEATH OF CARL HIILIAM RII-MSR

                              IJR. FRASER:   Sir, the final evidence you will hca r
                        thi:     ternoon relates to Carl "William Rimmer. Carl’s
                        mum and dad and fiancee and members of the family are
                    B   present in Court. T represent the family in a personal
                        cajjacity but, of course, also as a member of the
                        Steering Committee in the usual way.

                             THE CORONER:   T,Tilda is mum and dad?   And. f ian c ee ?
                        Yes.  Good afternoon.

                             I am just going to outline for 3 rou, as I do for
                        most families, the form in which the Inquest is presented
                        so that you know what to expect. In a moment I am going
                        to read to you the evidence which was tendered on the
                        18th April, 1 9 8 9 , which is when I opened the Inquests,
                        in order to enable me to let 3 ^ou have your lad back and
                        then I will deal with, if there are any errors on it
                        which you will no doubt tell me about when you have
                        heard them, and then I will tell 3 >x>u what the blood
                    D   alcohol was. Prof. Underwood, the pathologist, will
                        then come and tell us about the pathology. "When he has
                        completed his evidence we will be turning to the ¥est
                        Midlands Police Officers who will present the summaries
                        which they prepared for me. It is done in two bits.
                        The second bit is done by Inspector Layton who deals
                        with the visual evidence and in that he describes the
                        photographs and plans and so on.       TJhen he is doing
                    E   that verbally you may find it a little bit confusing
                        because he is referring to loads of numbers and things
                        but, as soon as he has finished doing that - we need
                        that so we can write it down of course - he comes round
                        here and, on these big plans, he shows us what he has
                        been talking about so that all of us can understand
                        what is going on, in particular you because you, in a
                        sense — — I know you have seen quite a lot of these
                        so you know the procedure but you have not seen this
                        particular document at all. Is that all clear to you?

                             This then is a resumed Inquest which was opened on
                        the 18th April, 1989* On that occasion Neil Anthony
                        Parkin, Acting Coroner’s Officer, said:

                                    [Tie body which is the subject of this
                                  Inquest has been identified to pc 271
                                  England of the South Vr          Police
                                  as that of Carl "William Rimmer  bv Kevin
                                  Edward Rimmer, his brother. He was 21
                                  years of age having been born on the 2 nd
                                  February, 1968 at Liverpool-    He w? r a_
                                  single man and ho lived at
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                  - 1 -
                                                                   PROF. J. UNDERWOOD



                                                             Liverpool.
                                   He was a video technician by occupation.
                                   He died at Hillsborough Football Ground
                                   following an incident there on Saturday,
                                   15th April, 1 9 8 9 * PC E ngland caused the
                                   b ody to be removed to the Medico Legal
                                   Centre and there he identified it to
                                   Detective Constable Simon Weigold who
                    B              subsequently identified the same b od 3>'
                                   to Prof. Underwood.     It is the family
                                   wish that the b od 3^ should be cremated."

                                   I then adjourned the Inquest.   I wrote to you and,
                           in fact, you, Mr. Edward William Rimmer - I do not
                           k n o w if you remember - but you signed a. form for me on
                           the 2 5 th April, I9 S9 and you confirmed that all this
                           information w h i c h I have now read out is, in effect,
                           correct and that is so, is it not?      We have got the
                           name and address right.

                                Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol estimations and
                           he gave us the evidence regarding these on the first
                           day, about two weeks ago no\ir, when we resumed and, in
                    D      the case of Carl, the estimation was 144 mg/100 ml.

                                           PROF. JAMES UNDERWOOD Called;

                                                 By THE CORONER:

                                THE CORONER:   Prof. Underwood and, indeed, all
                           the other pathologists have already taken the oath and
                    E      so they are not going to repeat that.

                        Q. Good afternoon, Prof. Underwood? - A. Good afternoon,
                           sir.

                        Q, Could 3 rou just introduce yourself? - A. I am James
                           Underwood, Prof. of Pathology at the University of
                           Sheffield and Hon. Consultant Histopathologist to the
                           Sheffield Health Autliorit3 ^, Dr. of Medicine and Fellow
                           of the Roya3. College of Pathologists.

                        Q. Prof. Underwood, I believe you carried out an autopsy
                           on a 3 roung man called Carl William Rimmer who was also
                           identified to you by a number, number 1 5 > is tha.t right?
                           A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q. And this was done on the 16th April, I think, was it
                           not? - A. At 11.30 in the morning, sir.

                        Q. Can 3 >rou take me through the relevant parts please? -
                           A. As a result of my examination I concluded that the
                           cause of death was traumatic asphyxia. The evidence
                           for that was that when I examined the body externally
                           I discovered that there were man 3 ^ small haemorrhages
                H          into the skin around the face, mouth and neck and,
                           incidentally, I also discovered some bruising to the
                           left and right legs and there was also a flake of
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                           pale blue paint on the left leg.
                                          PROF. J. UNDERWOOD



Internally there were similar small, haemorrhages or
bleeding points on the membrames covering internal
organs. These are the typical findings in death from
traumatic asphyxia.  I could find no evidence of any
naturally-occurring disease process.

Prof. Underwood, obviously one of the things that
concern families very greatly is the thought of
somebody being asphyxiated and suffering dreadfully
for a prolonged period.  Can you tell me what your
views are with regard to loss of consciousness in
the first instance? - A. Yes, sir. Death from
traumatic asphyxia occurs as a result of lack of
oxygen to the brain but, before death occurs, quite
rapidly after the supply of oxygen is reduced the
individual lapses into an unconscious state and so
the period of distress is really quite short.

¥e have had various estimates but the average seems
to be about 1 0 - 1 5 / 2 0 seconds, something of that sort? -
A. That is not unreasonable, sir.

And, in fact, I think it was Dr. Slater who referred
to a recent paper where somebody appeared to lose
consciousness almost instantaneously but I know nothing
more about it than that. But you would go along with
10-15 seconds? - A. Yes, sir.

That does not mean to say the person'is dead at that
point but he or she does not feel anything after that? -
A. That is correct.

And a lot of these signs which you have described,
these petechial haemorrhages and so on, might well
be developing after the loss of consciousness? - A. Yes,
sir.

     MR. FRASER:        No questions.

     MR. LIMB:     No questions.

     MR. CATCI-IPOLE:      No, thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER:    Prof. Underwood, thank you very
much indeed.  Is it likely that the family would ....

     MR. FRASER: Sir, I   think Mrs. Rimmer might find
some comfort from a quiet word with Prof. Underwood if
he would be good enough to spare her five minutes.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, would you be willing to .... -
A. I would be pleased to stay until the end of the
Inquest, sir.

Prof. Underwood, before you go, I just want to say
something else. You must know, of course, that this
                                                                       PROF. J. UNDERWOOD
                                                                       G. S. EVANS


                           is the last time you are appearing in connection with
                           the Hillsborough Inquests? - A. Yes, sir.

                           In fact, I think it is six pm*s that you undertook for
                           us as far as I know. May I take the opportunity of
                           thanking you very much indeed for, in the first
                           instance,, of course, being willing to come on the
                           day to help to do the post-mortems.   Secondly, for
                    B      giving your evidence so very, very clearly and
                           sensitively and kindly and, thirdly, for, as in this
                           case, being available to the families because I know
                               ., in many cases, this has been a tremendous help
                           that,
                           that they have been able to talk to the pathologist
                           for a few minutes afterwards.    It sort of helps to
                           come to terms with the pathdlogy, so to speak, so
                           thank you very much indeed for your help and also,
                           of course, your other colleagues from the Hallamshire
                           who came down and did so valia.ntly for us. Thank you
                           very much indeed. - A. Thank you, sir, for those kind
                           remarks.

                                MR. FRASER;  Sir, raay I, on behalf of my Committee
                           and those lay clients T^ho have had the benefit of
                    D      talking to Prof. Underwood be associated with those
                           remarks.

                                Thank    2   ^ou, your help is very much appreciated.

                                THE WITNESS:         Tliank you.

                                     OFFICER GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called;
                    E
                                                   B y THE CORONER:

                        0. Yes? - A. Geraldine Elisabeth Evans, Officer of the
                           West Midlands Police.

                        Q. When you are ready? - A. On Saturday, 15th April, 1 9 8 9
                           Mr. Kevin Edward Rimmer tra.velled to Sheffield by
                           private car with his brother, Carl William Rimmer,
                           G r a h a m Hurst and Michael Brooks intending to watch
                           the FA Cup semi final football match at Hillsborough
                           stadium. All four had tickets to enter the stadium.

                           Michael Brooks and Kevin Rimmer separated from the
                           other two as they had tickets for the North Stand.
                           Graham Hurst was with Carl outside the Leppings Lane
                           turnstiles at about 1430 hours when they became
                           separated due to the crowd.

                           At a.bout 1530 hours following the severe crushing in
                           the West Stand terracing, PC England went onto the
                           pitch near to the goal at Leppings Lane and lie saw
                           a man who he now knows to be Carl Riramer l3 ring on the
                           ground. The officer was assisted b 3 ^ Fireman Peter
                H          Brough to resuscitate Ca.rl but without success.
                           PC Engla.nd then assisted to carry Carl on a hoarding

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                     .
                           to the gymnasium where a t e m p o r a l mortuary had been
                           set u d
                                                       -   4
                                                           -
At 1552 hours Dr. Brian Robert Timney examined Carl
in the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

Just pause for one moment ....

     TIED CORONER:  Mr. Rimmer, do you want us to pause
for a minute? I knot/ it is very upsetting but we will
wait if you like? Shall we carry on?

     MR. AND MRS. RIMMER.:        Yes.

     THE CORONER:   All right, you carry on? - A. At
about 0020 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 1 9 8 9 Mr.
Kevin Rimmer identified the body of his brother to
Police Constable England in the temporary mortuary.

The officer later escorted the body of Carl to the
Medico Lega.1 Centre where lie confirmed the identification
to DC Weigold.

On Sunday, 16th April, 1989» following idejitification
b 3 ^ DC Weigold., Prof. James Underwood carried out an
autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of death.

Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
blood sample from Ca.rl where the presence of ethanol
was detected.  The witnesses proving continuity of
the blood sample are Detective Constable Alai; Cha.rles
Jones, Detective Sergeant Turner and Detective
Sergeant Fletcher ....

Would you like to sit down? - A, No, sir.       Dr, Forrest
carried out the analysis.

In the circumstances it cannot be established exactly
how Carl entered the stadium.

     TIIE CORONER:      I have no questions.   Any questions,
Mr. Fraser?

     MR. FRASER:       No, sir.

     MR. LIMB:       No, sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:       No, sir.

         POLICE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                        By THE CORONER:

Yes? - A. Michael Layton, Detective Inspector, West
Midlands Police.  Sir, an examination has been made
of video film and plaotographic evidence and Carl
has been identified outside the stadium and
subsequently in Enclosiire no. 3 alive. He is also
                                               N . IAYTCIJ



shown, sir, be i ng carried across the pitch on a
temporary stretcher.

Graham Hurst has identified Carl alive outside the
stadium on a. video, a BBC video ta.pe, sir, referenced
1'LA.P 9, s-rcd bea ri n g the digits 00 :1 1 :02 :1 9 • Sir, as
I have mentioned before, that is not actually a time
reference but we k n o w that that piece of film was
taken between 1437 2-nd 1450.

FC England has identified h i m se l f carrying Carl on
a temporary stretcher and this, sir, is on a
photograph referenced PR7/11 and the ph o tograph is
timed a.t 1535*       Fire m an Peter B rough has identified
himself on the same p ho t ograph although, at this stage,
he did not k n o w the name of the deceased.         Sir, I
think there is a small typing error there. In fact,
it is Mrs. Ja„cqueline K i l c ul l en who is C a r l 1s aunt
and, in fact, Mr. Kilcullen, both of w h o m are in
Court at the moment, they have v i e we d visual
evidence.      I k no w I have mentioned it before, sir,
but I can say that it was a. v e r y difficult occasion
for them but one w h i c h they decided to undertake on
b e h al f of Hr. and Mrs. Rimmer and they were able to
acti®. lly identify Carl alive in Enclosure no. 3 on
a sequence of photographs, one of w h i c h is referenced
PR1/10A and tha.t photograph, s ir, is timed at 1503*

Before you turn to the plans, the significance of
the first MAP 9 reference is, of course, that Ca.rl
could not have b een in the stadium before 1437*                  We
cannot say w hat time he wen t in but he wou l d not
have been in before because that is w h e n the sequence
begins? - A. That is right, sir.    U n f o r t u n a t e l y / , it
is not a continuous sequence of film.

Yes, I understand that. We cannot say what time
it was but we know that is the time it bega.n? -
A. Yes.

Yes, okay, if yoii turn to the plans? - A. Sir, first
of all, can we refer to M WJL 166, whi c h is the plan
referring to that identification outside?

That will be C2 3 6 . - A. A n d then,      sir, MWJL 115?

That will be C237. - A. Whi c h is a plan of the terraces,
sir.  And M W J L 21, wh ic h is a plan of the pitch.

A nd can we have ...• - A, Yes,sir, Mr. Brough's plan,
P B / 1 , sir.

We will make that C238. - A. And M W J L 21, sir.

C239. - A. Sir, if we can refer, first of all, to




                            —6—
                                          M. LAYTON



I'fifJL 166 which refers to the identification of Carl
outside and the point at which we believe Carl is
shown there, sir, is here somewhere in this area,
These are the outer perimeter gates here and it is
in approximately this location here, sir.

In respect of the terraces, sir, this is Enclosure no.
3 and specifically on the plan MIfJL 115 i s reference
to a photograph PL1/10A and the location that I
believe that Carl is shown there is in this j)osition
here.   Sir, this dotted line is the barrier which
subsequently broke. Again, sir, my perception of
the photograph is that, at that stage, Carl is still
a.live but I cannot sayr at what stage of the medical
process you have heard about ...•

And how good do you think is the identification? -
A. The family are absolutely convinced, sir. If
you ‘could just bear with me a second ....

Certainly/.- A. Peter Brough, in respect of that
identification, he has indicated a point on the pitch
in this location here. In fact, it is just slightly
down, and that is the Leppings Lane end of the pitch.

And it is, in fact, outside Enclosure h more-or-less,
is it not? - A. It is, sir, yes.

There is no significance. I am just trying to locate
it. - A. Yes.  Sir, MT-JJL 21 refers to the photograph
PU7/10. That is the photograph where Carl is being
carried across the pitch. The location of that
photograph is approximately here, sir, so towards the
Spion Eop end of the pitch.

And, again, that tends to show what is, in fact, the
case with many, many of the people, that they were
carried or moved across into that direction? - A. That
is right, sir, yes.

Because the gymnasium is somewhere down at the bottom
there? - A. Yes, sir.

Down the side, I thinlc, is it      not? -A. It is actually
down here, sir.

     MR. FRASER:    The family have no questions, sir,
thank you•

     MR. LIMB:     No, thank you.

     MR. CATCIIPOLE:    No, thank you, sir.

     MR. FRASER:    Sir, again, before you conclude
the evidence in this case, Carl’s family, and I
include in that his fiancee, have asked me to stand
and offer through you their heartfelt thanks to
everybody who der.lt with Carl on the day, particularly,
sir, to Police Constable England and to Fireman Brough.

                        -7-
                             Their efforts are very much appreciated.  Sadly,
                        they wore in vain but the family want those officers
                        to know that their efforts were very much appreciated.

                             TE3 CORONER:       Thank you very much indeed, Ur
                        Fraser.

                             Thank you for giving Mr. Fraser the instructions
                    B   to say that because ---- well, you could see how much
                        the West Midlands Officer was affected just in telling
                        the story and I think it is only fair to say that,
                        although we have to deal with technicalities and the
                        details of the plans and one thing and another, the
                        thing that we try and remember in these Inquests is
                        not that we are dealing with a whole load of people,
                        anybody, but we are dealing, in this case, with your
                        boy, Carl, I knot/ that makes it worse but, on the
                        other hand, I want you to know that we have thought of
                        him. Thank you very much indeed for being here this
                        afternoon.

                             We are about to rise. Ladies and gentlemen, it
                        is inevitable, is it not, when we are dealing with this,
                        we are going to be upset from time-to-time. We cannot
                    D   help that.

                            We are going to rise. I want you to do what I have
                       already asked you on many other occasions x/hen we have
                       risen - go home and I am not telling you what to do at
                       home but try and relax and put it out of your mind, if
                       you can, because I want you to be fresh tomorrow. I
                    J] know that sounds awfully hard but it is the only way
                       to tackle it. I want to start at 9«30 tomorrow. Now,
                       tomorrow, if I can just take one minute of your time
                       to tell you, we have got five Inquests in the morning
                       and then we have completed every single case that we
                       are going to deal with at the moment. But we are going
                       to come back in the afternoon because there is one
                       case, Mr. Williams, which we need to just re-open and
                       deal with one-or-two points which have arisen but we
                       will deal with that tomorrow afternoon. Then there
                       are a few remarks to be made but I am aiming, I am
                       hoping, that we will be able to let you go home at
                       around 3 o ’clock or thereabouts. That is what I am
                       targeting. I s.m not promising to hit it but I will do
                       my best and I hope that will be satisfactory to you as
                       well, Mr. Fraser, and, of course, to all of you.

                                 We will rise then for this evening   Thank you very
                        milch.

                                 (The proceedings were adjourned until 9.30
                                          the following morning )

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
