                                                                                               M I R . 15




    OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and tim e raised                                   Num ber


    T itle                      P~T                                                                          ZLk.Ou.OQ
    ^Include source and any document number i f relevant)
                                                                            ~X- <z>
'    Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No ____
                                                                                                                            Receiver




                                                                                                                            In dexer
    D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

    No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                      S tatem ent Reader
    Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                            Indexer
     Indexed as indicated

    No(s) o f actions raised

    Examined - fu rth e r action to be taken                                                            _                          S IO



                                                                                            r1 | 1! IwSL
                                                                                                      F               £ -



    F urth er action No(s)                                                                                                  Indexer



    When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                   CARL BROWN




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER,   LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

            (Her M a j e s t y ’s Coroner)




                        At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                        On
                   2bth. April 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                                 INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                    B



                        OPENING BY THE CORONER

                    C   DR. JOHN CLARK Called

                           By THE CORONER

                        DETECTIVE SERGEANT JULIE APPLETON Called

                           By THE CORONER
                           Cross-Examined by MRS. NORCLIFFE
                    D
                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                           By THE CORONER




                    E




                    F




                    G




                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        Tuesday,   24th April, 1990


                                         THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                                                   CARL BROWN
                    B
                                MR. FRASER:   Sir, the next case you will hear
                           relates to Carl Brown.   Carl's parents are in court
                           this morning and have with them their solicitor,
                           Mr. Lynch.   His practice is in fact a member of my
                           group and it has been agreed I should act as his agent
                           in the usual way through the agency of the steering
                           committee.

                                THE CORONER:   Yes, thank you.    I noticed you in
                           court in the earlier case so I am not going to repeat to
                           you the procedure to be followed because you have
                           already personally heard it and seen it.

                                This then is a resumed inquest which was opened on
                    D      the 9th of April, 1989.   On that occasion Neil Anthony
                           Parkin, acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                                   "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
                                   been identified to PC 1124 Pratt of the South
                                   Yorkshire Police as that of Carl Brown, by Terence
                                   Brown, his father.   He was 18 years of age, having
                                   been born on 21st March, 1971 at Leigh.
                    E
                                   He W3s a single man and lived at
                                         Leigh, Greater Manchester.

                                   He was a student by occupation.   He died at
                                   Hillsborough football ground following an incident
                                   there on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.

                                   PC Pratt caused the        body to be removed to the
                                   Medico Legal Centre        and there he identified it to
                                   Detective Constable        Simon Weigold who subsequently
                                   identified the same        body to Professor Usher and Dr,
                                   Clark.

                                   It is the family wish that the body should be
                                   buried.

                           Then I adjourned the inquest and I wrote to you and
                           asked you just to check the details.   In fact,
                           Mr. Brown, you signed the statement on the 26th April,
                           1989, confirming the details which I have given and you
                           added the post code to the address, and the place of
                           birth was Leigh.
                H
                                                      -   1    -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                               Blood alcohol was estimated by Dr. Forrest and was
                          given in respect of everybody on the first day of these
                          resumed inquests.   In the case of Carl, the level which
                          he measured was 83 mg/100 ml.

                               We will now turn to Dr. Clark.

                    B                     DR. JOHN CLARK Called

                                              By THE CORONER:

                               THE WITNESS:   I am Dr. John Clark, forensic
                          pathologist, at the University of Glasgow.

                          This is your report on the case of Carl Brown, case
                          number 46? - A. Yes, sir.

                        5 . You did this particular post mortem on the 17th April, I
                            think? - A. Yes, that is right.

                        5 . Can you tell me cause of death? - A. Yes.   The prime
                            cause of death was inhalation of stomach contents
                            orinhalation of vomit, and a contributing condition to
                    D       that and probably the precipitating condition was crush
                            asphyxia.   1(a) inhalation of stomach contents and 2
                            crush asphyxia.

                          This was based on finding...

                        Q. It was 2 crush asphyxia, not 1(b)? - A. Arguably it
                           could either be 1(a) or 1(b).   There are very technical
                    E      terms, perhaps not...   I chose to put it under 2.

                          He had vomit in his air passages and hemorrhaged into
                          the lungs as a result of this and that seems to have
                          been the ultimate prime cause of death.

                          He also had moderate signs of asphyxia in his chest.
                          That is, the face had become blue and there were small
                          hemorrhages on the skin and internally.   Now both these
                          things, inhalation of vomit and the asphyxial signs
                          would be consistent with crushing of his chest.
                          Probably what has happened is crushing of the chest and
                          has produced some of these signs of asphyxia, but also
                          caused him to inhale vomit and that has brought about
                          his death very quickly.   As with everyone else, it is
                          almost certain he was unconscious when all this
                          happened, that the vomit occurred.   He would have
                          become unconscious within about ten seconds or so and
                          because he was unconscious when he did vomit it went
                          down and did not come out as normally so he would not
                          have known anything about that.


                    H
                                                 - 2 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        In addition to these changes he also had a number of
                        injuries on his face and elsewhere on the body.   Some of
                        these were old and some were new.   There were bruises
                        on his arms probably caused by gripping, firm gripping,
                        probably while he was being assisted by people round
                        about him and others being caused by being forced
                        against the ground or against other people.   These were
                        all surface injuries, pretty minor, and there was no
                        internal damage at all.   No rib fractures or anything.

                        He was not suffering from any natural disease which
                        could have played any part in his death.



                    c




                    D        MR. FRASER:   Carl's parents and family have no
                        questions, but without wishing to appear to make a habit
                        of this they would very much like to talk to Dr. Clark
                        afterwards if he would be good enough to spare them five
                        minutes.   I don't want to make a habit of this, sir,
                        but families obviously feel that the last person who
                        dealt with their son in this case was Dr. Clark and they
                        would like to talk to him.
                    E
                              THE CORONER:   If Dr. Clark does not mind I don't
                        mind.    I note what you say but obviously it is an
                        opportunity for families to meet the pathologist.    That
                        is one of the advantages of having the pathologist here,
                        as opposed to dealing with it by way of documentary
                        evidence, and so if it helps then I have no objection to
                        it at all.

                             MR. FRASER:   Sir, certainly those families to whom
                        that offer has been extended in the preceding days have
                        very much felt the benefit of an opportunity to talk to
                        the pathologist concerned.

                             THE CORONER:   I am pleased to hear that.    Have
                        you got anything you want to ask?   (No)




                    H
                                              - 3 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
      DETECTIVE SERGEANT JULIE APPLETON Called

                   By THE CORONER;

     THE WITNESS:   Julie Appleton, Detective Sergeant
in the West Midlands Police.

If you would take me through the summary, please? - A.
At about 1045 hours on Saturday, 15th April, 1989,
Mrs. Delia Brown saw her son, Carl, leave the family
home with the intention of travelling to Sheffield.
Carl was known to have a ticket for the Cup Semi Final
football match at Hillsborough stadium and was to travel
by car with friends.

Carl travelled to Sheffield with Mr. Frank Bocking, Lee
Walls and a number of other people.   They arrived in
Sheffield at about 1355 and parked the vehicle a short
distance away from the ground.

Carl and Lee made their way on foot to the Leppings Lane
entrance arriving at about 1430 hours.   They joined the
mass of people waiting to enter the ground and
eventually entered the stadium via the Leppings Lane
turnstiles at approximately 1445 hours.   Carl and Lee
made their way along the tunnel and into enclosure 3,
but they became separated almost immediately.   Lee did
not see Carl again.

Following the severe crushing in the Leppings Lane
terracing, Police Sergeant Andrew Eddison made his way
to enclosure 3. Together with other officers he
assisted to remove a number of people from the
terracing.  Sergeant Eddison states that it is possible
that Carl was one of these persons.

Police Constable Andrew Pratt found Carl lying on the
pitch at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.    The
officer checked for signs of life but was unable to find
any.   Together with the assistance of Liverpool
supporters who have not been identified, Police
Constable Pratt carried Carl to the gymnasium where a
temporary mortuary had been set up.

At 1603 hours Dr. Andrew Byrne examined Carl at the
temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

At 0310 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 1989, Mr. Terence
Brown identified the body of his son to Police Constable
Pratt.  This was at the temporary mortuary.   The
officer later escorted the body of Carl to the Medico
Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
Detective Constable Simon Weigold.
                             On Monday, 17th April, 1989, Dr. John Clark carried out
                             an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of death.
                             Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the blood
                             sampling from the deceased where the presence of ethanol
                             was detected.   The witnesses proving continuity of the
                             blood sample are Detective Constable Anthony Winfield,
                             Detective Sergeant John Turner and Detective Sergeant
                             James Fletcher.   Dr. Alexander Robert Forrest carried
                    B        out the analysis.

                             Lee Walls confirms that he entered the stadium with
                             Carl.   They entered via a turnstile at approximately
                             1445 and his complete ticket was taken by the operator.
                             No ticket or counterfoil was found in the personal
                             effects of Carl.

                             This concludes my evidence, sir.

                         , Can I just go back with regard to timings?   These young
                           people arrived I think you said at 1355 hours? - A. That
                           is right.

                             Then if you look at the statement there is some conflict
                    D        as to how near they parked.   One person said two miles
                             and another one said half a mile? - A. That is right.

                        Q. However, in fact in the statement where the half mile
                           occurs, which is page 8, they took their time, whether
                           it was a half mile   ortwo miles and Lee Alex Walls says
                           at about 2.45 theydecided to go towards the turnstiles.
                           This is not an exact quote, this is the sense? - A. that
                    E      is right, yes.

                        Q. So if that is right, then if they went towards the
                           turnstile at 2.45, presumably they must have entered
                           somewhat later than that? - A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q.    You cannot say what time it was because none of   them
                             actually say precisely? - A. No.

                        Q. I want you to turn     topage 18, if you would, about   half
                           way down.   Line 13     -A. Does it start, "The
                           blockage..."?

                        Q. That is right.   Now that is the evidence of Andrew
                           Eddison, or part of the evidence of Andrew Eddison? - A.
                           That is right, that is Sergeant Eddison.

                        Q.    What I want to pick out of there is he describes
                             somebody and he says this person was dead.     That is
                             right? - A. Yes, he does.

                             In fact we know from the pathology...    Did you give us
                             the weights?   I know what they are.    It is 80 kg?
                H                                   - 5 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
     DR. CLARK:      Eighty-four kilograms.

Because Sergeant Eddison describes a rather big lad,
shall we say? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Eighty-four kilograms would be on
the heavier side, would it not?

      DR. CLARK:     About twelve to twelve and a half
s tone.

     THE WITNESS:   Sir, if I say that I spoke to
Sergeant Eddision yesterday afternoon.   I had an
appointment with him.   I have explained to Mr. and Mrs.
Brown.   He is unable to say that definitely it was
Carl, although he thinks it is a possibility that the
person he talks about was Carl.

     THE CORONER:   This is really what I was trying to
drive at, that on page 22, and obviously your
conversation, but on page 22 he says, having viewed
various items:

     "It is possible that the man I refer to above is in
     fact Carl."

That is right,     isn't it? - A. That's right.

So there is a bit of a doubt in his mind as to the
identification, is that correct? - A. He is certainly
not able to say it is positively Carl.   He says it is
possibly Carl.

What I want to ask you now is, if it were Carl, then he
says in his statement that at the point of time when he
dealt with him, he was in fact dead? - A. That- is right.

     THE CORONER:   What I am trying to do is to sort
out this question which worries you - quite
understandably - the difficulty is you cannot make
people say what they don't remember and you would not
want to do that:

However, on the assumption that the identification
refers to Carl, then at the point in time when he dealt
with him he had formed the view he was in fact dead? -
A. That is right.

     THE CORONER:      Mr. Fraser, any questions?

     MR. FRASER:   No, there are no questions from the
family, sir, thank you.
                                       Cross-Examined by MRS. NORCLIFFE:

                        Q. Officer, just one point.     I think you advise us that
                             this young man and his friends arrived at the ground at
                             1430 and I think, sir, from something you have just
                             said, they arrived at the ground at 1430... - A. That is
                    B        correct.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   1430 or 1445? - A. They arrived at
                             the ground at 1430 and they...

                        Q. Yes, that is right, you are quite correct. - A. "As we
                             walked to the ground we took our time and arrived
                             outside the ground at about 1430."

                        Q. Yes, you are quite right. - A. Then they wait for a
                             little while and it says:

                                  "It was a mass of people outside.  We hung about
                                  until about 2.45 pm and then decided to go towards
                                  the turnstiles."

                    D             MRS. NORCLIFFE:      Sir,   that clarifies the point I
                             was going to raise.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   I think the     sense of the statement
                             is that they got there at 2.30,     did not make straight
                             for the turnstiles, for reasons     we don't know, decided
                             to go towards the turnstiles at     1445 and there was a
                             mass of people, so one presumes     it took a little while
                    E        to actually get there, but they     don't say what time they
                             actually got through.   That is     right, isn't it?   I
                             have summarised it correctly? -     A. That is correct, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:      Anything arising out of that, Mr.
                             Fraser?

                                  MR. FRASER:    No, thank you,     sir.


                                   DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                                                 By THE CORONER:

                                  THE WITNESS:   Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
                             West Midlands Police.

                        Q. Yes, officer. - A. Sir, an examination has been made of
                           visual evidence, but at this point in time no visual
                           identification has been made.



                    H
                                                      - 7 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                          Lee Walls has signed a plan of the terraces indicating
                          the position at which he last saw Carl and that plan has
                          been given the reference number LW.l

                          Sergeant Eddison, as you have      heard, sir, identified
                          himself on a BBC video at the      gate of enclosure number
                          3.   It is in that particular      area that he believes the
                    B     person who may have been Carl      was actually found.

                          Sir, the reference for that video tape is MAP.7, timed
                          at 1521.54.03.

                          Police Constable Pratt has signed a plan of the pitch
                          indicating the location at which he found Carl.   That,
                          sir, is referenced AP.l.

                          Mrs. Brown, Carl's mother, spent some four hours with
                          us, sir, in an effort to find Carl on video or
                          photographs.   She made a very determined effort but
                          unfortunately we were unable to find anything.

                        Q. Yes.   There are not very many cases where you have
                           found no visual evidence and even less where the family
                    D      have participated.   This must be one of the very few? -
                           A. Unfortunately, sir, yes.

                        Q. It is just one of those things. - A. Sir, can I refer
                           you to a plan which has been given the reference number
                           LW.l?

                        Q. C.74. - A. The plan by PC Pratt,     sir, AP.l.
                    E
                        Q. That will be C.75.- A. Sir, if we can deal with Lee
                           Walls' plan, LW.l, this is enclosure number 3. The
                           point at which he feels he last saw Carl was in this
                           position h e r e . That is in enclosure number 3. In
                           respect of PC Pratt, sir, the plan AP.l, the point he
                           has indicated is in this position here on the pitch.

                        Q. It is right that this is a recollection?   This is not
                           based on visual evidence and therefore... - A. It is a
                           recollection, sir.   I am aware in fact that Mrs. Brown
                           has seen PC Pratt so she has had the opportunity to go
                           into that aspect in some detail.

                                THE CORONER:    Yes,    thank you.      Any questions of
                           the officer?

                                MR. FRASER:    No,    thank you, sir.

                                 THE CORONER:  Mr. and Mrs. Brown, that is all we
                           are going to do today with regard to the evidence on
                           Carl.

                    H                                - 8 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
     It must have been very hard for you to try and look
through all the photographs and then to be doubly
disappointed at having spent so long and not to have
found him on any of the visual evidence that you looked
at.   I am amazed, quite honestly, that people have been
able to find their sons and daughters on some of the
photographs because it is so difficult to do.   Of
course as you know because you looked at them, people
get obscured by others and it is very, very hard.

     As far as we could we wanted to try and do this
because we knew that people wanted to know as much as
they could, but in the end one just has to accept that
occasionally one just cannot get there.

     I appreciate very much indeed that you are here and
also that you had put all this effort into helping the
West Midlands Police and, therefore, me, in sorting some
of the matters out with which we have to deal.     I would
like you   to know how very much all of us would wish to
feel for   you and with you in the loss which you have
suffered.

     We are going to rise now, ladies and gentlemen, and
then we will deal with the next case.     If you would
allow Dr. Clark to give his evidence in the next case
and then   talk to you because he will be under rather
less pressure to rush, so to speak, and you will have
the benefit of his rather more undivided time.

     (The inquest on CARL BROWN was adjourned to a date
                    to be fixed)
