                                                                                          MIR.15



  OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised     -? - r ./o S ~ /3r o                Number


  Title                                 0 3 1             ~ 1 ^7       & <Z -A *r\A t-\   V ^< b £ C g ^

  (Include source and any document number i f relevant)                                         \O 4^)

'^F^]ceivers instructions - urgent action - Yes/No                                                                        Receiver




                                                                                                                          Indexer
  Document registered/indexed as indicated

  No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                      Statement Reader
  Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                          Indexer

   Indexed as indicated      VQsca

   No(s) of actions raised

   Examined - further action to be taken
                                                                                               tff
                                                                                                •j? t   ^
                                                                                                                                    S IO

                                                                                               -f-f—    $-




                                                                                                                           Indexer
   Further action No(s)

   When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST D I S T R I C T )



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                  STADIUM DISASTER

               ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



              INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                GRAHAM J OHN ROBERTS




                         Before

DR. S.L.    POPPER,   LL.B,    B .M E D .S c i , B M , B S , MRCGP

               (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                              At

              The Medico-Legal Centre,
                   Watery Street,
                     Sheffield.

                              On

                      30th April 1990




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          APPEARANCES:



MR.    D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors'   Group
                              Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH                  Medical and Dental Union of
                              Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                              Forrest)

MR.      CALLAGHAN            Trent Regional Health Authority and
                              South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                              Ambulance Service

MR.      GREGORY              Sheffield City Council

MISS      THORPE              Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN              Police Federation of England and
                              Wales

MR. P. ISAACS                 Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS.    B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire
MR.    P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                             INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT



                                                                   Page

                    B
                    o ’ENING BY THE CORONER                          1   .
                    D l.   JOHN CLARK Called

                            By THE CORONER                           2   .
                            Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER             3.
                            Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB               4.
                    c       Further by THE CORONER                   5.

                    p 3LICE CONSTABLE GILLIAN PARKS Called

                            By TH E CORONER                          5.
                            Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER             9.
                            Furhter by THE CORONER                  10   .
                        1TECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                            By THE CORONER                           11      ,




                    E




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        Monday,   30th April,   1990


                                        THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                                                GRAHAM JOHN ROBERTS
                    B

                                MR. FRASER:    Sir, you will now hear evidence
                           relating to Graham Roberts.   Graham's parents and his
                           fiancee and members of his family are present in court
                           with a social worker.   The solicitors who represent
                           the family are a member practice of my group and I
                           therefore appear as a member of the steering committee
                           on the usual basis on their behalf.

                                THE CORONER:    Mr. and Mrs. Roberts, I will
                           outline to you the procedure so that you can follow the
                           form in which this inquest will be conducted.     I am
                           going to read to you in a moment the evidence which was
                           taken on the 19th of April, 1989.    Then I am going to
                    D      make any necessary corrections, if any, in that.    Tell
                           you what the blood alcohol was, listen to the
                           pathologist, who will tell us of his findings.    Then we
                           will turn to the West Midlands Police Officer who will
                           present the summary.    When that has been done
                           Inspector Layton will tell us about the visual
                           evidence.   The visual evidence is presented from there
                           in the first instance.    Sometimes it is a bit
                    E      confusing because we talk about plans and a lot of
                           reference numbers.    We need those for the record, but
                           when he has presented the evidence he comes over here
                           and on these big plans he shows us what he is talking
                           about so it all becomes much clearer as it goes along.

                                All the people have already taken the oath in
                           respect of the inquests with which they are concerned.

                                This then is a resumed inquest which was opened on
                           the 19th  of April, 1989.   On that occasion Neil
                           Anthony Parkin, acting Coroner's Officer said:

                                  "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
                                  been identified to PC 2964 Sinclair of the South
                                  Yorkshire Police as that of Graham John Roberts by
                                  Paul Dunderdale, his friend.

                                  He was 24 years of age having been born on the 5th
                                  of May, 1964 at Liverpool.

                                  He w as a single man and lived at
                                             Merseyside, Wirral.
                    H
                                                       - 1 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
    He was an engineer,      Gas Board,       by occupation.

     He died at Hillsborough football ground following
     an incident there on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.

    PC Sinclair caused the body to be moved to the
    Medico Legal Centre and there he identified it to
    Detective Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently
    identified the same body to Professor Usher and
    Dr. Clark.

     It is the family wish that the body should be
     buried ."

      I then circulated a form and it was signed by Mr.
Stanley Roberts on the 28th of April, 1989.    I think I
may h ave misread the address.   It should be
     I Wallasey, Merseyside, but all the rest of the
information is correct.   We have re-described him as a
Gas Board engineer.

     Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol estimations and
he gave evidence of these on the first day of the
resumed inquests.   In respect of Graham the level was
79 mg/100 ml.

     Dr. Clark.

                  DR. JOHN CLARK Called

                     By THE C O R O N E R :

     THE WITNESS:   Dr. John Clark, forensic
pathologist at the University of Glasgow.

Now, Dr. Clark, could you just confirm that we are
talking about Graham Roberts who I think is case number
79, sequentially numbered, and tell us the relevant
findings? - A. Right.  Graham died from crush asphyxia.
This was based on finding very marked signs of asphyxia
in the face.   That is, his face was rather florid.    It
had a blue discolouration and there were a large number
of little hemorrhages on the skin coming down on to his
chest and also his internal organs.    This was
indicative of his chest having been crushed, preventing
him breathing.   It is very likely, as with everyone
else, that within about ten or fifteen seconds of his
chest having been crushed he would have lost
consciousness and then would have died within three or
four minutes or so.     The bulk of the pressure killing
him happened after he had lost consciousness.

He did have a number of injuries on the surface.
There were a number of bruises and grazes on his face
                        and on his back and on his arms.  Some of these were
                        old, but the bulk were fresh and some were probably
                        caused by gripping.   The bruises on his arms would be
                        caused by gripping, other people gripping him.




                    B

                                                              So just coming
                        back for a moment, you say, as you have said of course
                        on other occasions, that in a crush asphyxial situation
                        loss of consciousness supervenes within seconds? - A.
                        That is right, yes.

                        You have indicated that if the situation is not
                        relieved within three, four or five minutes, then
                        irretrievable damage has been done? - A. That is right.

                        The irretrievable damage is in the brain?    That is
                        where the damage occurs? - A. That is right.    It is
                        because there is no oxygen getting to the brain.    The
                    D   brain is very sensitive to lack of oxygen and if there
                        is no oxygen getting into the lungs the brain is
                        deprived of it and that goes in stages.   The first
                        stage is loss of consciousness and thereafter permanent
                        damage to the brain cells occurs and thereafter the
                        next stage is death of the brain cells occurs and once
                        that happens the person is dead.
                    E              Cross-Examined by MR. F R A S E R :

                        Dr. Clark, is it possible to offer a view as to what
                        would have been the effect if perhaps once
                        unconsciousness occurs, immediately thereafter the
                        crush is lifted and that therefore some form of
                        assistance could have been given to Graham, can you
                        offer a view as to first of all what would have been
                        needed to have been done to help him and secondly, what
                        sort of timescale the rescuer would have had to work
                        within before any irreparable damage was done to the
                        brain?   I appreciate you say the final loss of life
                        sometimes takes a few minutes, but is it possible to
                        shorten that and to say at what point perhaps
                        resuscitation might have worked? - A. I would have
                        thought that probably permanent damage to the brain
                        would occur within two minutes or so.

                        Of the loss of consciousness? - A. Well, no, probably
                        two minutes from the start - you know, you have got
                        fifteen seconds.   If he had received help within, say,
                        two minutes of his chest having been crushed, there is
                        a possibility that even though although he had lost
                H
                                              - 3 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                          consciousness at that stage, he could have regained
                          consciousness.   That would be applying oxygen.
                          Giving oxygen back to the body.   It is possible the
                          brain cells could recover to some extent and he may
                          have regained consciousness.

                        Q. Suppose, as a hypothesis, that had happened, and that
                    B      air had got back in to the airways and the blood had
                           started to circulate after the crushing and that Graham
                           had then subsequently lost his life within a few
                           minutes of his recovery, as it were, would the cause of
                           death still be crush asphyxia or would you be looking
                           for another cause? - A. I am not entirely sure what you
                           are saying there.   That he has lost consciousness...

                        Q. And regained it.    - A,    ..and regained it and thereafter
                           dies?

                        Q. Yes.   Would he still have about him when you examined
                           hi m the classic signs you have described of crush
                           asphyxia? - A. Yes.    The signs of petechia, even
                           though a person recovers and lives, do remain for days,
                           and particularly in Graham because they were very
                    D      intense signs.

                        Q. If he had recovered and had been breathing, however
                           shallowly, then as I understand it, crush asphyxia
                           would not be the cause of death and there would have to
                           be another cause? - A. Yes, I think so.   That is
                           right.

                    E   Q. Was there anything at your examination to suggest any
                           other cause? - A. No.

                                 MR. FRASER:   I don't think I can take it any
                                ter.
                           further     Thank you, Dr. Clark.

                                        Cross-Examined by MR. L I M B :

                        Q. Dr. Clark, can I just ask you this:   in your summary of
                           the PM you spoke in terms of there being very marked
                           signs of asphyxia.   Does that give any assistance in
                           determining, as an educated opinion, whether the crush
                           abated or whether it was considerable and for a
                           sustained period of minutes, or can no conclusion be
                           drawn? - A. I don't think you can get a 100%
                           conclusion.   I think what it does show that there has
                           been very marked pressure, very intense pressure, and
                           probably quite prolonged pressure on his chest.
                           Whether for a short period that wais relieved and then
                           started again I don't know.   I think it is indicative
                           there certainly was very severe pressure on his chest.

                                THE CORONER:      Anything else, Mr. Fraser?
                    H
                                                      - 4 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                    A           MR. FRASER:      No,   thank you,       sir.

                                         Further by THE C O R O N E R :

                        Q. I suppose occasionally people might call it hypoxic
                           brain damage, but I think it is semantics more than
                           anything, isn't it? - A. Yes.   The basic cause, if you
                           like, in lay terms, is because his chest has been
                           crushed.   From a purely medical point of view there
                           are a lot of stages after that, but I think it helps
                           no-one to pursue that too much.   The basic thing is he
                           died because his chest was crushed.



                    c




                    D

                                You don't want to ask anything about that, Mr.
                           Fraser, do you?

                                MR. FRASER:     No, sir.

                    E           THE CORONER:    The family were bound to know it,
                           anyway.

                                  POLICE CONSTABLE GILLIAN PARKS Called

                                               By THE C O R O N E R :

                                THE WITNESS:   Gillian Parks,           a Police Constable
                           of the West Midlands Police.

                           Can you take me through the summary please? - A.
                           Between 1030 and 1045 hours on Saturday, 15th April,
                           1989, Mr. Stanley Roberts saw his son Graham John
                           Roberts leave the family home.   It was his intention
                           to travel to Sheffield to watch the FA Cup semi final
                           football match at the Hillsborough Stadium.

                           Graham travelled to Sheffield with several friends,
                           including Paul Dunderdale and Kenneth Fellowes.  They
                           travelled in two cars and left Wallasey at about 1100
                           hours that day.  Graham Roberts travelled in a car
                           driven by Paul Dunderdale.

                    H
                                                  - 5 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
Upon arrival in Sheffield the group of friends,
including Graham, stopped at a public house where they
all had about two pints to drink.  After approximately
45 minutes they left the public house and parked the
vehicles a short distance away from the stadium.   The
group then made their way on foot to the Leppings Lane
turnstiles, arriving at about 1440 hours.  Graham and
his friend joined the mass of people waiting to enter
the stadium.  After approximately ten minutes the
concertina gate, gate C, was opened and Graham and his
friends entered the stadium through this gate.

They made their way along the tunnel.   Kenneth
Fellowes was forced into enclosure 3 by the pressure of
the people behind him and ended up within a few feet of
the front perimeter fence.   He could see Graham
approximately two yards to his right, a few feet from
the front perimeter fence.   Pressure from behind
increased and this was the last time Kenneth Fellowes
saw Graham.

Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
terracing, Police Constable Yates arrived at the
entrance to the tunnel that runs under the West Stand.
About fifteen to twenty feet from the tunnel entrance
he saw a male whom he now believes to be Graham Roberts
lying on the concourse.

Police Constable Yates went to him and saw the body of
a teen-aged youth lying concealed beneath him.     This
youth was attended to by other officers.    Police
Constable Yates formed the opinion that Graham appeared
dead.   He left hi m in the prone position where he had
found him and returned to the tunnel to assist others.

Police Inspector Kerry Grace attended the rear of the
West Stand together with Detective Inspector Peter
Webster.   The officers saw numerous apparently dead
person laid out in the concourse area and organised
their removal to an area outside the perimeter of the
ground adjacent to the river in Leppings Lane.

Police Constable Andrew Best was also in the concourse
area at this time.   He recalls Graham Roberts as a
person he believed he dealt with in the concourse area.
Together with other officers, who have not been
identified, Graham was carried on to Leppings Lane
where other bodies were laid out.

Police Constable Best believed Graham Roberts was
breathing at this time and left him to assist others.
When he returned with another casualty he formed the
opinion that Graham was in fact dead.   The officer
again returned to the West Stand to assist others.
                           Police Constable Carl Sinclair attended Leppings Lane
                           and was allocated the body of Graham Roberts.

                          At approximately 1625 hours that same day, Dr. John
                          Ashton attended Leppings Lane end and certified life
                          extinct on a number of persons, one being Graham.

                          Police Constable Sinclair then escorted the body of
                    B     Graham to the temporary mortuary which had been set up
                          in the gymnasium of the stadium.   At 0140 hours on
                          Sunday, 16th April, 1989, Paul Dunderdale identified
                          the body of Graham to Police Constable Sinclair in the
                          temporary mortuary in the gymnasium.

                          Police Constable Sinclair later escorted Graham to the
                          Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
                          Detective Constable Simon Weigold.

                           On the 16th of April, 1989, following identification by
                           Detective Constable Weigold, Dr. John Clark carried out
                           an autopsy and submitted a report giving his cause of
                           death.

                    D     Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                          blood sample taken from Graham where the presence of
                          ethanol was detected.  Witnesses proving continuity of
                          the blood sample are Detective Constable Thomas
                          Bardell, Detective Sergeant John Turner and Detective
                          Sergeant James Fletcher.    Dr. Alexander Robert
                          Forrest carried out an analysis.

                    E      Found in the personal effects of Graham was a full
                           match ticket, which confirmed his entry to the ground
                           via gate C, as described by Paul Dunderdale and Kenneth
                           Fellowes.

                        Q. If we just turn back to Mr. Yates for a moment.   That
                           is the officer who formed the impression that the
                           person he was dealing with was dead, that is right? -
                           A. That is right, sir.

                        Q. He describes him quite clearly as having a tee shirt,
                           is that right, pages 69 and 70? - A. He had a light
                           coloured sleeveless tee shirt on and jeans.

                        Q. He also is absolutely clear in his mind there was
                    G      nothing more he could do to help the lad, as far as he
                           could judge? - A. He did say that, sir, yes.

                        Q. In fact he then gives a further statement at page 70
                           and he identifies the person who he thinks he deals
                           with from clothing, is that right? - A. From clothing,
                           yes  sir.

                H
                                                - 7 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        Q. He says:

                                  "I am 95% sure this is the person I describe."

                             - A. That is correct.

                        Q. He does repeat that his recollection is that he was
                           wearing a light coloured sleeveless tee shirt type top?
                    B      - A. that is right, sir.

                        Q.   I think it is right, and perhaps Inspector Layton will
                             confirm that later, that the photograph of the clothing
                             which we have, NA.79, does not show a tee shirt? - A.
                             No, there is no top clothing whatsoever, sir.

                        Q. So he is really basing his identification on a pair of
                           jeans and one or two other items of the lower clothing?
                           - A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q. And rew Best on page 75, he describes attending, I
                           think, at the back of the North Stand, at about 3.10,
                           about six lines down, is that right? - A. "I made my
                           way back under the North Stand towards Leppings Lane."
                    D
                        Q. "At approximately 3.10 I made my way back..."   Then
                           presumably he arrives at the rear of Leppings Lane? -
                           A. "On arrival at the rear..."

                        Q. Yes.   He there describes...   He says he helped a
                           large man, about 25 to 30, fair hair, not wearing a
                           shirt, is that right? - A. That is correct, sir.
                    E
                        Q. He says:

                                  "He was breathing when I put him in the lane.
                                  Moments later when I returned with someone else I
                                  saw that he was dead.   I was shocked that this
                                  would happen at a football match."

                             That is all he says?    - A. Yes,    sir.

                        Q. Just a small point on paragraph 12.  We have used the
                           word "confirms", but it is probably more correct to use
                           the words "consistent with"? - A. That is right, sir.

                        Q. There is a clear statement from Mr. Dunderdale to say
                           that they came through gate C? - A. That is correct,
                    G      sir.

                        Q. The full match ticket obviously is consistent with
                           that? - A. That is correct, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:      Mr. Fraser?

                H                                    - 8 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
             Cross-Examined by MR.    FRASER:

Officer, you heard the questions I put to Dr. Clark.
The family are obviously concerned about the
possibility of their son perhaps still breathing when
the officer left him.   Does the officer say anything
in his statement about perhaps the position of Graham
when he left him, or is it possible he may have had
some sort of coherent exchange with him?   I do not
suggest a conversation, but was he breathing to the
extent that the officer formed the view that he knew
what was going on around him? - A. PC Best you are
referring to?

Yes.

     THE CORONER:   I did read you, I think, all that
is relevant in the statement with regard to this
episode.   The officer can look through the statement
but she will not find an answer to your question.   By
all means have a look in case I have missed anything.

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, you will appreciate the
significance of the question, I am sure.

       THE CORONER:     Oh, yes.

     THE WITNESS:    As we read before, the extract we
read, his only mention of Graham, it is very brief and
that is all it says.

     MR. FRASER:    He mentions being with him and then
leaving him for a little while and then going back to
him.   Is there anywhere else in the statement during
which that time period can be estimated? - A. He just
refers, as he says:

       "Moments later I returned with someone else.      I
       saw that he was dead.

So it is moments?     - A. Moments.

     THE CORONER:    He does not, of course, mention
this person by name.    He mentions him as I read it, a
man whom he describes.

       MR. FRASER:      I appreciate that,   sir.

     THE CORONER:      We   have to be careful that we don't
over-state it.

     MR. FRASER:    I appreciate that, sir, but it is
obviously a point that concerns the family:
In the evidence of Constable Yates, is he able to put
times on events to any...   He went to the rear of the
West Stand, I think you said, and he saw Graham and
formed the view that at that stage he was dead.
Again, is it possible from his evidence to offer the
time that he formed that view? - A. Page 68, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, it is perfectly all right for
you to say what it says there, what time he got there.
What time was it? - A. Police Constable Yates said:

     "It was about 3.05 pm when I arrived at the
     entrance to the tunnel."

Then he goes on to refer to the person he believes to
be Graham, fifteen to twenty feet from the entrance, so
it is about that time.

     MR. FRASER:   Constable Best is not able to put a
time at the time that he saw Graham?

     THE CORONER:     I think the nearest we got was:

     "At approximately 3.10 I made my way back under
     the North Stand towards Leppings Lane to return to
     my Serial."

     MR. FRASER:    Just to have an idea of the
timescale of events, sir, that is all.    Thank you,
officer.

              Further by THE C O R O N E R :

Perhaps you could just deal with this one point on Mr.
Yates s evidence.  He does actually say that he put
this gentleman in a prone position, does not he?    He
says:

     "I pulled the man off the youth and put him in the
     prone position."

A. That is correct.

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, my recollection was that he
found him in the prone position.

     THE WITNESS:     Can I read that section?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, read it. - A. "I went to him
and I bent over him and I realised that partially
concealed by him was a teen-aged youth.    I pulled the
man off the youth and put him in the prone position and
other officers attended to the youth. '
                             MR. FRASER:     Thank you, officer.

                             THE CORONER:    Dr. Clark, anything you want to add
                        to your evidence in the light of what we have heard
                        with regard to this?

                             DR. CLARK:    I don't think so,        sir, no.
                    B
                             DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                                           By THE C O R O N E R :

                             THE WITNESS:   Sir, I am Michael Layton,          Detective
                        Inspector of the West Midlands Police.

                        Yes, officer. - A. Sir, an examination has been made of
                        video and photographic evidence.    Mr. David John
                        Carden who was wit h a group that travelled to the match
                        with Graham has identified a person who he believes may
                        be Graham on the terraces in enclosure number 3.    Sir,
                        photographs referring to that possible identification
                        specifically are referenced PR.1/13A and PR.1/14A.
                        Sir, both of those photographs are in fact timed at
                    D   1503.   Mr. Carden has also indicated on a plan of the
                        terraces the position at which he last saw Graham and
                        that plan is referenced DC.l.

                        PC Yates who has viewed photographs of the deceased
                        and, as you have heard, a clothing photograph and he
                        identifies Graham as a person he possibly dealt with in
                        the concourse area at the rear of the West Stand.    He
                    E   states he found Graham approximately 15 to 20 feet from
                        the entrance to the tunnel.   Sir, the officer has
                        signed a sketch plan indicating the position at which
                        he found Graham in the concourse area and that is
                        referenced CA.l, sir.

                        PC Best has viewed photographs and identifies Graham as
                        a person he believes he dealt with in the concourse
                        area at the rear of the West Stand near to the tunnel
                        entrance.   He states that he helped to carry Graham
                        into Leppings Lane where he also saw other deceased.

                        Sir, it has not been possible to identify the persons
                        who carried Graham from the enclosure to the rear of
                        the West Stand.
                    G
                        Can I just get this right.   PR.1/13A, which is David
                        John Carden, is timed at 1503, is that right? - A. That
                        is right, sir.

                        Have you got the time on the other one, PR.1/14A?          - A.
                        They are both timed at 1503.

                H
                                              - 11 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
The evidence which we have heard about Mr. Yates is
that he...   I am not saying he dealt with this person
at 1503, but that is when he started making his way
towards the back of... - A. That is right, sir.

There is no visual evidence to confirm that,    is there?
- A. No, sir.

Or, indeed, the evidence of Mr. Best as to what time he
got to the concourse area? - A. That is right, sir,
yes.   Sir, that plan is referenced MWJL.96.

That will be C.164. - A. Sir, can I refer you to the
plan of David Carden, which is referenced DC.l?

That will be C.165.   - A. A further plan, MWJL.161.

C.166. - A. Which will relate to the plan CAY.l,    the
concourse area.

Sir, if I deal with Mr. Carden's plan first, that is
DC.l, I think that is probably strictly more
chronological.     In fact Mr. Carden indicated a point
just h e r e . This is enclosure 3, this area here and
the point he has indicated is just in the mouth of the
tunnel at the terrace end and in that location t h e r e .

Then, sir, in respect of the possible identifications,
sir - as I say, they have not been confirmed - but the
position that he has indicated in respect of Graham is
there in that location.   Again in enclosure number 3.
Then, sir, in respect of the plan MWJL.161, and
specifically referring to CAY.l, the officer's plan,
this is the concourse area here and this is the
position h e r e .

That is Mr. Yates? - A. That is right, sir.   This is
the tunnel, the concourse, and that is the position
indicated.

Have we got the location of Mr. Best as well on that? -
A. No, sir, I don't think so.

You have got two markers which I assumed one was Mr.
Best and one was... - A. No, that does not relate to
Mr. Best.

What does the second marker relate to? - A. It relates
to a further sighting of Graham.   It is the position
at which the bodies were placed afterwards by the
river.

That, in a sense, is what Mr. Best says?   Doesn't he^
say that he took him... - A. That is right, sir, but it
                             is not actually his plan reference,         but that is the
                             same location, but I can...

                        Q. Can you just point that out? - A.           It is basically
                           opposite gate C, by the river.

                        Q. Can you point to Mr. Yates's position first?           - A. H e r e ,
                    B        sir-
                        Q. And then the young man was moved to there? - A. H e r e ,
                           sir.

                                  THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen of the Jury, I
                             told you there were several collecting points and that
                             was in fact the area where quite a lot of people who
                             had come up through the tunnel and who unfortunately
                             died were collected before they were moved to the
                             temporary mortuary at the gymnasium.

                                    Mr.   Fraser?

                                    MR. FRASER:     No,   thank you,    sir.

                    D             MR. LIMB:   Just a question by way of information.
                             What does C.164 relate to?   I am wondering what it
                             relates to, sir.

                                    THE CORONER:    MWJL.96:

                        Q. Can you just remind us what that evidence is?   It is
                           one of the photographic... - A. That is right.
                    E      MWJL.96 refers to the possible identification by Mr.
                           Carden and again from the detail shown in the
                           photographs it would be very difficult for me to say at
                           what stage of the process we are at.   There is not a
                           lot of detail actually shown.

                        Q.        MR. LIMB:   That is the possible sighting in front
                             of the barrier that was broken? - A. That is right.
                             Here.

                        Q.          THE CORONER:    PL.1/13A,   where is that? - A. H e r e ,
                             sir.

                        Q. Where is PL.1/14A?         It if virtually identical?      - A.   It
                           is, sir, yes.
                    G
                        Q. Those are the ones       timed at 1503?     - A. That is right,
                           sir.

                                  THE CORONER:   Mr. and Mrs. Roberts, I am afraid
                             coming to this inquest is obviously a very harrowing
                             experience for everybody and for you as well.   We have
                             heard quite a lot of evidence about plans and timings
                H
                                                      - 13 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        and numbers and all kinds of things which are, of
                        course, very important because they give us some idea
                        of what has happened or what has not happened, as the
                        case may be.

                              I do want to warn you that you must be very
                        careful with recollections of positioning or, indeed,
                    B   times.    Where we have got hard photographic evidence
                        with the time on it then we can reasonably say we are
                        certain.    When we rely on what people remember then
                        one has to take into account that none of us are
                        terribly good at remembering times, at the best of
                        times, and we are even worse at it when we are in a
                        stress situation.    Although all the times we have been
                        given by the officer as they are in the statement, you
                    C   must remember that people were not walking around
                        looking at their wristwatch at any particular point in
                        time.    They had other things to think about.    That
                        does not mean to say that the times are not accurate,
                        but we cannot be absolutely certain of it.

                             Having said that, I do want to say that I am
                        exceedingly sorry that you should have had this
                    D   terrible tragic loss in your family life and that
                        Graham should have lost his life on this occasion at
                        this football match.   There were many other people who
                        lost their lives, I know that, we all know that, but at
                        the moment we are dealing with your inquest, your
                        Graham, nobody else, and I want you to know that we are
                        conscious of that and that he is unique, just as I have
                        said this in respect of others.   They were unique to
                    E   their families.   He is unique to you and very special.
                        Thank you for coming this afternoon.

                         (The inquest into the death of GRAHAM JOHN ROBERTS
                                was adjourned to a date to be fixed)



                    F




                    G




                H
                                             - 14 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
