HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT) •




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

           20th February, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, L td .»
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




D.J. LOCK Recalled

     Cross-Examined    by Mr. King (Cont)
     Cross-Examined    by Mr. Toulson
     Cross-Examined    by Mrs. McBrien
     Cross-Examined    by Mr. Russell
     Cross-Examined    by Mr. Hale
     Cross-Examined    by Mr. Isaacs
     Cross-Examined    by Mr. Manning
     Further by The    Coroner
     Cross-Examined    by Mr. Catchpole

C.E. NICHOLSON Sworn

     By The Coroner
         FIFTY FOURTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

          WEDNESDAY # 20 th FEBRUARY 1991

                DOUGLAS JOHN LOCK

         Cross-Examined by MR. KING (cont.)

Mr. Lock, you gave us an example yesterday of the postponing
of kick-off from your experience when a great number of
fans arrived at the Penistone Road end. Do you remember
that example you gave? - A. I do sir.

Just out of interest how long ago was that, roughly? - A . ,
I would think it would be about 1983 sir. I may be wrong
but I think it would be then.

The example you gave developed itself because you spoke
about the fact there was a great deal of anxiety of the
fans to get in? - A. That is correct.

What do you mean by that? - A. Well people start to push
and shove and they want to get in obviously and they are
concerned that they are going to miss the kick«=*6ff.

In your experience, therefore, is that something which can
be anticipated? Is the Natural likelihood if you get a
great deal of fans arriving very shortly before kick-off,
that is to say you can anticipate there will be anxiety
to get in? - A. Yes.

And there will be pushing and shoving and so forth? - A.
Quite.

Now of course the Penistone Road end we know is a wide
open expanse, isn't it? - A. It is.

Notwithstanding that even at the Penistone Road end you
had experience of that anxiety? - A. Well it is a wide
road but of course it is a very busy road for traffic
and the footpath does not accommodate everybody, they
spill out.

Of course the Leppings Lane is very different from the
Penistone Road as far as configuration and layout is
concerned, isn't it? - A. It is sir.

You have a much more narrow bottleneck effect at the
Leppings Lane entrances, don't you? - A. You do sir.

So if you get a great deal of spectators arriving at that
end shortly before kicke6ff, you are increasing the
problems compared with Penistone Road as regards the
effect of anxiety on the fans? - A. Well you don't have
the anxiety of the traffic but you have got the funnelling
into that area on the outside of the turnstiles.
                                                              2



                                      D.J. LOCK


Q. Which is much more confined? - A. Yes.

Q. Clearly therefore a situation where a great deal of
   people arrive shortly before kick-off, if one can
   anticipate, one would like to be able to anticipate to
   prepare for it, if one could? - A. Yes.

Q. And you agree with me that as far as anticipating that
   sort of problem with an all ticket game, one of the ways
   of anticipating it is observations from within the ground
   as to how the terraces are filling up over the previous
   hour or so? - A. That is one of the ways, yes sir.

Q. You yourself were not in a position were you, as Iunder-,
   stand it in 1989, to be viewing the terraces within the
   ground, actually looking at them from within the ground
   itself? - A. No sir, we are underneath a Stand. We can't
   see outside.

Q. We had heard evidence, I think it was from Mr. Wells who
   was an Ambulanceman who had been from about 10-past-2
   onwards actually in the ground, that is in the pitch
   area, and he had made observations of noticing at the
   Liverpool end a much slower build-up of fans than previous
   years. Now you would not have been in a position to see
   that, would you? - A. No, I wouldn't sir.

Q. But that is the sort of information which can be helpful
   to anybody trying to anticipate whether there are still
   a large number of people to come, isn't it? - A. Quite.

Q. Can I just ask you this finally on these matters.   You
   were in the Club Room weren't you? - A. I was.

Q. Do you ever recall Police Inspector Darling coming to
   the Club Room some time at about 2 o'clock or perhaps
   shortly before? - A. No, I don't sir.

Q. Do you recall yourself at about 2 o'clock or perhaps
   shortly before any observation being made within the
   Club Room using figures which were coming out from the
   print-out or what have you, that at the time I am now
   putting to you, that is 2 o'clock, perhaps shortly before,
   there were only some 12,000 people in the ground in 1989
   as opposed to 20,000 who had been there in 1988? - A. No,
   1 don't recall anyone saying that sir.  I know at about
   2 o'clock time I saw Superintendent Greenwood and I went
   out of the room then because there had been a bit of a
   crush outside the players' entrance, but I don't recall
   anybody saying anything about the disparity in the
   figures between the two years.

Q. I want to try and jog your memory if I can because it
   was not just simply a disparity in the figures, it was
   an observation that the shortfall of 8,000 was particularly
                                                         3


                                        D.J. LOCK



  noticeable at the Liverpool end?   A. Well if anyone did
  say that, and I don't dispute that, I was not aware of
  it.

Q. So be it. Can I just return again for a moment to the
   evidence you gave yesterday about the need when you have
   a capacity game with one set of fans using the Leppings
   Lane terrace, the need to keep an eye on and look at the
   centre pens in particular as they fill up. Can I return
   to that? - A. Yes.

Q. You told the learned Coroner that you regarded the terrace
   as a whole. That is what you said to us yesterday? -
   A. Yes.

Q. You also told my learned friend Mr. Payne:  "Well that was
   for the purpose of the overall capacity but then it is
   a question of where they go"? - A. That is true.

Q. And it is right, isn't it, from what you have told us,
   and I need not go through all the factors again, that once
   you have a heavily populated terrace and can anticipate
   a heavily populated terrace, it is important to look at
   the centre pens as individual units, isn't it? - A. Well
   it is because they are confined by the radial fences.

         MR. KING:   Thank you very much.


                Cross-Examined by MR. TOULSON:

Q. I wonder if acetate 383 can be shown please. Mr. Lock,
   if you could just turn round there. You spoke in your
   evidence about a barrier which was causing a blockage
   j^st as you entered the terraces from the tunnel? - A.
   Yes sir.

Q. It is a little difficult perhaps to see the numbering on
   there, but do you know is it Barrier 144 that you are
   referring to. If you turn round? - A. I have it in front
   of me sir.

Q. If we imagine ourselves coming down the tunnel from the
   top of the screen and then you come down through those
   gates and then immediately in front of you on the right
   as you enter, stage right, left on plan, the stick is
   pointing it out, is that the barrier you are talking
   about? - A. Yes, it is sir.

Q. Barrier in that position which I think we know was 144?
   - A. Well I don't know if that is the number but that
   is the barrier sir.
                                                       4


                                       D.J. LOCK



Q. Thank you for identifying that. . Do I understand your
   evidence that back at the time when you were Superintendent
   in charge of the ground, you were concerned about the safety
   implications of that barrier because it was apt to cause
   blockages? - A. It did cause problems sir, yes.

Q. Next, you were asked by the Coroner what was the highest
   attendance when you were Superintendent in charge of the
   ground and you said that you thought from memory it was a
   figure of around 48,000? - A. Yes sir.

Q. We have been provided with a sheet by the South Yorkshire
   Police of gate figures and I just wonder if I can invite
   you to look at that and see if we can identify the match
   you are talking about. We can have copies made for
   everybody if necessary but I don't imagine it will be.
   May I give you a copy and a copy to the Coroner.

         I think if you look four lines from the bottom of
   the page. You told us that you retired I think did you
   say on the 18th February 1985? - A. I retired on the
   28th February 1985.

Q. It appears on the 2nd February 1985 Wednesday played
   Liverpool at home in the league when there was a recorded
   gate of 48,246? - A. Can I interrupt you there sir?

Q. Yes? - A. I retired on the 28th February 1985 but I stopped
   work on the 22nd December 1984 and the remainder of that
   time was off on Annual Leave and time owing.

Q. So the 48,000, the one that you policed must have been
   ah earlier occasion than that? - A. Yes sir.

Q. It looks from that print-out as if there were over the
   years a number of occasions when gates of 48,000 or
   more were recorded.  I see some four later occasions
   after the 2nd February 1985 when I think you would have
   had the role of Security Officer at the Club? - A. Yes
   sir.

Q. Is it within your knowledge that there were a number of
   occasions when gates of that order or in excess of that
   order would occur? - A. Yes sir.

Q. You told the Coroner and the jury yesterday that during
   your time at Hillsborough two methods were used for
   filling the Leppings Lane end safely. One was you
   described the sequential filling method. Does one
   understand that on those occasions when you were filling
   sequentially that you would keep the gate in the radial
   fences closed? - A. The gates in the radial fences were
   closed sir when we weren't going to use those pens.
                                                        5



                                       D.J. LOCK



Q. Exactly, because that was part of maintaining segregation?
   - A. It was.




                     Q. But I think you
I think you explained when you were expecting a capacity
crowd the method of filling safely was initially to let
spectators enter whichever pen they liked? -A. Yes.

And distribute themselves as they liked? - A. Yes.

Sometimes termed, whether accurately or inaccurately,
"finding their own level"? - A. Yes, sir.

It was your experience, was it, that the central pen
would habitually fill first? - A. I think it is the
situation that occurs at both ends of the ground,
although the Kops not penned, people tend to stand behind
the goal.

According to your evidence, as I understand it, the
filling would therefore be observed? - A. It would, sir.

And, in your words, when the central pen was comfortably
full you would give orders to close it? - A. Yes, sir.

Can I just consider with you for one moment the material
you had available to you when making that decision?
Firstly you had the view from the Control Box which you
have described? - A. Yes.

And I don't want to ask you any more questions about
that.   Secondly, you had reports available to you from
the Police Officers on the ground? - A. We did.

You explained on a number of occasions when, for
instance, Sykes on one occasion, and you named other
Officers, would come to you? - A. Yes.

Thirdly, were you in a position to compare the central
pen with the wing pens and observe whether there was any
marked disparity? - A. Yes, sir.

Although you might not be able to tell individual head
counts and say you could gauge there were so many in
there, as a matter of practical experience was it a
relatively simple matter to see whether there was an
apparent discrepancy between one being markedly fuller
than another? - A. Yes, it was, sir.

Fourthly do I understand you were in a position to know
how many fans were waiting to come in? - A. That's right,
sir.

With that material at your disposal did you have any
difficulty in working the system? - A. No, I never did,
to be honest.
                                                D. J .   LOCK


Was there any problem you encountered in being able to
achieve reasonably even filling? - A. No, because we were
able to close the pens and people would move into the
others.

Or to close the central pen long before there was any
risk of injury? - A. That's right, sir.

Just by way of illustration I wonder if you could look at
photographs which I do not think have gone in of the 1988
semi-final.   SergeantGriffiths I think has a bundle of
these.

     THE CORONER:   Have we got acetates of these?
These are 1989?

     MR. TOULSON:  One is 1989, which I am now told has
already got an acetate and there are three of 1988.

     THE CORONER:   Have we got acetates of the 1988
ones, Sergeant Griffiths?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   Of the photographs in these bundles
we have got acetates.

     THE CORONER:   The first one, what is the number?

     MR. BEECHEY:   C.326A.

     THE CORONER:    In which order are you going to take
the 1988 photographs, because we want to label them?    I
don't think the schedule you have produced, I do not
think we will give it a "C" number because (a) we have
not used it and (b) we got the evidence from you.

     MR. TOULSON:    Would it be convenient to look first
at the photograph which shows the whole of the west end,
and in the left hand corner has the score line,
Nottingham Forest 1, Liverpool 2?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   The one that is being submitted
now, sir, is a better photograph than what we term C.351.
The one we have got does not show the clock and does not
     the scoreboard •

     THE CORONER:   Which year are we talking about?

     MR. TOULSON:   This is 1988.

     THE CORONER:   Just give this a "C" number.

     MR. BEECHEY:   The number is C.489.
                                                    D. J .   LOCK


     THE CORONER:     Is that the one?      Just check I have
got the right one.

     MR. TOULSON: Exactly.     For the jury, that   is the
one which they will be able to see taken at 4.20. If
one looks at the scoreboard the score was Notts. 1,
Liverpool 2.   Then perhaps it would be convenient to
take the second one, the view looking along the terrace,
the west terrace.

     MR.   BEECHEY:   That is C.490.

     MR.   TOULSON:   Lastly the black and white.

     THE   CORONER:   That will be C.491.

     MR. TOULSON:   Now the fourth one I believe has
already got an acetate number, which is the 1989
photograph.   Members of the Jury will find they have got
four copies, the fourth one has got the legend, "Appendix
5. West Terraces 2.59 pm." It is I believe one which has
already got an acetate number.

     THE CORONER:     Yes, that is the one that is C.326A.

     MR. TOULSON: Mr. Lock, I am not going to ask you to
draw comparisons between the 1988 and the 1989
photographs, because we can all do that for ourselves.
I just want to ask you this, looking first at the first
of those three 1988 ones, that is to say, the one with
the score showing on the scoreboard. - A. Yes, sir.

We know that was a capacity crowd.   That sort of
relatively even distribution in the crowd, was that the
sort of distribution you would be able straightforwardly
to obtain? - A. Yes, sir.

As far as the second photograph is concerned, the one
looking along the terrace, does that approximate to the
sort of view you would have from the Control Box? - A.
Yes, approximately, sir.   You can see the Control Box on
the first photograph actually.

So far as the third photograph is concerned, the black
and white one, I think you said in your evidence that it
was customary to station a Serial of Police Officers at
the back of the central pens.   If you look at the black
and white photograph, do you see there a line of what
appear to be police helmets? - A. Yes, sir, I do.    I can
see five.   I can see one clearly and the tops of the
heads of four other Police Officers.

Is that the position you were describing and referring to
when you gave your evidence earlier? - A. Yes, sir.
                                               D.' J .   LOCK


Those three are all the 1988 semi-final.   Can I just ask
you this, because in the course of a questions yesterday,
reference was made to luck being involved and that drew
an objection.   Was there, would you say, any question of
luck involved in being able to close the central pen and
achieve the sort of even distribution you have been
speaking about? - A. No, because you could see what was
happening.

Now may I ask you a hypothetical question?   Suppose when
the question of the introduction of radial fences was
under discussion, either that the City Council's engineer
or the club's engineer had said something of this kind,
without wishing to cause offence, "I don t think the
Police have the means or the skill to be relied on to
close any pen before it becomes dangerously overcrowded."
Am I right in supposing you would expect the answer to
have been, "That s ridiculous"? - A. Yes, sir.




     Q. As far as you are concerned
                                                          10

                                                D. J .   LOCK


Q. As far as you are concerned, would it indeed have been
   ridiculous? - A. Well we performed the function before
   so it would be, sir.

Q. You speak as the man who was effectively in charge of
   the policing during the three seasons between the
   introduction of the first radials in 1981 and the
   further radials in 1985? - A. I was not in charge at
   the time when the first radials were in - they were in
   situ when I arrived.

Q. But during the three seasons that intervened between
   the introduction of the first radials and further
   radials, you were the Superintendent? - A. I was not
   there when the second lot of radials were in.

Q. That is right, you spanned the period between the two?
   - A. I do, sir.

Q. The first went in in '81 and the second in '85? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. In any such discussion as to the ability to close off a
   pen, is it right you would have regarded yourself as
   indeed in a better position to speak than a structural
   engineer because although an engineer might know more
   about the strength of barriers, when it came to the
   operational control of the ground you were the person
   with day to day experience? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Changing to another topic, as understand it you did not
   know of the closing of the pen in 1988, but on learning
   of it, it would have come to you as no surprise? - A.
   That is true, sir.

Q. Because that was something which had happened regularly
   before and would merely have indicated to you that the
   system was working to plan? - A. Yes.

Q. Am I right in thinking that when the pens were filled
   by this method, the radial gates would be kept open but
   manned by Police Officers? - A. They were kept open and
   locked back and in the smaller games they were manned
   but in the larger games they were not, because you
   could not move the gates backwards and forwards when a
   crowd was in the pen.

Q. But there would be Police stationed at the back of the
   pen in the way that the photograph shows and the way
   you have described? - A. Yes.

Q. One point of difference between you and other witnesses
   appears to relate not to the fact of the closing of the
   pens but to the method of closing, because you have
indicated they would be closed by putting a barrier
across; others have indicated that the gates would be
closed.  Can we just clarify one point on that in case
there is any confusion? Might we have up, please, C265
and 266?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   265, sir.

     MR. TOULSON:   That shows us, doesn't it, the
gates when you are standing in the concourse looking
towards the pitch and one can see that those gates
indeed open towards, so to speak, the fans if the fans
are trying to come out in an emergency? - A. That is
true, sir.

And that was the point that you were describing? - A.
Yes.

Now if we can have the next photograph.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   266.

     MR. TOULSON:   That shows the gates on the terrace
end of the tunnel, and they would open away from the
fans wouldn't they, as they were leaving the terrace? -
A. Yes, sir.

So that whatever system was or was not used, the danger
point you were concerned about if gates were to open
towards fans trying to escape would apply to the gates
at the concourse end of the tunnel, but not the gates
at the terrace end of the tunnel? - A. That is true,
sir.

So that from a safety point of view there would be
nothing objectionable about closing those gates at the
terrace end of the tunnel, provided always there was a
responsible person there with a key in order to open
them the moment anybody needed to get out? - A. Well,
if they did close those gates I would not have thought
they would have locked them, I would have thought they
would have just closed them to so that they could push
it open.

So be it. - A. But it would not be as dangerous as
closing the other gates that you have mentioned.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Lock, you have been employed as a Security Officer
at Hillsborough since August 1985, haven't you? - A.
Yes, ma'am.
So you will be aware of the Safety Certificate, won't
you? - A. Yes, ma'am.

I would like to draw your attention this morning to two
of the items stated in the Certificate.  Firstly,
number 3 on page 3

     THE CORONER:     We have to find the Safety
Certificate first.    What is the reference?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     C381, sir.

     THE WITNESS:   I have the Safety Certificate,
ma'am.  Can you give me the number, please?

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Number 3, on page 3, where it
     says:

     "The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium
     and to the several areas of spectator
     accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed
     the figures specified in Part 1 of Schedule 3".

If you could turn now to page 10, please? - A. I have
page 10, ma'am.

You will see the capacity for the West Terrace in 1989
was 7,200, and for the North West Terrace 2,900, making
a total of 10,100? - A. Yes, ma'am.

Secondly, on page 4, you will see number 6 at the top
of the page, and the second term under number 6 that
says:

     "The Holder shall refuse admission to, or evacuate
     spectators from, the Stadium or any part thereof
     at any time before or during a Specified Activity
     upon receiving instructions so to do from the
     Chief Constable."

Am I right in thinking that you would ensure that no
unauthorised persons entered the ground during a
football match, that is ticketless fans or fans the
worse for drink? As Security Officer would that be one
of your main tasks? - A. I would assist in that. Of
course, the people in the turnstiles would be the ones
who are responsible for receiving the fans through the
turnstiles and would not admit them unless they
produced a ticket. That is the first thing.   In
respect of drink, of course, if a person has taken
drink and just hands a ticket in and walks through the
turnstile, the turnstile operator can do nothing about
that. Unless they do something which warrants their
                                             D. J .   LOCK


attention they won't know whether they have had drink
or not.

No, but certainly as far as the people without tickets
are concerned, you would condemn their entry into the
stadium, wouldn't you? - A. Of course, because we would
not know how many were coming in to exceed the numbers
on the terraces.

Quite, so the numbers would be exceeded, or could be
exceeded, if they were allowed in? - A. That is true.

You told us that Chief Superintendent Mole, as Chief
Commander, would survey the whole area before a match,
going round assessing all the various areas, including
the outside of the Ground? - A. Yes. He had a Land
Rover for that purpose, and a driver.

You told us that Police Officers were positioned at the
tunnel entrance to redirect fans if necessary, but you
said Officers would also be required at the radial
gates on the terrace, as the fans who had been
redirected could still make their way to the centre by
way of the radial gates, as these would always be left
open at a capacity match. Would you agree with that
principle, that although they could be redirected at
the tunnel there was nothing to stop them whatsoever
making their way to the centre via the radial gates? -
A. Which sort of game are we talking about, please?




    /Q. In 1989
1989 let us say or any game really? - A. I do not know
in 1989 whether the Police did perform that operation.
I do not know whether they did have men on those gates.
What I said before in answer to the question was, when
I was in charge and we had a large game and we were
using the whole of the terrace we used to lock back
those radial gates but there would be Policemen on the
terraces but not on those gates and people could go
through the gates.  In answer to a question of Mr.
King's I also said that as if they were able to see
them because if they were stuck in the middle of the
centre pen they would not be able to look back and see
where the gates were which were off to their right or
left.

It was possible for them to do it, was it not? - A. Oh
yes, they could go through the gates if they saw them
there.

You said you personally closed the centre pens off in
1988, didn't you? - A. No, I was not aware that the
pens were closed until some time into the game when I
saw Stuart Thorpe, the head steward, who told me that
the Police had barriered off the centre pen.  I had
nothing to do with the Police operation in 1988, ma'am.

I am sorry about that.  I have made an incorrect note.
So crowd control at the ground, the responsibility lies
with the Police then and not the Club? - A. Excuse me,
it is a joint function because you have asked me since
I was the Security Officer at the ground, during the
whole of that time we have had installed in my room the
computer and the video so that we were keeping a
running total of the people coming into the ground and
periodically either we told the Police or they checked
with us to see what the levels of capacities were.

The Police, for instance Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield, he would listen to any suggestions that
the Club made on that day? - A. I do not know who was
listening.  The Controller in the Police Room who
mostly spoke to us was PC Ryan and the information
would be fed by either myself or PC Guest to PC Ryan.
Now whether Mr. Duckenfield was in the box or whether
he was elsewhere, I do not know what sort of
information was passed out to him.

Are you saying you did not receive any messages on that
particular day, that you were not in liaison with the
Police Control Room?

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, can I just help you a
little bit?
     MRS. McBRIEN:   Please, yes.

     THE CORONER:  I think you cannot ask him whether
Mr. Duckenfield received the message because he does
not actually know whether Mr. Duckenfield was in the
Control Room. What you are trying to find out is
whether messages were passed from his room to the
Control Room and we might possibly find out later on
who received those messages because we will be talking
to those people. All he can say is that but it is a
fair question, did he pass any messages? That is what
you are asking, is it not?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Yes.

     THE CORONER: That is right, Mrs. McBrien, is it?
I have got it right?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, that is right.

     THE CORONER:   Can you answer that? - A. I can,
sir. I can answer it quite clearly. Yes, we passed a
number of messages and more so as we go towards kick-
off time and these were passed No. 1 by PC Guest,
either by his radio or the Club control radio or even
by a land line. I know I spoke to PC Ryan myself
several times and once on the telephone.  So we were
passing this information through to them.

What was the latest time, if you can remember, that you
were in contact with PC Ryan? - A. I cannot remember,
ma'am.

Approximately? Quite a long time before kick-off or
fairly close? - A. If you say that C Gate was opened
the first time at approximately 2.59___

     THE CORONER:   2.48? - A. I am sorry, sir, I beg
your pardon.  It was 2.48. I had left the room round
about that time.  It must have been prior to then.

You must have left the room after that because you knew
about it in the room, did you not? - A. I left the room
after that, sir, but I say that my conversation would
have been before that.

     MRS. McBRIEN: All serious decisions would be made
from the Police Control Box, wouldn't they? They would
not come from the Club Control Box? - A. Ultimately the
Safety Certificate says that the Chief Constable's
designated Officer is the person who can override the
decisions and make the final decision.
 Q. I am sorry, that is the Chief Constable’s Officer, you
    said? - A. The Chief Constable's designated Officer,
    that would be the Officer in charge of the game on that
    day.

 Q. He would be the Ground Commander? - A. Yes, ma'am.

           THE CORONER: Controller I think it is, it is not’
      The Ground Commander is? - A. The Ground Controller,
      sir, yes. The Commander would be the Chief
      Superintendent.

Q. Yes, that is what she is asking. - A. Yes.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   I think this question should have
     come before the other one actually. You said that
     Chief Superintendent Mole had most likely given the
     ordsr to block off the tunnel using movable barriers in
     1988. Am I right? - A. No, I did not say that, m a ’am.
     If I remember correctly I said I thought he would be
     aware that the barriers had been placed across the
     tunnel and that it had been closed.  I did not know
     whether he knew.

Q. Are you saying he would know? He would need to know
   that sort of thing? - A. I would have expected him to
   have been told.

Q.    But you do not know if    he was? - A. No.

Q.    So my next question is then he would not be the one who
     would direct the Police Officers to do that? If the
     order did not come from him then where would the order
     come from to put those movable barriers in position? —
     A. If the Ground Controller had decided to close that
     centre pen as I had done in the past I would have given
     that order but I just do not know who had given that
     order on that day because I was not aware that the
     order had been given.

Q. Are you saying that when you were in the Control Box in
   the position that Mr. Murray was in in 1989 that you
   gave that order from that position? - A. On other
   occasions, yes, prior to my retirement in 1985.

Q. That procedure of closing the tunnel with movable
   barriers, surely you would record that. That would be
   recorded in the debriefing, wouldn't it?

          THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I think you can ask,
     and it is perfectly proper to ask him, when he was in
     charge whether that event would have been recorded so
far as he now remembers. He cannot possibly say what
happened after that because he had nothing more to do
with it.

In 1982 to 1985, would closure of the tunnel by
whatever means be part of the debriefing at the end of
a match so far as you remember? - A. So far as I
remember we had, besides myself in the Control Box, I
have described yesterday PC Ryan who was the radio
operator cum telephone operator and he used to record
incidents on the debrief sheet.  I would have thought
yes, but I cannot remember precisely now whether it
was.

     MRS. McBRIEN: Because it was a method being used,
that is why I am questioning that.  If it was an
accepted method being used then I was wondering if it
would be recorded in the Operational Order? - A. The
Operational Order did have for the particular serials
working on those terraces, before the game started,
half used to be on the concourse and half on the
terraces and then they used to come in afterwards.   The
Operational Order did say that the people on the
terraces would take their instructions as directed by
Control so that anything I told them to do they did and
they were quite aware that they had to do that.

I think when we were looking at part of the 1988
Operational Order we received one sheet of it. I have
not got it in front of me.  I think Phase II was that
Officers would be positioned in the tunnel itself.  I
am afraid I have not got the sheet unfortunately of
that? - A. I did see the 1988 Operational Order. Mr.
Mackrell let me have a look at it but I cannot remember
details such as that.

     THE CORONER:   It is C.479, Mrs. McBrien.

Let us just check whether you saw that page. Did you
see that Operational Order? - A. If I remember rightly,
sir, I did not actually see this structure of the
serials.  I only received the general order which
stated intention but I did not get the piece which
contained the different serials.

So you would not have known what that Operational Order
said in there? - A. No, sir.

     MRS. McBRIEN: When I read that I did not see the
point of Officers being positioned in the tunnel if
there were these barriers there as well.  I did not see
the purpose of the two methods. That is why I just
wondered if you knew more about that? - A. I do not
know what the intention was of the person who wrote
this Order and so I cannot answer that question.

Let us say those barriers were in position at the
entrance of the tunnel and there was a sudden emergency
in the centre pens? - A. Yes.

Do you think those barriers could present an obstacle
for fans? - A. No, they could be pulled away by one
person, with a bit of difficulty, but there were Police
Officers on either end because otherwise the fans tend
to come round them. They would be lifted away quite
easily.

I mean in a very sudden situation? - A. You have always
got the distance between the back of the terrace and
the back of the tunnel and so I think they would have
been able to move them quite easily.

The point I am trying to make is that if the Police
were at those movable barriers, were not aware of
something that had occurred on the terrace and that
fans suddenly evacuated there, could that barrier form
a hazard for them in some way? - A. I do not think so,
ma'am.  I do not think so.

Yesterday you said that the tunnel doors themselves
that we saw in the photograph just now should never be
closed. That is right, isn't it? - A. Those front
doors as you go from the concourse into it should not
be closed because that is when there are people on the
terraces I mean.

Yes, when the ground is in use? - A. Yes.

They should not be closed? - A. Because they open
inwards against the flow of people coming out.

I think you said yesterday that a suggestion was made
to remove those doors altogether.  It was thought
about? - A. Yes, it was thought about at one stage.
There was quite a lot of thought about the
reconstruction of that end of the ground and that was
one of the things which did arise but I think they were
retained because on days when the terrace centre pen
was not being used it was quite easy to just lock those
doors and prevent entry on to the terrace.

Why was the suggestion made that they should be removed
altogether? Do you know the reason for that? - A. I do
not know.  I am just guessing if I answer that.

     THE CORONER:   Well, do not? - A. No, sir.
                                                P.   J.   LOCK



     MRS. McBRIEN: The fact that you have told me they
should never have been closed, this fact was
highlighted even more after the Bradford fire disaster,
wasn't it? - A. It was, ma'am.

Is it true, therefore, that if the tunnel did become
blocked those pens could become a death trap? - A. It
is difficult to say. I mean if there were very few
people in it and the gates were closed, not necessarily
so.  It is a hypothetical question I cannot really
answer, sir.

It would depend on the numbers really, wouldn't it? -
A. It would, yes.

Mr. Toulson did mention barrier 144 and you mentioned
yesterday that that barrier was restricting the entry
of fans on to the terrace? - A. Yes, ma'am.

Now it was the Police suggestion that that barrier
should be removed, wasn't it? - A. I do not know.  I do
not know who suggested that because that barrier was
removed when I was not in office.

Do you know when it was removed? - A. I do not really
know.  I could not be certain.




                     /Q. Did you know that a barrier.
                                                                       20


A                                              D.J. LOCK



      Q. Did you know that a barrier had been removed in Pen 3?
         - A. Oh yes because I recall the barrier being there.
         When I was in charge of the Police Control the barrier
  ■      was there and because people tended to come down and
Bj       wait they caused a blockage, so we had Police Officers
          either end of it directing people itound on to the terrace
          steps.

      Q. So you personally found that was a nuisance having a
         barrier there? - A. No not really because it prevented
         people coming down in a sudden rush.   It was helpful
         inasmuch as it slowed people down and made them go on
         to the terraces.  It was a bit of a nuisance sometimes
         when they were leaving because of course they had to
         still go round and the area between the back of the
         West Stand wall and the back of the barrier was quite
         tight.

      Q. Would you agree that it had been designed that way to
         actually slow the progress for ingress and egress
         to make it safer? - A. Well I was not consulted about
         the construction of the ground and I would only be
         hazarding a guess at what was in the engineer's mind.

      Q. But would you agree that if people either come in or
         go out suddenly in large numbers, that can present, in
         fact that is one of the most dangerous times, isn't it,
         when people are leaving a terrace, it can be a dangerous
         time unless something slows them up? -    Oh it can be
         yes ma'am.

      Q. The barrier was not removed completely in Pen 4, was it,
         just a part of it in that pen I believe, that barrier 144?
         - A. Barrier 144 was removed in its entirety if I remember
         rightly ma'am.

                 MRS. McBRIEN:   Mr. Catchpole, can you help on
         that?

                 THE CORONER:    I will help you, Mrs. McBrien.

                 MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you.

                THE CORONER: The barrier was removed in its
         entirety from Pen 3 but a segment of it was left in
         Pen 4.

                 MRS. McBRIEN:    Thank you.

      Q. Now did you yourself think when that barrier wasn't there
         that greater pressure would be exerted on the barrier
         in front? - A. I never - because I was not in the Police
         Control - I never saw the entry on to the terraces with
         the barrier absent.
                                        D. J.   LOCK



Q. Oh. So you did not see the    fans going into that area
   once it was not there? - A.   Well I was not positioned
   in that Control Box. I was    then in the Sheffield
   Wednesday Control Box which   is under the South Stand.

Q. You mentioned one match that was to have a 7.30 kick-off,
   an evening match, but I think you said home fans were
   arriving late that year for that game? - A. Yes.

Q. And so it was decided that the kick-off should be
   delayed for 15 minutes? - A. Yes ma'am.

Q. Which match was that please? - A. I can't remember ma'am.

Q. I think it was the 1987 semi-final that you said
   Coventry fans were delayed. Is that right? - A. Yes,
   that is true.

Q. That they were delayed on the motorway? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you know how many coaches of Coventry supporters
   would be arriving altogether on that day? Would either
   the Club or the Police have those details? - A. We would
   both have details of how many Coventry fans were coming
   because of course we knew what the allocation of tickets
   to them were.

Q. So would you know how many coaches had arrived at kick-off
   time, of Coventry supporters? - A. I am not sure.  I
   think the Police knew that there were a certain number
   still to arrive and in fact as I said in my evidence-in-
   chief, two of them arrived at getting on for half-time
   and we had to bring them along the front of the Kop and
   put them in through the entry gates.

Q. So it was just two coaches that arrived late, was it? - A.
   There may have been more late but there were two which
   were extremely late.

Q. How many fans travel on a coach approximately? - A.
   Approximately 50.

Q. So if there were coaches there would have been about 100 ...

           THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien he has given you a clear
     answer that two coaches arrived very late. He did not
     say that those were the only two coaches which arrived
     late.

Q.         May I ask you this:  are you seriously suggesting
     that if it was known that there were two coaches which would
     arrive at half-time or late, that the match would have been
     postponed with 54,000 people inside and 100 not there?
     - A. No sir.
                                                            22


                                      D.J. LOCK



Q. You are not making that as a proposition, are you? - A.
   No sir.

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you.

Q. No, I realised the reason for delaying the match was
   because of other fans being late, wasn't it, it was not
   because of the two coaches obviously.

         Nov/ did you say that the turnstiles closed at
   half-time? - A. The turnstiles, in the normal situation
   they have all of the turnstiles open till 3.15 and then
   there are certain turnstiles on each side of the ground
   called stoppers, they call them stopper openers, and
   they stop open until half-time.

Q. So these late coaches, did they arrive before half-time
   or after half-time? — A. I don't recall.  It was extremely
   late and the fact was they could not put them through
   the turnstiles so they must have been nigh on half-time
   because we brought the supporters off the coach and along
   the pitch and put them on to the Kop terraces through
   the gates in the fence, in the safety fence.

Q. Who knew that these fans wished to go into the ground at
   that time of the day? - A. Well the Police knew. The_
   Police on the motorway were telling, the South Yorkshire
   Police Control were passing it through to the Control
   and Mr. Mole himself came on the radio to me and said:
   "We have got a problem with two coaches arriving late,
   where can we put them?" so there was the liaisoni there.
   I told them where to put them and I warned my Stewards
   on the gates where they were coming in and I warned my
   Stewards on the terraces that they were coming in.

Q. So they were being met at the entrance.   That is what
   you are saying? - A. Yes.

Q. Now were these fans all checked for tickets and alcohol
   before they entered the ground as they were not going
   to go through ....

         THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I have tried to
   restrain myself but I find it difficult to see how any
   of these answers are going to advance progress with the
   Inquest.
         Tell me in two sentences what it is you are trying
   to find out which is relevant, apart from interesting?

         MRS. McBRIEN: Well as Mr. Lock was Security Officer
   at that time I was wondering if he was aware that security
   measures would still be taken even if people did arrive
   late. That is the question.
                                                            23

                                        D.J. LOCK


           THE CORONER:  I can't really see the relevance
     but it is a relatively quick question.

Q. They came in through a gate. You told me that? - A. The
   tickets would be checked sir and if there was any drink
   I would be surprised.  The kick-off was of course
   12 o'clock until it was put back. Of course they could
   have carried drink on the coach but the Police would have
   dealt with that I am sure.

Q. But tickets would have been checked? - A. Yes sir.

           THE CORONER:   Okay, next question Mrs. McBrien.

o.         MRS. McBRIEN: Then these fans were ushered to
     Gate 0, weren't they? - A. Yes.

Q. How wide is that gate please approximately?

           THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I am sorry. I cannot
     see any relevance of it. You have heard that they came
     through a gate, that they were checked, they were met,
     they were escorted. That is enough.   It does not aiatter
     if this gate is 200 yards wide or 5", it does not matter,
     if you can get through a 5" gate. I can't. Go on,
     Mrs. McBrien. We have got to make some progress otherwise
     we will be here for two or three months.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN: However, the crowd entering was
     a relatively small crowd, wasn't it? - A. Yes ma'am.

Q. And the small crowd was marshalled right up to their
   positions inside the ground? - A. Yes ma'am.

Q. And that was to ensure that the arrival of these lute
   fans created no safety risk whatsoever.  Is that right?
   - A. That was one of the reasons. We did not want the.n
   going in with the Leeds fans either ma'am.

Q. Does a bell ring in the Club Control Room when the capacity
   has reached three-quarters of the full capacity thus
   acting as a warning about the numbers entering the ground?
   - A. No, on the computer ma'am, when an area reaches within
   10% of its full capacity the displayed figures change
   colour and pulse. Normally they are white figures on
   blue but when it gets within 10% of capacity they change
   over and they become blue on white and they pulse, they
   flash at us so it makes us aware that we are within
   10% of capacity.

Q. Did that happen on the 15th April 1989? - A. It did
   in some parts of the ground, yes.

Q. Which parts were they? - A. I can't recall.  I think the
   South Stand open seats I think that did. I think also
   the South Stand. The others I can't be sure.
                                                             24

                                          D.J. LOCK



Q. Now you said the Police seemed.to be     handling the situation
   on the 15th April 1989 very well and     that no one was
   saying to them there was a problem.      Do you remember
   saying that yesterday? - A. I said I     did not observe
   any problems.

Q. So are you saying that you personally knew nothing at all
   about the crowd problem that had developed outside the
   Leppings Lane turnstiles from approximately 2.35. Were
   you aware of that at all? - A. I heard no radio messages
   and I received no information by telephone that there
   was any problems outside of the gates.  I could see part
   of the crowd outside, of course, because the camera which
   looks at the turnstiles at that end also shows Gate C
   and obviously I had seen something when the gate opened
   the first time.

Q. So you said nothing alarmed you until Gate C opened at
   2.48? - A. Yes ma'am.

Q. Now why were you alarmed when you saw that gate opening?
   - A. Because first of all I was alarmed .... Somebody
   said:  "The gate is broken" and I thought that the first
   thing that had happened was somebody had broken through
   the gate; the gate could be damaged; the people could
   come into the ground; we would not know how many we had
   got in and we did not know whether people were coining round
   without tickets and were trying to force their way in, so
   when the gate opened I was alarmed that people would
   come into that gate unchecked.

Q. Yes, it was a natural reaction for you? - A. Of course.

Q. Do you know why Gate C opened at 2.48? - A. I did not
   know at the time but I later looked ....

           THE CORONER: You don't have to tell us if you
     did not know at the time.

          THE WITNESS:   Thank you sir.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN: But did you think just a small number
     had come through? - A. Well I had not seen the people
     go through.  It was when I think it was Harold Guest said
     "The gate is broken" and I looked up and there were only
     a few people coming through.  I saw a mounted Police
     Officer who put his horse across the gate and the situation
     seemed to be resolved and under control very quickly.



                                  Q. So you were quite happy
So you were quite happy?   You thought things were under
control then, at that time? - A. I was not happy that the
gate was broken, but I was quite happy that the Police
were controlling the situation.

Now when you thought the gate was broken, did you think
something would have to be done...

      THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien,    I am sorry. I do not
want to interruptyour questioning but you have spent a
good twenty minutes now merely getting him to repeat
evidence which he has already given to me in chief, and
which he has already given.     If you want to challenge
his evidence in the sense you want to say he did
something wrong or if you want to elicit something which
is   new, then I do not object, but I am going to stop you
if you merely ask questions where the witness - and I
will do this with all the witnesses from now onwards -
where the witness is simply repeating what he has already
said.    Occasionally it is necessary, where one wants to
make a specific point, to get the witness to repeat what
he has said, but we can't spend hours merely repeating
and repeating and repeating what he has already said.

     If you have a question which is relevant, ask it,
but I am going to stop you every time you merely ask for
repetition.   I am sorry.   I will try and do it with
others as well, but it is not always easy because you are
developing arguments.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Did you say you went back to the
players' tunnel and back to your room?   You did not go
over to the Leppings Lane terrace? - A. No.

I don't know if I will be allowed to ask this:
afterwards you knew the Police had opened the gates,
didn't you? - A. I discovered when I went back to my
room, Harold Guest said "They...", meaning the Police,
"...have opened the gates."

Did you, as Security Officer, consider whether these fans
who had been allowed in by the Police, if they had been
checked for tickets, did you consider that at all
yourself? - A. I didn't think that they had but I wasn't
absolutely certain.

So you would have thought capacity could have been
exceeded then, is that right? - A. Yes, it could.

Although you knew uncounted fans had been allowed in
through a large exit gate, that would be totally contrary
to normal Police procedure, would it not? - A. I cannot
recall any occasion when I myself have been in a ground
when the gates have been opened to allow fans into it.
                                                     D. J .   LOCK


In that way? - A. In that way.

I don't know if you said yesterday the time you noticed
the centre pens were far more crowded than the outer
pens, I am not sure whether you gave an answer on that? -
A. I did.   I said when I went down on the second
occasion when the gate had opened that I saw there was in
fact space available on the wings.   I did see concrete
terracing so I knew there was space there and I saw
spaces, seating spaces in the North Stand, at the west
end of that stand.

     THE CORONER:       I know, Mr. King,   but that is his
answer now.   Carry     on Mrs. McBrien.

        MRS. MCBRIEN:   What time was that? - A. I do not
know.      I am getting confused myself now.

Were the players on the field? - A. No.   If I can
collect my thoughts, I think the first time I went down I
noticed that when I spoke to Graham Mackrell, yes.

Was that when the players were on the field? - A. They
were having a kick-about.   The match was not in progress
then.

Do you know how long the players were on the field before
kick-off? - A. No.

This is the last question.   Are you aware that at big
matches, such as all-ticket semi-finals, a substantial
number of people usually arrive near the ground without
tickets? - A. In my police experience I have found
occasions when people have turned up at the ground
without tickets, yes.

Would you agree that the Police are well experienced in
matters relating to segregation? - A. Yes.

And that it is outside the ground at big matches such as
semi-finals that segregation of fans with and without
tickets is vital in an efficient Police system? - A. I
don't know whether or not that was taking place that day.

     THE CORONER:   When you answered, "segregation", did
you mean segregating between fans on the same side or
segregating between fans on the opposing sides?   How did
you understand the word "segregation"? - A. I thought
 segregation" meant keeping apart the fans of the
respective teams.

        THE CORONER:   That is what I thought as well.
                                                   D. J .   LOCK


     MRS. MCBRIEN: Yes, I know that is what it does
refer to most of the time, but segregation can also mean
keeping people who have no tickets away from the ones who
have tickets.   In fact filtering them out so that people
without tickets do not enter into the turnstile area, to
make things easier? - A. That can be done.

Would you agree that no ticketless fans should be allowed
immediately outside the turnstiles at an all-ticket match
as they undoubtedly cause an obstruction if they are
there? - A. I think they turn up at every match and
ticket touts sell tickets to them, so whatever you do I
think you will inevitably get some there.

As you say, it can be dealt with successfully, and it has
been dealt with and still is being I suppose? - A. Well,
I do not know whether it is or not.

     THE CORONER:   I think all you can ask this
witness...   I'll do this for you:

Did you yourself ever police a ground outside? - A. I did
not police the outside of the ground at Sheffield
Wednesday, sir.

So you have no experience of using the word "segregation"
in the way Mrs. McBrien has used it?   Segregating fans
of the same team into different categories? - A. Not in
that way, sir, no.

So you can't actually answer the question, can you? - A.
No.

Not from your own knowledge? - A. No, sir.

It is simply if you do attempt to answer it you are just
answering it on the basis of what anybody else could say?
- A. That's right, sir.

     THE CORONER:      I don't think we can pursue it any
further.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:      Thank you, Mr. Lock.

    THE CORONER:       We will pause for coffee.

                     (Short adjournment)

    THE CORONER:       Mr. Russell.
                                                  D. J .   LOCK


            Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

Mr. Lock, you have told us before the game started during
the build-up to the match, you had liaison with various
officials and Police Officers in your room? Is that
right? - A. Are you talking about the 1989 semi-final?

Yes, I am. - A. I had liaison both inside and outside the
room.

One of the Police Officers you named this morning, that
you had contact with, was Superintendent Greenwood? - A.
Yes, sir.

The time   you identified when that contact   took place was
at about   two o'clock? - A. Yes, sir.

Perhaps not a great deal turns on this, but do you think
it was rather earlier than that and was when the team
coaches arrived, at about that time? -A. If memory is
correct, I think Liverpool arrived at about 1.35 to 1.40
and Notts Forest arrived slightly after that.   I know
there was an incident outside theplayers' entrance.     I
did meetSuperintendent Greenwood outside there.     I may
be wrong to five or ten minutes.

You would agree with his recollection that it was at
about the time when players' coaches arrived? - A. Yes.

At that time do you remember any other matter you
discussed with Superintendent Greenwood? - A. Yes.    When
Kenny Dalgleish came down to put some tickets - there is
a rack inside the players' entrance for tickets to be
placed - he put some tickets in there and there was quite
a big crowd there, and one or two of the players had come
down and they were leaving tickets and signing
autographs.   There was a mounted horseman, and I noticed
his shirt was white, indicating it was not a South
Yorkshire Policeman, and he came across the mouth of the
players' entrance.   One of the Liverpool fans had his
foot stepped on and he was complaining, and complaining
to Kenny Dalgleish.   I spoke to Superintendent Greenwood
about that and he made some comment to the effect, "Well,
we don't do that in South Yorkshire and we will put that
in the debrief."

Can I direct your attention to one particular matter.
Do you remember telling Superintendent Greenwood about
the Brian Clough element that afternoon, namely, his
special dispensation to sit two rows back from the
touchline, notwithstanding the touchline ban? - A. I may
have done, sir.
                                               D. J .   LOCK


That would have been something you would have brought to
his attention considering his position on the day, is it
not? - A. That's true, sir.   He was in charge of the
ground, the pitch.

That was a feature of the day which you regarded as
something which should be brought to his attention? - A.
Yes.

Do you recall seeing Superintendent Greenwood again
before you saw him run on to the pitch to stop the match?
- A. No, I don't recall that, sir.

You do recall Superintendent Greenwood running on to stop
the match? - A. I do, yes.

Between that meeting, shortly before two o'clock, and
when you saw him running on the pitch, you did not see
him again? - A. I may have done but I can't recall it.

You don't recall it? - A. No.

You can probably confirm for us the evidence we have
heard about the segregation of supporters in the Spion
Kop, that a small area of the Spion Kop was, both in 1988
and 1989, reserved for Liverpool supporters who had
managed to obtain tickets for the Kop end? - A. Yes, I
can confirm that, sir.

Were you made aware of the aggravation and difficulties
there were in that segregation and demarcation at the
1988 semi-final? - A. No, I wasn't.

Given there was such an incident, in your experience as a
Police Officer would that lead you, assume you were still
a Policeman for the 1989 semi-final, to have particular
regard to a repeat of that flare-up? - A. Yes, it
certainly would.   In fact I saw the Inspector from the
Kop who spoke about that segregation on the elevated
section.

You have told us that on the terracing some parts of the
terrace are more popular than others? - A. Yes, sir.

And that you will not have a completely even density of
supporters on the terracing?   Is that right? - A. Yes.

And that the wings of the terrace and the front of the
terrace tend to be less popular than the back of the
terrace and the centre of the terrace? - A. Yes, sir.

That is so both at the Kop end as at the Leppings Lane
end? - A. That is true, sir.
                                               D. J .   LOCK


By way of illustration could you.please look at a
photograph which is in the album, DB.16, frame 22, of
which I hope Sergeant Griffiths has prepared an acetate.

     MR. BEECHEY:   That is C.492.

     MR. RUSSELL:   That is a photograph taken, as you
will appreciate, of the northern part of the Kop stand at
the front? - A. Yes, sir.

One can see that there is a considerable amount of room
at the front? - A. That's true, sir.

And less room towards the middle? - A. Yes, sir.

Now this photograph was taken at about twenty-five to
three.   I am afraid it is the latest one at this angle,
but does that illustrate the sort of disparity that you
have remarked upon in referring to popular and less
popular areas of the terracing? - A. It does, sir.

It is a disparity that is equally to be observed at the
Leppings Lane end and can I ask you to look at C.449?
That is the vantage point     from the Control Box,    roughly
speaking? - A. Yes, sir.




   Q. One can see in that
                                              D. J .   LOCK


One can see in that photograph, much as one can at the
other end, albeit earlier, that on the front and the
side of the Leppings Lane Terrace, down in the
foreground, the density of the crowd is much less than
towards the middle? - A. Yes, sir.

And one can even see in the foreground the   concrete of
the terracing itself? - A. You can, sir.

That is also something observable in 1988, if you would
look at the photograph that was introduced by learned
friend this morning, C490. - A. Yes, sir.

That photograph could have   been taken from anidentical,
position to the one you have just looked at? - A. Yes,
sir.

It also represents the view from the Police Control
Box? - A. Yes, sir.

Although it shows rather more of the West Stand and of
pens 1 and 2? - A. Yes, sir.

One can see equally in that, that the crowd is sparsely
populated towards the front, and one can only see the
concrete of the terraces themselves? - A. You can, sir.

Can you help me with this, you see on the extreme right
hand side of the photograph - not on the acetate, I
fear, but on the hard copy - a Policeman.  Can you see
that or has it been cut off? - A. The one on the pitch,
sir?

The one on the perimeter track with his one leg in the
air? - A. Yes, I can see that.

One can see, can one not, fans standing on or climbing
over the radial fences between pens 2 and 3, and what
looks like pens 4 and 5? - A. I can see some people who
appear to be above the normal level of the fans' heads,
yes.

Quite clearly they are standing on the fence, aren't
they? Either getting over it or standing on it? - A.
It is not really very clear.

You see the Policeman with his right leg raised? - A.
Yes.

If you go straight to the left about one centimetre? -
A. Yes.
                                             D. J .   LOCK


You see a man in an anorak and blue jeans with his
right arm on top of the fence, and his left arm raised?
- A. I can see that man but I am not ....

He is either standing on the head of a supporter or on
the radial fence, isn't he? - A. Yes.

If you go over his left shoulder along the fence you
come to a further pair of supporters, I suggest, each
wearing a white shirt - possibly one of them a coloured
man - who are also higher up in the air than the rest
of the crowd? - A. I can see the man in the white coat
who is in a sort of half bent position.  He looks to be
half over the fence.

So half over the fence.  It would appear from this
photograph that people are either standing on or going
over the radial fences between those pens? - A. Yes,
sir.

You have been shown, Mr. Lock, C326A, which is the
vantage point of someone high up in the North Stand,
looking down across the terraces? - A. Yes, sir.

That is not the vantage point of someone in the Police
Control Box, is it? - A. No, sir, it is a different
angle.

Mr. Lock, as I understand your evidence you were
prompted to go to the pitch because on the monitor you
saw, or it was drawn to your attention that on the
monitor it showed that Gate C had been opened? - A.
Yes, sir.

Your evidence is that you left immediately the Control
Room? - A. I was told, "The gate's gone", and then I
looked and I saw the gate was open, but the Police had
regained control with the mounted Officer, and then I
went to the pitch and on doing so I carried out certain
functions on my way there.

Yes. Your destination was the pitch but you had a
number of matters that you attended to on the way? - A.
My destination was going to be the "C" gate, via the
pitch.

Yes. On the way to the pitch, if I can just list your
activities, you went first of all to reinforce the
players' entrance? - A. Yes, sir.

You then went to the caretaker's office to arrange for
a key? - A. I did, sir.

To lock that? - A. Yes.
                                             D. J .   LOCK


You then went to the Directors' entrance? - A. Yes.

You had a conversation with WPC Crottendon? - A. Yes,
sir.

And you had a radio conversation with Brian Barker
about stewarding? - A. Yes.

All those activities no doubt took a number of minutes?
- A. Yes, sir.

One of the matters that you identified that happened on
the pitch when you were on it was the arrival of Brian
Clough, the Nottingham Forest manager? - A. Yes, sir.

You told us yesterday that you remembered him arriving
and taking his seat? - A. That is right, sir.

Doing the best you can now, can you remember how long
before his arrival you had been on the pitch, first of
all? - A. Not very long, sir.

A minute or so? - A. I couldn't really say because when
I got down to the pitch I had a conversation with
Graham Mackrell about the gate, and then after that I
returned and I think I spoke to Sergeant Chapman about
Brian Clough's imminent arrival and where he was
sitting, and then he did appear so it may have been two
minutes or so, I can't say.  I really could not suggest
a proper time.

No, I understand. You see, we can pinpoint Mr.
Clough's arrival on the pitch to the second. - A. Yes.

We know that happened at 14.59.30, almost coincidental
with the actual kick-off. - A. I would accept that,
sir.

How long after Mr. Clough arrived did you leave the
pitch to go back to the Control Room? - A. Well I was
going back to Control then, and Brian Clough came down
and took up his seat - there were a lot of
photographers about - and as soon as I could Iwent
round him and went back to Control then, directly that
time.

So that would mean that you left the pitch just after
the kick-off had taken place? - A. Yes, sir.

The video shows you to be inthe same proximity, or
close proximity, to Superintendent Greenwood at that
time, but as I understand your evidence you do not
recall seeing Superintendent Greenwood there? - A. He
                                             Dt -J.   lock


may have been there, sir, but I had no reason to recall
him being there.

Can I just make this clear, you equally have no
recollection of a conversation with Superintendent
Greenwood at that time about the matters outside the
Ground? - A. No, I have none, sir.

When you were on the pitch you went there, as I
understand your evidence, with a particular purpose in
mind, and that was to see where the supporters who were
still outside the Ground and expected to come in, were
going to be accommodated? - A. No, I went there because
I was going to go to Gate C and I did these functions
on my way there, but I looked at the computer and
noticed the number of vacancies there were and I
thought whilst I was there I would look to see where
the crowds were on the terraces, because I had no way
of knowing.

So can we take it in this way, that you went to the
pitch armed with certain information which included the
situation outside the Ground, or at least the number of
people who still had to go through the relevant
turnstiles, which information you had obtained from
your computer? - A. Yes, I knew how many were still to
come in.

And also the information that a gate had been tfpened
and that a number of people had come in? - A. Yes, sir.

That information prompted you to scrutinise where the
remaining people to be got into the Ground were going
to go? - A. Yes, sir.

Would it be fair to say that if you did not have those
two important pieces of information then being on the
touchline about 1-minute-to-3 you would not necessarily
have scrutinised those particular parts of the Ground?
- A. I accept that I may not have done, sir.

Just to complete the picture, on your return to the
Control Room following the kick-off you were greeted by
the news that the gates had been opened, that is right?
- A. That is right, sir.

And you returned then to the pitch immediately? - A.
Yes, sir.

And you got there just in time to see Superintendent
Greenwood run onto the pitch to stop the match? - A.
Yes, sir.
                                                                   35

                                                         D. J .   LOCK


    Q.    Does that recollection help youto time when you
         returned to the pitch? - A. No, it doesn't, sir.

    Q. But if we know when Superintendent Greenwood ran onto
       the pitch and stopped the match does that not assist
B      you in the time at which you returned to the pitch? -
       A. I think I know that the time was 3.06 then but I
       don't know if I was aware of the time when I went onto
       the pitch.

    Q. I am not seeking you to remember the time itself, I am
       seeking you to remember the event which can now be
       timed? - A. Oh, I do remember the event, yes.

    Q.    Mr. Lock, you have spoken about you doing the job that
         Superintendent Murray was doing on 15th April, 1989? -
         A. Yes, sir.

    Q. And being able to make from his position an assessment
       of the position on the terraces? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Doing that job it was an assessment    that you   made from
       the Control Box? - A. That is true,    sir.

    Q. And it was an assessment made from the Control Box with
       the assistance of certain information that you received
       from Officers outside the Control Box? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. That information was in particular the number of
       supporters who still had to come into the Ground? - A.
       Yes, sir.

    Q. So that was information then that was coming to you
       from outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A. That is
       true, sir.

    Q. Can I now ask you to look at another of the photographs
       that my learned friend Mr. Toulson put before you, and
       this is the black and white one, C491. - A. I have it,
       sir.

    Q. That, of course, we know is the Leppings Lane Terraces
       behind the goal being defended by Liverpool? - A. Yes,
       sir.k

    Q. We know that because we can see the Liverpool
       goalkeeper in the goal? - A. Yes, I can see Grobbelaar.

    Q. And we know, or we can work out, perhaps you would
       agree with me, that it was, in fact, in the first half
       of the 1988 semi-final? - A. I don't know if that is
       so, but I accept it if you say that is so.
                                                            36
A                                                   D.J.   LOCK


    Q. If I can just tell you why I am able to suggest that to
       you, at C489 we can see the time of 20-past-4, which
       would have been well into the second half, would it
       not? - A. Yes, sir.




c



D




E




F




            /Q. We can see




H
                                                                 37*

                                                         D. J. LOCK


    Q. We can see that it is the Nottingham Forest goal that
       is there being defended in the second half? - A. Yes,
       sir.
B
    Q. Assuming as football is often described as a game of
       two halves, then this was the first half? - A. Yes, I
       accept that, sir.

    Q. It was the terracing that was, of course, populated by
       Liverpool supporters? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q . I say that notwithstanding that you see above the word
        "Johnstone's Paint" a Juventus banner? - A. Yes, you
        do.

    Q. It was Juventus, was it not, who were the Liverpool
       opponents at Heysel? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. The first half of the game was part of Phase II of the
       match in Police operational terms, was it not? - A.
       That is right, sir.

    Q. You have been shown this photograph and asked whether
       it supports, whether it is visual evidence, of your
       practice of Police being stationed at the rear of the
       pens? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Would this be fair, Mr. Lock, from looking at this
       photograph you do not know that the Police who can be
       clearly seen at the mouth of the tunnel at the back of
       Pen 3 were Police who were stationed at the back of the
       pens or were Police who were stationed in the tunnel
       during Phase II in accordance with the Operational
       Order? - A. I did not see the Operational Order — oh,
       this is for 1988.

    Q. No. - A. I could not say what their position was in
       relation to the Operational Order.

    Q. Yes, but I think we have had one page exhibited from
       the Operational Order for 1988? - A. Yes.

    Q. It describes, I believe, the duties of Serial 14? - A.
       It does, sir.

              MR. RUSSELL: Sir, I am afraid I have not got a
         copy of this. What is its C number please?

              MR. BEECHEY:   It is C.479, sir.

    Q.        MR. RUSSELL:   Do you have that, Mr. Lock? - A.
         Yes, I have, sir.
Do you see the duty for Serial 14 is set out? - A. Yes.

Could you please read to the Court what Serial 14 was
to do in Phase II? - A. Phase II says:

    "Phase II during match. This serial will be
    located in the central tunnel to the Leppings
    Lane terraces to maintain order as required."

A list of the Officers for Serial 14 is given? - A. It
is, sir.

That is in the Order, is it not? - A. Yes.

Would you like to try and identify any of the Officers
in the photograph C.491? - A. I do not think I can do
that, sir.

No, I would not expect you to do so but the point is
that you do not know whether those Officers shown in
that black and white photograph are, in fact, members
of Serial 14 or possibly another serial, you do not
know? - A. I do not know, sir.

Who were stationed in the tunnel during Phase II and
who took the advantage of a quiet period of the game to
watch the match from the mouth of the tunnel? - A. That
is true, sir.

That would be a perfectly normal and natural activity
for Police Officers to do if there was no trouble or
other matters for them to attend to, would it not? - A.
It would, sir.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Maxwell, is there anything that
you wanted to say?

        MR. MAXWELL:   There is not, sir.   Thank you very
much.

                  Cross-Examined bv MR. HALE

I am afraid it is my faut that I was not in when you
began to give your evidence yesterday but my guess is
that it was yesterday morning fairly early? - A. It
was, sir.

So you have been there a long time now cogitating on
all these matters, weighing them up and looking at all
the information that other people have given to you? -
A. Yes, sir.
A
                                                                    39'

                                                          D. J. LOCK


    Q. On the day, if you had any decision to make about the
       crowd on the terrace, for instance, how long would you
       have had to make that decision?   From when you went
B      out and had a look and saw that may be there were too
       many people in the centre and there was room on the
       wings, how much time would you have had to make a
       decision? - A. I think it has been established that it
       was 2.48 when C Gate went and I went down after
       carrying out these functions on to the pitch.   I think
       the gentleman at the end said it was 2.59 when Brian
       Clough came back. So having regard to the extremity,
       it was eleven minutes and I had to carry out other
       functions and so it would probably have been whittled
       down.

    Q.    I was coming to that. You, like many other people, did
         not have the foresight to know what precisely was going
         to happen? - A. Quite, sir.

    Q.    Therefore, your mind, like many other people, was taken
         up with all sorts of other possibilities? - A. Yes,
         sir.

    Q. Including possible trouble. You had to get a key and
       instruct a lady Policeman to lock herself in and so on.
       So you had a great deal else to worry about? - A. Yes,
       sir.

    Q. Can I just ask you about your experience? It covered
       very many years, did it not? - A. It did, sir.

    Q. During that time, did things remain static or was there
       a gradual evolution of understanding of what was
       needed? - A. I think the system did evolve.

    Q. For example, sometimes barriers were put up and then at
       other times in the light of experience they were taken
       down again, is that right? - A. Yes, they were.  144
       for instance, sir, yes.

    Q. Also during your time radial fences were put up? - A.
       Yes, they were, sir.

    Q. It has now been very substantially questioned whether
       they were a good thing or not? - A. It has, sir.

    Q. There was evolution and fortunately during your time no
       great emergency arose, is that right? - A. That is
       true, sir.

    Q. You were able to carry out your plans, arrange for
       this, that and the other to be done with everything




H
                                                                 40‘

                                                       D. J. LOCK


       going at a nice pace and you were in control? - A. Yes,
       sir.

B   Q. As an example, when the two coaches came, they came
       very late indeed? - A. They did, sir.

    Q. So by that time there was nothing too much else to
       worry about? - A. No, sir.

    Q. Not too difficult to deal with them? - A. No, sir, it
       was easy.

    Q. Can you envisage that some circumstances might have
       arisen — I know they did not but they might have
       arisen — that would have put you under some strain if
       something exceptional had happened? - A. Oh yes.

    Q. You have not had the benefit of being here from the
       beginning of this Inquest but we have heard witness
       after witness say that on this particular day very
       exceptional things happened? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Would you accept that your experience was different
       from the people who were in charge on that day? - A. Oh
       yes, yes, sir.

    Q. You were dealing with fairly normal, nice, steady
       circumstances. On that day the circumstances were
       exceptional? - A. Yes, they were normal for me until
       2.48.

    Q. Just one final small thing; when you went out you had
       a look at the terraces and you formed some sort of a
       view that may be they were getting a bit full in the
       middle and there was room on the side? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. That did not alarm you, did it, at that time? - A. Now
       I do not think....

    Q. I am coming to now but I am talking at that time. At
       that time did you think there was going to be a major
       tragedy here with people crushed and almost a hundred
       killed? - A. No, sir.

    Q. Because that is exemplified, is it not, because shortly
       afterwards you saw people climbing over the fences?
       That is right, is it not? - A. I did, sir.

    Q. Your view was that there was a pitch invasion? - A.
       Yes, I thought there had been a fight or there was a
       pitch invasion.
                                                                  41 * *

                                                         D. J. LOCK


    Q. If you had had the benefit of hindsight and hours of
       cross-examination, listening to all the evidence and
       everything else, when you saw those people climbing
B      over you would have said that they were trying to
       escape the crush? - A. That is true, sir.

    Q. But you did not? - A. I did not.

    Q. On the information you had   at that time, in the light
       of all your experience, on   that day you did not think
       that there was a danger to   life and that is why they
       were climbing over? - A. I   did not think there was a
       danger then.

                       Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS

    Q. Mr. Lock, I wonder if you can help me with a number of
       matters? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. As I understand your evidence you started policing at
       Hillsborough as someone in command in the summer of
       1982? - A. That is right, sir.

    Q. You finished some time towards the end of December 1984
       though you did not officially retire until February of
       1985? - A. That is correct, sir.

    Q.   Before those years, and we are covering really two and
         a half seasons, are we not, of a football season? - A.
         Yes.

    Q. When had been your last experience of being involved in
       any way in the policing of Hillsborough? - A. I was the
       Detective Inspector at F2 Ecclesfield.  I think it was
       in 1973, 1975, for about two years and there was during
       that time at least one Semi Final which I can recall
       and that was Manchester United against Derby County.

    Q.   When you were doing that, as Iunderstand       it, youwere
         not in a position as you were later on in 1982 to
         1984/1985? - A. No.

    Q. Being in a position of control? - A. No, I was there
       because of the crime which might occur during the pre­
       match build up and during the match itself.

    Q. So nothing to do with assessments of safety of the
       crowd, nothing to do with the allocation of fans,
       nothing like that? - A. No, sir.

    Q. So your first experience came, I think you said on
       another occasion, with the Leeds United game? - A. Yes.




H
A                                                                42 *

                                                       D. J. LOCK


    Q. Would that be right? Sheffield were playing in 1982 at
       Hillsborough? - A. At Hillsborough, yes, sir.

B   Q* Who was the person you took over from? - A.
       Superintendent David Chapman.

    Q. He was, before you took over, then fulfilling exactly
       the same role as you later went on to fill? - A. Yes,
       sir.

    Q. Ground Controller? - A. That is right, sir.

    Q. As I understand it the Ground Controller during your
       time took operational decisions with regard to the
       ground and the distribution of teams of Officers and
       allocation of resources? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Could you help me with this; Mr. Chapman, was he a man
       of experience so far as that role was concerned? - A. I
       think that he was there for about two years.  I do not
       know if that answers your question, sir.

    Q. He had two years of experience of doing the job? - A.
       Y es.

    Q. Do I understand this to be the case that you did not
       just go and start the job, as it were, fresh? You had
       discussions with him before you did it? - A. I was very
       fortunate in that David Chapman moved sideways to
       become Detective Superintendent in F Division and I was
       appointed to take his role. So consequently he was in
       the same building in another office and, of course, we
       spoke about it. In the transitional period when I took
       over we spoke about the various problems within the
       Division including Hillsborough.

    Q. Let us just concentrate on Hillsborough? - A. Yes.

    Q. Because you say that you were very fortunate? - A. Yes.

    Q. How important to you was the advantage of getting that
       experience, that acquired experience, from Mr. Chapman?
       - A. It was a tremendous advantage inasmuch as quite
       frequently in the Police Force somebody retires and a
       promotion occurs. The person who has been promoted
       takes the place of the retiring Superintendent without
       much time.  I mean obviously you try and get down there
       for a day or two but the situation can arise where one
       retires and the other one takes up post and so there is
       no possibility of liaising.

    Q. In your particular instance, it seems from what you are
       saying that there was a substantial amount of liaison




H
                                                D. J. LOCK


between you and Mr. Chapman before you started to take
over the running of Hillsborough on your own account? -
A. If I remember rightly, as you were saying, it was in
the summer time and, of course, there was the
possibility to discuss, as I say amongst other things,
Hillsborough and look at what had happened in the past
and talk to David Chapman about it.

I think to be fair, to answer my question, there was a
substantial amount of liaison between you and him as to
the potential problems at Hillsborough? - A. Yes, sir.

You found that an invaluable experience? - A. I did.




                           /Q. I think in answer to.
                                  D.J. LOCK



I think in answer to Mr. Hale just a moment ago you said
that during your time at Hillsborough radial fences had
been put up and I think perhaps that was a slip of the
tongue on your part, perhaps you were not listening quite
as carefully as you have been listening to some of the
other questions, but as I understand your evidence during
the time you were at Hillsborough there were no radial
fences put up, they had been put up before and then after
your term of duty? - A. You are correct sir.

So already when you +'-ook over there was a situation of
radial fences but not the radial fences that were there
on the day in 1989. I think we know something about this.
What was not there, of course, were the area which is
Pen 5 and what was not there was that one radial fence
that goes up which distinguishes the central pen that
makes it 3 and 4, it was just a central pen? - A. It was.

But Mr. Chapman no doubt had had to grapple with the
effects of the penning system? - A. No doubt.

And was that something that he talked to you about? -
A. Well I suppose he would but I can't remember it
specifically.
But that would be something that you would now, all this
time ago, assume to be the case? - A. Yes.

And would he also have spoken to you about the different
systems of filling the Leppings Lane terrace, the
systems which you have told us about? - A. Yes, I should
add also because we are forgetting one person, that
there was the Chief Superintendent there at the time,
Superintendent Robin Herald. Now he took a great deal
of interest in what went on inside the ground, more bo
than the subsequent Superintendents who seemed to spend
more time outside the ground.

I shall corae to them in a moment, but certainly with
Mr. Herald, Chief Superintendent Herald, you tell us
a bit. You were going to go on about that and I
stopped you, but could you tell us then how he helped?
- A. Well he seemed to spend more time inside the
ground. Now I must add this: he was not there very
long.  In fact after the Leeds match I think it was
within months that he transferred and another Chief
Superintendent came and we were unfortunate inasmuch as
we had three in fairly rapid succession, but Mr. Herald
used to be in the ground, he was at the briefings, he
was in the Control Box and he was around more inside
the ground than subsequent Chief Superintendents.

      I recall him saying to me:  "When I leave you
must make sure Doug that you have got hold of this
because whoever comes will not be familiar with
Hillsborough".
                                     D.J. LOCK



Right. You mentioned Chief Superintendent Herald's
name, a man of obviously great experience? - A. Yes.

In the context of my question relating to discussions
between you and Mr. Chapman as to the methods of filling
the pens on the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes.

I assume you did so because you clearly had discussions
with Mr. Herald about the way in which those pens would
be filled? - A. Yes.

We know there were two approaches.   One was the sequential
filling approach? - A. Yes.

And the other was when you had or felt you had sufficient
away fans, because we are only talking about away fans,
aren't we? - A. Yes.

To give them the whole of the terrace? - A. That is
right sir.

And from your evidence the position seems to be the
method that was adopted was they would be allowed to go
where they wanted but if you felt that the time had come
to stop them going to a particular area you would do
so? - A. Yes sir.

Was that the system that was employedbefore youstarted
and which Mr. Herald told you about? - A. Yes sir.

You were then particularly fortunate in that you did
not have to work out the advantages and disadvantages
of those two systems yourself? - A. That is true sir.

Could I just ask you about another aspect of this:
apart from the invaluable assistance before you took
over that you received from Mr. Chapman and Mr. Herald,
I assume that you also had taken over a team of senior
Officers who had experience of policing Hillsborough?
- A. That is right sir. All the group Inspectors were
of long standing in 'F' division and in particular
Inspector Clive Calvert had been the Liaison Officer
there for quite a number of years.

It may be difficult, Mr. Lock, but please try and help
me with this: had you not had the invaluable assistance
of Mr. Chapman and Mr. Herald, when you first took over
you would, would you not, have had to have leant heavily
on the experience of those senior Officers, one of whom
you have just mentioned? - A. Conditionally, yes.  I
say "conditionally" because I should also inform you
in 1979 prior to my promotion I had been Deputy Sub-
Divisional Commander at Rotherham where we had in those
days I believe a Second Division team and prior to that
                                   D.J. LOCK



I had been a uniform Inspector in Barnsley and I had
in both those towns been involved in policing, so I
was not completely ignorant of the manner in which
policing at football matches was carried out, but
obviously when I went to a brand new ground doing
this new function it was invaluable to have people
such as Clive Calvert who had done the job for years.

And had you not had the input that you have told us
about from Mr. Herald and Mr. Chapman, you would have
expected to receive information from your most Senior
Officers as to the way in which things were done?
- A. Of course sir.

And the potential problems? - A. Yes.

And how to get round those problems? - A. Yes.

If you had not had the help from Mr. Chapman and
Mr. Herald and if by some misfortune you had not had
the benefit of the sort of advice that I have just
been talking about from your Senior Officers, it would
by - it is a matter of commonsense perhaps M r . Lock
- it would have taken you some time, would it not,
to have got to grips with the problems, the difficulties,
the things to look out for, a matter of comraonsense?
- A. Of course sir.
Particularly with an enterprise like running a football
match it would have been necessary to have seen a numoer
of matches (a) that were at almost full capacity. Yes.
- A. Yes.
And I expect a number of matches where very few people
came to see the different problems that emerged in boti
instances? - A. Quite so.
To take one small example of that.  I don't know, you
may have been told that one of the reasons for having
the radial gates at the back of the pens was to allow
fans to go from one to the other? - A. Yes.

 And in doing so to find their own level on the terrace,
 as we have heard? - A. Yes.
 Unless you had been already, let us assume you are not
 told:  "By the way it has got a tendency to get blocked
 up". Having been told that, unless you had actually been
 to a game and seen that that actually took place, that
 sometimes it was difficult to see, you would not know?
 - A. No, unfortunately lots of considerations are made
 at empty grounds and when you get the crowds in it is
 of course a different proposition.
                                      D.J. LOCK



Absolutely, I am very grateful to you. Now similarly
you have told us about visual assessment of crowds?
- A. Yes sir.

That is something else which is bound to be based on
experience? - A. Undoubtedly.

We have heard Mr. Lock, and I am not going to weary you
with the Green Guide again, but we have heard that there
are capacities on a terrace which relate to the speed
of exit from the terrace, determined for example by the
Fire Service? - A. Yes.

And there will be a capacity on the terrace determined
by reference to density? - A. Yes.

The sort of formulae that Mr. Payne was asking you about
yesterday? - A. Yes sir.

And the safe capacity is as I understand it and somebody
will shout at me if I am wrong, is that which is the
lower of the two? - A. Yes.

That means a capacity crowd is not necessarily one where
the whole of the terrace is full to the same density?
- A. Well an example of that sir is that the ground at
Hillsborough used to hold up to 75,000 before safety
regulations came into effect which ultimately reduced
that by one third.

So you can get a situation where for whatever reason
the crowd in the centre is greater than the crov/d at
the sides but still perfectly safe? - A. Yes.

Back to the matter that I was asking you about. Clearly
then if one is relying on visual assessment, and tliut
is based on experience, you need something to compare
your visual assessment with before you can determine
whether that is more than usual or less than usual.
It is a matter of commonsense? - A. Yes, a n s w e r i n g the
question as you put it "more than usual or less than
usual" you do need some experience to make comparisons.

And you also need to have some experience of what is
crowded and what is not, or ot/ercrowded and what is not,
to be able to make a sensible judgment? - A. I am not
too sure about that sir.

Well if you have nothing to compare it with then to a
degree you have got to rely, haven't you, on the
experience of others who have seen a crowded terrace?
- A. But I thought you asked me the question whether or
not you needed experience every time to judge whether
something was full or not.
                                                        48


                                      D.J. LOCK



Q. Well there are degrees of fullness, aren't there? - A.
   Yes, but comfortably full.

Q. And if you have never been in a situation - let's posit
   this at the moment - if you have never been in a situation
   where you have needed to close the tunnel to prevent more
   people coming in then you have nothing to compare, if you
   are looking at it for the first time, that with against
   what you have previously done? - A. No, I accept that.

Q. I think I put it very badly in the first instance. And
   again it is similar to the example I gave you about not
   appreciating the difficulties that people may have in
   seeing the radial fence at the back.  If you have not seen
   it happen before you have nothing to compare it to? - A.
   That is true sir.

Q. So again if you were - and I talk about you now in the
   situation you found yourself in - if you were in that
   position in 1982 you would have to rely on the experience
   of others to give you assistance and help? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And advise you about those matters to which your attention
   should be directed?- A. Of course.

Q. Can I then move on from there to another point, but it
   is allied to it. One matter I can deal with very quickly
   and that is this: when you have a system of sequential
   filling the order, in the Operational Order, would be that
   for example if it was intended that home supporters would
   be allowed, and I am talking about your time now in the
   job? - A. Yes.

Q. There was still a time when home supporters would be
   allowed to share the terrace - I am talking about Leppings
   Lane as v/ell - with away supporters. If home supporters
   would be on one side of the terrace and the away supporters
   on the others and it was said in the Operational Order
   "That it is intended that the central pen will be closed
   unless numbers of supporters necessitate that it will be
   opened and this will only be done when instructed by
   Control"? - A. Yes sir.




                          Q. I am reading
                                                D, J.   LOCK


I am reading it, so no-one thinks there is any mystery
about it, from an Operational Order that in fact is
signed by Mr. Lock for a Sheffield Wednesday and
Liverpool game on the 17th of January, 1984? - A. Yes,
sir.

Rather strangely it said this at paragraph 141, and no-
one need have copies, sir:

     "Despite constant success Liverpool do not have a
     large away following and have requested only 4,450
     tickets for sale to their supporters."

How times have changed! - A. Yes.

This was an Operational Order signed by you and from what
I have read from it this was an occasion, despite the
fact, and please accept it from me for the moment, that
an attendance of 45,000-plus was expected where because
of the matter I have just mentioned - not many away fans
expected - sequential filling of the pen was going to
take place? - A. Yes, sir.

Just to look at that for a moment, and if you feel I may
have got it wrong you say so and I will let you look at
this but I didn't feel it was necessary to copy the whole
document.   You said that Chief Superintendent Moseley
would be in charge of the whole event? - A. Yes, sir.

Superintendent Lock would be in the Police Control and in
charge of operations within the ground? - A. Yes.

Chief Inspectors Greenwood, Leppings Lane side, and
Lithgow, Penis tone Road side, would be responsible for
operations outside the ground? - A. Yes, sir.

Then you went on, as we have seen in our Operational
Orders, the ones that concern 1989 and, to a degree,
1988, to deal at other stages with what other people were
going to do? - A. Yes, sir.

Just a couple of questions about this.   You are a
Superintendent.   You are in the Police Control and you
are in charge of operations within the ground? - A. Yes,
sir.
There are two Chief Inspectors who are in charge of
operations outside the ground? - A. That is correct, sir.

The Chief Superintendent is in overall control but with
no specific function? - A. That is right, sir.

Wasn't Mr. Moseley one of those Officers who tended to be
here and there? - A. He did, sir.
                                                 D. J .   LOCK


So you were in a position, as I understand it, and we
have had this evidence before, that Mr. Murray was in in
1989? - A. Yes.

As I understand what you are saying, accepting at the
moment this was a matter of sequential filling, you were
the one who determined when the pen needed to be closed
or not? - A. Yes, that is right, sir.

You didn't for a moment need to go to Mr. Moseley for his
permission? - A. Oh, no.

From what you have been saying he didn't have the sort of
experience you had? - A. If I could just add that after
Mr. Herald left there was a Chief Superintendent
Broomhead and then Mr. Moseley.   Mr. Broomhead didn't^
stay very long and only worked a few matches and I don't
think Mr. Moseley had been there very long then.   As you
say, they had very little experience of policing big
football matches.

So that was clearly a responsibility you felt you had at
that time, as you said earlier, to take operational
decisions within the ground? - A. The Chief
Superintendent in fact had insisted that that is what I
did.

Let us put aside sequential filling.   Can I ask you then
about the other system you have told us about, which is
fans having the whole of the terrace? - A. Yes, sir.

Unless you think I have misrepresented anything so far as
the sequential filling order is concerned by reading out
to you how the pens were to be filled and then closed,
that is, the Orders Control, effectively, I can leave
that? - A. Yes, sir.

What would be said in the Operational Order so far as the
second method was concerned, about this? - A. You stretch
my memory, sir.   I believe it was something to the
effect that after having outlined the number of away fans
which were expected and their conduct, I believe we would
say the whole of the west end of the ground has been
dedicated to the away support.   With the exception of
those supporters of Sheffield Wednesday who hold season
tickets in the stand, the whole of the terracing would be
dedicated to the away fans and pens will be closed as
instructed by the Control Commander.

Meaning you? - A. Yes.

You having that responsibility? - A. Yes, sir.
Would that go in every order when it was that approach -
and I am not going to keep on wearying everybody by
saying when it is this approach because now we are
assuming always in the questions I ask that the whole
terrace is available. - A. I can't really recall whether
it would.   I think it would.

It should do, shouldn't it, if   that was the case? - A.   Oh
yes.
You haven't mentioned in what you have told us about
anything about any individual Officer monitoring or
looking at the Leppings Lane terrace, the pens, for
overcrowding.   Is that because there would be nothing in
such an Order? - A. That's right, sir, there wasn't
anything in the Order about specific Officers looking at
the crowds for crowding.
Why is that? - A. Because I could fulfil that function.

I think you have told us there   were occasions when
Mr. Creaser whom you have mentioned by name and Mr. Sykes
whom you have mentioned by name, would come up and tell
you? - A. Oh, yes. When I say I was observing it, they
were packing the crowds in.   They were directing the
crowds in.   When I say "packing", I don't mean
packing...
I think we all understand what you mean. - A. They were
directing the crowds in and they would radio and say to
me, "How many more have we got outside, sir?" because
they would inside the ground on those occasions.   I
would contact the outside Officers and they would tell^
me.   Bob Creaser might say, "Have we got enough room?
I would say, "Come and have a look."   Or he would say,
"Can I come up and have a look, because I have got so
many in the concourse."   He would come up and say, Oh,
yes, there is room at the front," or words to that
effect.
I also understood you to say yesterday that there were
occasions when your Inspectors, whoever they may be,
actually took the decision themselves to close the
tunnel? - A. That's right.   I can remember on one
occasion fans were coming in in large numbers and Clive
Calvert could see from the back of the terrace that the
pen was getting full.   He barriered it across and
informed me, "I have closed the centre pen."

Now Mr. Calvert in those circumstances, and correct me if
I am wrong, I assume Mr. Creaser and Mr. Sykes on the
occasions you have told us about when they were involved,
would be the Inspector in charge of the Serials or
Leppings Lane terrace, concourse and turnstile area? - A.
Yes, sir.
Although different Serials within the group of Serials
that they had to control would be doing different things
within that area, they would have responsibility for the
whole of that area? - A. That's true, sir.

That responsibility, therefore, as some of their men
would be behind the turnstile, some of their men, you
tell us, having something to do with the terrace or on
the concourse, their role on those occasions would be to
pass from the concourse to the terrace? - A. That's
right, sir.

What you are saying is this, that without any specific
instruction in the Operational Order, they would know to
look at the crowd in the central pens to see whether
there was any overcrowding? - A. Can I just add that
inside the ground, on the pitch and in the areas such as
on the Leppings Lane end where we appreciated we would
get away fans and possibly problems and trouble, I always
made it a policy to ensure that the Officers who worked
there were F Division Officers.   They would work, not
every match, but they would work the majority of matches
over a season, so these Offices knew the areas, knew the
ground layout and as you were asking me early about
experience in being able to determine levels of fullness,
they were able to do that also.   We worked - although I
say "I" and forgive me when I say I made this decision,
quite often they would be saying to me, "Sir, I
suggest...", which meant that really we had to do that
because they were experienced Officers and we were
working as a team.

Not only would they have the ability to judge whether it
was time - and when I say "they", every time I am talking
about the Inspector who was involved in this particular
function, the Leppings Lane terrace area, you would not
expect an Inspector who was on the Kop to be doing this,
at least not in relation to Leppings Lane terraces? - A.
Quite, sir.

They not only had the ability to judge when the pen
should be shut, but they also appreciated that part of
their role was to monitor? - A. Yes.

You are saying that that was because they had   experience?
- A. Yes.

And because at some stage right at the beginning of their
tour of duty somebody in a position no doubt you were in,
had asked them to do that? - A. Yes.
                                                                53

                                                      D. J .   LOCK


    Q. You were aware that that was necessary because somebody
       very kindly had given you that information? - A. That's
       right, sir.
H   Q. Would you have felt entitled to expect such an Inspector
       to let you know when he thought that the tunnel needed
       closing? - A. Generally, yes, butI can see a situation,
       and I said that Clive Calvert put thebarriers across,
       where he could have been up five minutes earlier and had
       a look at what the crowd was like, saw there were still
       vacancies, gone back to the concourse, and had seen a
       great gathering of supporters in the concourse and
       thought to himself, "These are not all going to get in.
       I will barrier across," rather than say, "Please, sir,
       can I close the centre pen?   There are lot more
       outside," and I have to look and say, "Yes," and then I
       relay back to him - because we are always being
       interrupted with radio messages - and I relay back to
       him, "Yes, close it," because by that time it might have
       been over full.   I would expect the Inspector to be able
       to use his initiative and do this based on his knowledge.

    Q. The very least you would expect is to be informed? ~ A.
       Quite.
    Q. If circumstances required it, you would expect him to act
       on his own initiative? - A. Yes.

    Q. After all, he is a Police Inspector and as I understand
       it in this city at the very moment, Inspectors have the
       control of large areas of it? - A. They do, sir, and
       nights on their own.

    Q. It is clearly important in those circumstances for the
       Inspector in charge of that area to remain within that
       area?   Do you see what I mean? - A. Yes.

    Q. Otherwise, the information which he could give you, or
       the initiative which he could take himself, could not be
       taken by him? - A. True.

    Q. That is a matter of logic? - A. Yes.

    Q. If someone was looking at one of your Operational Orders
       for the whole terrace, would there be anything...   Let
       me put it a different way.   What would be there to tell
       them that some part of the ground, some part of the
       terrace, should be closed off would be that little bit
       you have just told us about? - A. Yes, sir.



                 Q. This is someone who had,
                                                  D. J .   LOCK


This is someone who had come totally fresh, totally new
to policing, being in charge of policing at
Hillsborough. Put yourself in that position. - A.
Well, you have got to go back a stage before you do
that, because obviously if we had a new Inspector
posted to the Division, and I can't remember this
situation arising I must add, but if we did have I
would have thought that we would have taken him down to
the Ground and given him a run through, a dry run.
Then when we come to the actual match day, I always
briefed the men myself, and I briefed everyone, the
entire turn-out that day, that was my Chief Inspector,
my Inspectors, Sergeants and the PCs. Thereafter,
because what the Police Officers, and it was on a "need
to know" basis, what they needed to know as against
what an Inspector needed to know, obviously more in
relation to his area, I would have the Inspectors and
the Sergeants aside and give them a briefing on their
own. So if we got that particular situation arising,
and I went through and - as I used to do - the serials
with the Sergeants, and asked them if they understood
the nature of their duties, and then the Inspectors, to
ask them if they knew the nature of their duties in
relation to a sector rather than a serial, and if they
had any problems we would discuss it then.

In fact, I was not really asking you about someone who
was at Inspector level but I will come back to the
point I was asking you about in a moment.  Can I just
deal with this question of people at Inspector level? -
A. Yes.

     MR. ISAACS:    Sir, I cannot recall whether the
Operational Order for 1989 is an exhibit in the case?
I anticipate it is. I don't know what the number is, I
am afraid, and perhaps I could be assisted.

       MR. GRIFFITHS:      285, sir.

       MR. ISAACS:      Have you got that? - A. Yes, I have,
sir.

I would like you to look first of all at page 98, which
is Sub-Sector 7. - A. Are these the numbers in the
bottom right hand corner?

Yes. Dealing with Serials 14 and 15. - A. I am sorry,
I only appear to go to 81.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sergeant Griffiths will come and
help, I hope. Mine has different numbers on, entirely
my fault, but not intended to confuse.
                                                D.. J .   LOCK


     THE CORONERs   I wonder whether we ought to pause
because you are starting a new topic. May I ask you,
please, without putting you under any pressure, if you
can give me an indication of how long you think your
cross-examination is likely to be?

     MR. ISAACS:   I told Mr. King I would be ten
minutes; I was being a little tongue in cheek, but I
did not expect to be as long as I have been.  I
anticipate I will probably be another half to three
quarters of an hour, at the least.

     THE CORONERs     What about you, Mr. Manning?

     MR. MANNING:  If my guesstimates are anywhere
near as good or bad as Mr. Isaacs, sir, I will be here
until the weekend] However, I hope that my learned
friend will have covered many of the points and I may
have to re-cover some of them or recover some of them,
depending .... (laughter)

     THE CORONER:     Very good.   Mr. Catchpole?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     I shall be very short at present.

     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen of the Jury,
can I just say that we are going to pause for lunch.  I
think you had better prepare yourself that we will be
going on at least until 4.30 today.  Is that going to
be very difficult for anybody? I think it is is going
to be 4.30 as well because we have got to get through
at least the next two witnesses before the weekend, and
that is Dr. Nicholson and Dr. Eastwood.  If we don t
need to we won't do it, but I am giving you warning now
so you can do your planning.

               (Luncheon Adjournment)
     THE CORONER:    Just remind me which page, Mr.
Isaacs.

     MR. ISAACS:   We were looking, sir, at the
Operational Order for 1989, Serials 14 and 15, Sub
Sector 7.

Mr. Lock, do   you have that now? - A. I do, sir.

The area that is being dealt with is the area Leppings
Lane Terrace  and Rear Enclosure (South), and Leppings
Lane Terrace  and Rear Enclosure (North)? - A. That is
correct, sir.

So that area, as we mentioned earlier, would be under
the control of an Inspector whose role would be to move
through the tunnel between concourse and terrace? - A.
Yes, sir.

With someone who was of experience, in your day, you
would expect such an Inspector - and you mentioned Mr.
Creaser and Mr. Sykes in particular - to certainly
monitor the level of the crowd in the central pen? - A.
Yes, sir.

We see that the Inspector involved in April 1989 was
Inspector White? - A. Yes, sir.

     MR. ISAACS:   I understand, sir, although I was
not here at the time, that it has been said in
evidence, and perhaps you could confirm this for me,
that Inspector White had that self-same duty the year
before?

     THE CORONER:    I don't know whether it was in
evidence but it is certainly not the name on the
Operational Order for 1988.   It is Inspector Walker, it
says. Whether that is a typographical error or not I
would not know.   I think somebody did actually say
that, come to think of it, in evidence.   I am just
looking at the copy of the 1988 Order.

     MR. ISAACS:    Certainly that is the evidence, as I
understand it.

     THE CORONER:    I think you are right.

     MR. ISAACS:   Could you also help me with this,
sir, before I ask further questions of Mr. Lock? Is it
right that the evidence was that Inspector White was an
experienced man on these terraces, and the stewards, I
think, knew him, if not by name by his beard and by a
nickname?
                                                                 57
A                                                      D. J .   LOCK


              THE CORONERs   That is right.  I have forgotten
         what the nickname was but you are quite right.

              MR. ISAACS:    Captain Birdseye.

B             THE CORONER:   That is it, yes.

              MR. ISAACS:    As being somebodywhowasregularly
         on this duty on the concourse and between the terraces?

              THE CORONER:   Yes.

    Q.        MR. ISAACS: Against that background then, Mr.
         Lock, would you in your day have expected such an
C        Inspector to havecarried out the function that  I have
         just mentioned? - A. Yes, sir.

              MR. ISAACS:   Sir, before I ask Mr. Lock any
         further questions about this, may I just ascertain one
         other fact which may be of some assistance? Is it your
         intention to call Mr. White to give evidence before
         this Inquest?
D             THE CORONER:   The answer is no.  I have got a
         reason for it, it is not just entirely arbitrary.

              MR. ISAACS:   I appreciate that, sir.  I wondered
         because it does seem to leave a rather great hole.

              THE CORONER:    It does, you are quite right and I
         am very aware of it.
E   Q.        MR. ISAACS: That is dealing with an Inspector
         who was at that particular station, and as you have
         said, because of his experience he would know what to
         do.  In addition to that, however, there would also be
         those words that you mentioned actually in the
         Operational Order itself, to the effect that the whole
         of the terrace would be dedicated to away fans and the
         pens on the terrace would be controlled by the
         Commander? - A. Yes, sir.
F
    Q. Meaning the Ground Commander, that is you, in those
       circumstances? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Let us take, Mr. Lock, the situation of let us say an
       Inspector, who was not experienced, and who was not
       aware of the system that had been adopted, year in year
       out, week in week out, of monitoring the pens and the
       closure of the tunnel - do you follow me? - A. I do.
G
    Q. The only thing in the Operational Order that would give
       him any indication, unless of course he was told, that
       the central pens should be monitored and possibly
                                                               58

                                                    D. J .   LOCK


       closed, would be those words that I have just referred
       to and you referred to earlier? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. In the event that those words were not included in an
       Operational Order and the Inspector was not told, and
B      he did not have any prior experience, there would be
       nothing at all, would there, to alert him to the job
       which he would have to do? - A. As you describe them,
       sir, no, there wouldn't.

    Q. Similarly there would be nothing to alert him to the
       idea, the system, that it was for the Police to monitor
       the numbers going into the central pens, and for
       possibly at some stage the central pens to be shut and
       the fans diverted? - A. Not within this Order, sir.

    Q. The same must therefore be true not only for an
       Inspector but any senior Officer, and so there is no
       mistake about it, let me suggest Chief Superintendent
       Duckenfield if it be the case. - A. Yes.

    Q. Who, looking at an Order that did not include the words
       that you have mentioned, who was not experienced, let
       us posit, in the ways of working of the Ground, and who
       had not been told that this is the way it was done,
       similarly there would be nothing to put him on notice?
       - A. No, that is true, sir.

    Q. I am very grateful. He would in those circumstances
       have to rely very heavily upon assistance from those
       under him who knew about the system? - A. He would,
       sir.

    Q. Mr. Lock, help me with this if you will. You were
       asked yesterday about risks and the assessment of
       risks. As I understood your evidence you were saying
       that your ability to assess the risks - I think Mr.
       King in particular asked you about this - assess
       certain risks, was the result of your considerable
       experience.  I think you said that in terms, or the
       question was put in those terms, "With your
       experience".  I think that is right, isn't it? - A. I
       think it is, sir.

    Q. Put yourself - and it may be very difficult and if it
       is please say, "I can't answer the question" - put
       yourself in the situation where you have not received
       the help, assistance, advice, briefings, that you have
       mentioned from those two colleagues.  Put yourself in a
       situation where you have not been to another -- no,
       let me put it another way, you have not previously been
       in control of an all, I was going to say ticket, but a
       capacity game at Hillsborough, so you have not had the
       opportunity previously to look at the terraces in the




H
                                             D. J .   LOCK


way that we discussed earlier.  If you are not aware
that the radial pens can become obscured; if you are
not aware that it is difficult on the terraces when
they are crowded to go upwards and back; if you are not
aware, as you clearly were after a while that you could
not leave fans to find their own level; and if you had
been led to believe that fans could be left to find
their own level without any Police intervention, then
the risks of overcrowding which you referred to and the
need to monitor the central pens would not be apparent,
would they? - A. No, I think it is a very invidious
position and I think they would be obscured.




      /Q. I am grateful
I am grateful. May I move on to the day itself? On
the day from time to time you were in your Club Control
Room, that is right? - A. Yes, sir.

With plenty of things to do there apart from look at
television monitors? - A. Yes, sir, quite a lot.

But you have got the   monitors there      if yourattention
is directed to them?   - A. Yes.

Just as when you were Commander at the ground you had
other things to do but look at television monitors,
there would be occasions when you would glance at them?
- A. There certainly would, sir.

We know there are at least two monitors showing what
the two or more fixed cameras are picking up from the
Leppings Lane terraces, is that correct? - A. No, sir.
My cameras are all fitted on to the — they are all
fixed to the turnstiles.

Did I say terraces? - A. You did, yes.

Then I am sorry because I meant turnstiles. Forget
about terraces. You are absolutely right. - A. Yes, my
cameras show the turnstile entrances.

There are, in   fact, three cameras,   are there not,
camera 16, 14   and 12 in particular   that show the
Leppings Lane   turnstile area? - A.   I do not know the
exact numbers   of them but they, in   fact, do that, yes.

Although they are fixed they are directed at the
turnstiles and the area above the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Your attention was not directed to anything that was
happening at the Leppings Lane turnstiles until the
time you have told us about? - A. That is true, sir.

Although you had the opportunity to look at the video
screen or the film screen, the closed circuit TV screen
is the proper way of putting it. - A. The monitor, sir.

During the course of the afternoon from say two until
ten to three, nothing you saw alerted you to any
problems? - A. That is correct, sir.

That is despite the fact that we know from twenty to to
quarter to three there were people actually coming up
over the top of those terraces? - A. That may be so,
sir.

Turnstiles I mean? - A. Yes, I understand the question.
                                                             61*

                                                   D. J. LOCK



Q. Something you just did not notice? - A. True.

Q. Similarly, we know there is within the Club Control
   Room this monitor which shows the numbers of people who
   have come into the ground, that is right, is it not? -
   A. That is the computer monitor, yes, sir.

Q. It shows the numbers who have come into particular
   areas in the ground? - A. It does.

Q. Is it right that despite the fact on any view that the
   numbers coming into the Leppings Lane turnstiles at
   that end would have been less than perhaps the previous
   year it never caused you any concern? - A. I was not
   aware that they were less. There was nothing to cause
   me concern but I did not notice any disparity between
   the 1988 and the 1989 entries into the Leppings Lane
   end, sir.

Q. Let us put disparity to one side. You have got the
   figures coming up and you would glance at them from
   time to time? - A. Yes.

Q. Forgetting about what happened the year before and
   whether there was any comparison you could make or not
   make it would show, for example, as we know must have
   been the case that by quarter past two only a certain
   number of Liverpool fans coming in at that end of the
   ground had got in as compared to the number of
   Nottingham fans who had come in elsewhere? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. You glance at it, you take it in and it does not cause
   you any concern? - A. No, sir.

Q. I understand, and correct me if I am wrong, that as
   between 2.20 and the time when you eventually went up
   following the opening of the gate — so that would be
   some time after 2.48, possibly five to three with all
   the things you had to do? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You had been up on to the pitch or in the pitch area on
   some three or four occasions. Am I right about that? -
   A. Not within those times, sir. You said twenty past
   two until approximately five to three.  I had gone down
   there earlier when I walked through with Superintendent
   Greenwood but after that the first time I went to the
   pitch was on the first opening of C Gate and the second
   time after I had     returned to the    ControlRoom and then
   went back to the pitch.

Q. Mr. Lock, it is a very long time ago? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                              62-

                                                      D. J. LOCK



Q. Certainly I am not going to suggest you should be
   criticised in any way if you may have forgotten
   something. Could I remind you of something you said to
   Lord Justice Taylor? - A. Certainly, sir.

Q. It is at page 66 and, in fact, it was Mr. King who was
   asking you questions.  You said this:

       "Q. Between the hours of half past two and
       three o'clock, did you at any stage have an
       opportunity to see the state of the Leppings
       Lane end terrace? - A. Yes.

       Q. From where? - A. From the pitch.

       Q. At what sort of time? - A. If I say I went
       down on to the pitch three or four times
       between twenty past two and the time I went
       down because of the gate that would be ten to
       three-ish, I went three or four times."

   Having remind you of that, if that is not right you
   tell us.  If that helps to jog your memory well so be
   it and you will tell us that that is right? - A. It
   does not, sir.  It does not help me.

Q. On those occasions, however many there were, and I
   think you accept there were some occasions? - A. Yes.

Q. Before the final time you went after the gate had been
   opened, you would have had an opportunity of looking at
   the terraces? - A. I would, sir.

Q. We know because it is established fact that the centre
   pens were fuller than the wing pens? - A. Yes.

Q. There was this disparity that you have been asked
   questions about? - A. Yes.

Q. But there was nothing when you saw that disparity on
   those occasions that gave you any cause for concern? -
   A. If there had have been, sir, I would have done
   something.

Q. So the very fact there is a disparity in itself is not
   a cause for concern because that is something that
   would be usual in a game? - A. We have seen on the
   photographs much later in the previous year disparities
   between the centre and the wings of the Kop.
                                                D. J. LOCK


Just one final matter, the Control Box; you would be
sitting where I think Mr. Murray sat on the day that is
in the left hand corner? - A. That is right, sir.




                           /Q.   I understand and again.
                                                            64


                                          D.J. LOCK



Q. I understand, and again correct me if I am wrong, that the
   space to stand in behind the chairs of the Officers who
   sit on the front row, Mr. Murray, Radio Operator, Telephone
   Operator, is about two, two-and-a-half feet? - A. That is
   right sir.

Q.   Clearly very cramped? - A. Yes.

Q.   Perhaps    this is commonsense but could you confirm it,
     that the    further away you are from that left-hand side
     seat the   more limited one's view is of the Leppings Lane
     terrace?    - A. You mean away to the right and to the back?

Q. To the right and to the back? - A. The window sill itself •
   would start to limit the view you have along the terrace
   the further back you were, yes.

Q.   It starts to get in your way.  First of all youdon't have
     the same angle of vision? - A. That is right.

Q. And secondly the construction of the box itself would
   start to get in your way? - A. I think as I said
   yesterday, sir, sometimes to see even underneath the
   pen you had to - I will demonstrate again - lift yourself
   up like that to look under, so the further back you were
   of course the window bottom would start to interfere with
   your line of vision.

           MR. ISAACS:    I am very grateful.   Thank you very
     much, Mr. Lock.


                    Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Q. A day in the life of the Controller of the Police Control
   Box? - A. Yes sir.

Q. I don't want to take you from the moment that you signed
   on from duty, but I do want you to give us a flavour of
   the sort of things that are happening particularly at a
   big match and I know that you have not worked a semi-final,
   so you can't help us as to that, but on a big match all
   the things that are happening encapsulated as you are
   sitting there in the left-hand chair because you are the
   first person that we have heard of that was in that
   Control Box.  If you can help us there picturing it in
   your mind's eye? - A. Well of course sir things happen
   and I don't know whether they did on the particular day,
   but there are things which happen which are peculiar to
   that particular time of the year.

           If you think, and I am not sure whether your client
     Mr. Murray was in fact in the same situation as I, but
                                                        65


                                     D.J. LOCK



  to start with we used to get down to the game and if it
  was a day match, if it was a 3 o'clock kick-off and it
  was going to be a big crowd we would be there, I would
  be there about 12 o'clock and I would be at the Police
  Room - that is not the Police Control Box - the Police
  Room where the cells are and I would be looking to see
  whether all the arrangements had been made for prisoners
  and that could include on a large match the mobile cell
  area.

        I would also have to see that the arrangements
  were made for briefing and then I would have to start
  by carrying out the briefings as I have described to the
  entire Police attendance; then to the Inspectors and
  the Sergeants.

        Then I would in those days, because there was not
  a man in the position of Security Officer as I au now,
  I would go and see the Club Secretary because we always
  provided him with a copy of the Operational Order and altnouc;
  we discussed it briefly, of course he had had it a few days
  and there may be aspects of the match that he wishes to
  discuss.

Q. What sort of time in round figures might you get up to
   your Control Box itself? - A. Round about 1 o'clock.

Q. Would you leave that Control Box? - A. No, not afterwards
   apart from obvious natural cause but apart from that I
   would stay there the whole of the time with one exception
   I should add, I have omitted to say this, that today I
   think it is the Chief Superintendent but in my day I used
   to always go and see the referee because the referee had
   to know the emergency Evacuation procedures and I would
   tell him such things as:  "You will hear the coded message
   go out. You will be busy with the match and you won't
   want to stop it at that time in any case, so I will ensure
   that my Inspector who is on the pitch itself will approach
   one of your linesmen and tell him to attract your attention
   straightaway."

Q. So pausing there because thank you you have answered iay
   next question as well.  Save for the calls of nature and
   the briefing of the referee, once you got to your Control
   Box that was you in situ until everything was clear ready
   to sign off? - A. That is right sir.

Q. Help us now get the picture of the typical sort of things
   that were to be dealt with within that Police Control Box.
   People may think, you see, that that was the best view
   of the game and that you did not really have vory much to
   do, Mr. Lock? - A. That would have been nice. Well of
   course the first thing is we have already arranged with
   the Club for the opening of the turnstiles and if the
                                                             66

                                          D.J. LOCK



      turnstiles were going to open up at half-past-1, quarter-
      to-2, invariably you would find that fans, mostly the
      away fans, would start to arrive a bit earlier. The
      first thing that you wanted to do, you wanted to make sure
B     that your Officers were outside controlling the situation
      in the whole of the ground and you needed rather than
      having the fans standing around doing nothing, you needed
      to be able to get them into the ground. Now I am not saying
      there was much to do inside the ground but at least they
      were there and you could see them.

    Q. Would you be in contact with those Officers? - A. Yes,
       we would be in contact with the Officers; directing the
       Inspectors to take their Serials, to place them oucside
       the ground and at the same time because we had Club radios
       then, we would either be calling up the Secretary by radio
       oi; by landline and asking them if they could get some of
       their gatemen out to open the gates because we had a build Uj-
       of a crowd in whatever area of the ground it was.

    Q. Let's take some unexpected incidents that people might
       think are not in the control of the Box, if one puts it ^
       that way. An accident close to the ground, motor accident?
       — A. I was going to go on to that sir. Of course once we
       got the gates open we start to get the crowds arriving and
       of course if we have got a big match and if they are using
       the Ml, and I say this notwithstanding they might be coming
       from the South, one might expect that people travelling
       from the south would exit from the Ml on the south of
       the city, we did not want football match traffic coming      ^
       through the city. So we took them all up to intersection 3o
       which is above Sheffield and nearly to Barnsley and i-hen
       at Tankersley there was a big layby and our Road Traffic
       Patrol men used to bring off the coaches and park them
       up in that layby, because if it was a big match we were
       very fortunate as well in having a Railway Station au
       Cole Road which was not used normally, but when there
       were football excursion specials we used to have them
       shunted in by British Rail into there, so we could
       get a situation where we had 10 or 15 coaches standing
       in the layby at Tankersley and then we could have trains
       coming. Nov/ the last thing we wanted was for everybody
        to arrive together so what we did, we couordinated so
        I could say:  "Right, we have got the trains coining in.
       We will receive the train in five minutes. Hold the
        road traffic at Tankersley; the train is in and off-loaded;
        they are walking down; bring in the coaches ....

    Q. You are on a synchronised exercise? - A. Yes.

    Q. But then some clown goes and has a motor accident?
       A. Then there is a motor accident. There was a bad
       accident on one occasion,  people unfortunately
                                                                67

                                      D.J. LOCK



  attending the ground. W& have heart attacks; we have people
  falling breaking legs; we have to call up the emergency
  services, ambulances and such like to deal with those.
  On a big match we usually have, even now, two or three
  incidents of people either taken ill or having accidents.

Q. Then you have got the drink situation and the control or
   people going to public houses; whether public houses a.>.e
   open or closed and there are public order situations
   inside/outside public houses? - A. And of course since^
   the exclusion of drink in the ground people have tended
   to go to public houses and on occasions <_hey have arrived
   at the ground in a drunken state.   I can remember a match
   against Chelsea when we had to exclude a whole coachload
   send them back down the motorway tellinq the Forces as
   they were linkincr up that this coachload of Chelsea
   supporters were coming back.

Q. And then you have got Officers on the way down to the
   ground, Officers who may be reporting things that are
   happening? - A. That is right sir.

Q. Householders who may be being inconvenienced about things?
   - A. Cars broken into; people reporting children lost;
   property lost; people going to the wrong end or the grounc,
   getting into the wrong end of the ground on occasions and
   having to be moved from one end to the other. There is
   an activity almost in a frenzy for most of that pre—mai_ch
   build-up.
Q. Thank you very much, Mr. Lock, you have arrived again
   ahead of me in describing what I would have wanted you
   to say, in other v/ords in a short sentence can you describe
   how you would say that is happening, so rather than the
   facetious remark which I made or suggested of sitting
   back and being able to watch, there is a frenzy in that
   period leading up to the match? - A. Yes.

Q. And this is nothing unusual in a big match, it is just
   something with which you have got to cope? - A. Yes.




                            Q. It is right to say
                                               D. J .   LOCK


It is right to say that as a man who is on the spot, you
have to rely upon information reaching you? - A. Of
course.

For the most part is that information transmitted to you
by radio and transmitted out by radio? - A. It is, sir.

You would, I am sure, unhesitatingly agree it is obvious
that the radio is a very important part of what is going
on in the Control Box? - A. It certainly is.

If you were having a problem with the radio and not being
able to be in communication, it is rather like cutting
your right hand off? - A. And it would not be the first
time the radios have gone funny there.   There are times
at Hillsborough when there seem to be electrical surges^
and the radios are affected by them. Of course, there is
a tremendous amount of traffic and I don't know what the
radio system is now, but in my day if I wanted to pass a
message to you I had to wait until the line was clear.

It is what is called talk-over? - A. That's right.

If talk-over was the system being used, and I don't know
whether we have explored this but we can do so fairly
simply: one person has the radio time and if he stops to
take a breath and some other person manages to get in
while he is doing that they take the priority and that
first person can t continue the conversation? - A. That
is right, sir.   You have to have a good radio controller
who can interrupt and say, "I am taking your message,
then yours next," and pole around to each of the
individuals, and be able to assess quickly which is the
important message which should be dealt with first.

My learned friend Mr. Isaacs has established that the
Control Box has a very limited amount of (inaudible), you
have establish the frenzy of the pre-match and we have
now agreed together that communication is absolutely
fundamental? - A. Yes.

The next point is a commonsense one and that is the
reliance you are entitled to place on every Officer who
is attending at that match? - A. Of course, sir.

You are entitled to say that if someone sees an incident
they would relay it either to their superior or their
superior's superior?- A. Yes.

That is very important indeed, if you are in situ to be
receiving information from all the way round? - A. Yes,
                                                 D.   J.   LOCK


Have you in your turn reliance upon the Officers who were
with you? - A. Always, sir.   They were my eyes.

If you were in that chair, do you believe that person was
entitled to rely upon the information that the Officers
on the spot would relay through? - A. He has got to be
able to do that, sir.
Looking for a moment at Leppings Lane, we have talked
about the information from the Officer outside.   We have
talked about the view that you have from the Control Box,
but you have already said in the same way, for example,
as your own duties in the Club Control Box now, that
there are a number of things to do and one flicks the
screens from time to time, but all the more so in the
Police Control Box? - A. Yes.

But you do at least have two other areas of visibility
that are available to you.   The first is the Officers
who are down actually on the track side itself? ~ A. Yes.

The second is the Officers - I don't know whether you
were here but we heard from Inspector Bullas who was in
fact up in the seated area above the standing area. He
said in fact, "I have got the best view of everybody
because I am looking direct down on them." ~ A. Yes.

It would be right in the context of the expectation of
the Controlling Officer for him to expect that if any of
those people saw something which was untoward, that they
would report it back to Control? - A. Of course.

In the same way, even though you are not now connected
with the Police Force except by our employment, as you
said to my learned friend Mr. Isaacs, 'If I had seen
anything on any of the visits I made to the^ track side, ^
with my experience I would have done something about it.
- A. Yes.
I think it is right to say, Mr. Lock, that you have in
the course of your new job gone from time to time into
the Police Control Room? - A. Yes, I do regularly.

You chat to them and exchange ideas? - A. Yes.

You don't interfere in Operational Orders? - A. Of course
not.
But you are a man of experience and recognised as being a
man who has done this same job so it is like talking to
like? - A. Yes, sir.

You talked about those men you worked under, Chief
Superintendent Moseley and Chief Superintendent Herald.
                                                                   70

                                                        D . J . LOCK    *


         It is right that the job was then taken over - I am not
         too sure of the sequence of appointment - but it was
         taken over by Chief Superintendent Mole? - A. Mr. Mole
         was always the deputy at F Division when I was there.
B        On the death of Mr. Moseley, shortly after I had retired,
         Mr. Mole took over as Chief Superintendent.

    Q. Would you agree he is a man with enormous experience? -
         A. Certainly, yes, sir.

    Q. Would you agree he is a man in whom a lot of people have
         a lot of confidence as being a man of particular
         expertise in policing football matches generally? - A.
         Yes, sir.

         I am told and you may know this and confirm it, that he
         actually lectures on the subject within the Police Force
         and outside? -A. I understand so, sir.

         But he is a man for whom you have got time and respect? -
         A. During the miners' strike he was in operational
         control.   That is the extent of his experience.

         You don't know what changes would have been made, if any,
         by Mr. Mole when he assumed the overall command? - A. No,
         I didn't sir.

         You know when you were there there was a tried and tested
         formula which you inherited and which you continued? -A.
         Yes.    I think if Mr. Mole thought we should know
         anything, he would either have contacted Mr. Mackrell or
         myself.

         Mr. Mole, I think, was a roaming man?   In other words,
         he didn't stay in the Control Box? - A, He saw his job as
         going where it was necessary to go.

         Rather like people who have this great talent he probably
         was in the right place at the right time, intuitively? -
         A. Yes, sir.

    Q.   Be that as it may, he was the person in overall command
         and therefore ultimately was responsible for the
         Operational Orders which were produced? - A. Yes, sir.

         Would you agree with me, Mr. Lock, that you assum eda
         system which was tried and tested by the time you did it?
         - A. I certainly did, sir.

    Q . If there was a problem which manifested itself you would
         expect first of all it to be in the debriefing? - A. Yes.

    Q . If it was in the debriefing or it was something that a
         Senior Officer had observed for the debriefing of Senior
                                                                     71

                                                           D. J .   LOCK


           Officers it would be brought up there? - A. It would.
           It would be brought up as well when we were sitting down
           to do our next Operational Order.

]}|   Q.    If it appeared that something of a like naturewas to
           recur and when you looked back to the last occasion the
           Police operation appeared to have worked very well, would
           you see any necessity to change that winning formula? -
           A. No.   You find out when things go wrong, what went
           wrong, and change that.    If you change a winning formula
           and something goes wrong people then ask why you changed
           it.
      Q. If you keep the winning formula you can say it was
         exactly right the last time and you can't think why it
         had gone wrong this time? - A. Yes.

      Q. I am going to ask you to puff your chest out with pride
         as a former Police Officer.   Would you agree with this
         proposition that insofar as this Police Force was
         concerned, football was considered to be a very
         successful policing venture? - A. It was, sir.

      Q.    That was particularly so for F Division which hadthe
           control of the Hillsborough Ground? - A. Yes, sir.

      Q. You believed when you yourself were a member of
         F Division, that this Force and that Division were
         amongst the leading Forces and Divisions in the country?
         - A. I was proud to think that, sir.

      Q. Do you agree that policing generally has an awful lot to
         gain from experience? - A. It certainly does, sir.

      Q. It was suggested that the Operational Order did not
         specifically require an Officer to look for the safety of
         an individual or individuals.   Would it be your view
         that any Police Officer upon joining a Police Force would
         be required to look at the safety of an individual as a
         paramount consideration at all times? - A. The first
         basic definition that all Police Officers under training
         receive is to ensure that they know they are there for
         the protection of life and property.

      Q. Would you think that that was something, therefore, that
         has to be written in front of a Police Officer's eyes? -
         A. I should think it is at the forefront of his mind all
         the time.

      Q. I am not going to go over ground which has been well
         trodden, but you have said firstly that you did not see
         anything in the crowd which alerted your attention, or
         needed you to draw it to anybody's attention at the
         various times you were out? -A. Yes, sir.
                                                   D. J .   LOCK


I take you as the eye of experience, if I may say so, a
man who is rather more used to assessing the situation
and would notice something.   Would you accept that? - A.
Yes, sir.

When the moment came when you received the report in your
Club Control Room, presumably at that time you flicked
both the monitors and also the computer screen to show
what the situation was?   Indeed, I think you said to us
that at that moment you registered in your mind's eye
there was something of the order of 2,000 people to come
into one stand and 2,500 people to come into another
stand? - A. What time are you talking about, sir?

I think it was at the moment you were      told that Gate C...
- A. When Gate C went the first time?

Yes. -A. Yes.

You registered that instantaneously, looking at the
monitors? - A. Yes.

There was nothing there that made you think immediately,
"Oh, my goodness, these figures are way off course"? - A.
No, that never entered my mind at that time.

If it had entered your mind, Mr. Lock, that there was a
problem which was quite clearly manifesting itself either
on the screens - your screen for your   own CCTV, the
Police monitor screen which you had showing you thesame
things as the Police in the Control Box were seeing, or
on your computer print-out, you would have done something
about that? - A. Of course.

In all three of those circumstances? -A. Yes.

But you in the the experience of both an Officer with the
Police Force at a senior level and with the experience of
having done the job you now do with the club, did not see
in any of those three instances anything of a emergency
situation to which you needed to alert anyone? - A. No,
sir.

    MR. MANNING:    Thank you, Mr. Lock.

     THE CORONER:   I will just ask you questions the
jury have asked me to and then I will let you go, Mr.
Catchpole.
                                                             73

                                                  D. J .   LOCK


                   Further by THE CORONER:

Q. Just two or three questions from the jury. - A. Yes, sir.

Q. The first one relates to the radial fences.    The
   question from the jury is this:  if it is right that no
   home fans went on to the Leppings Lane terrace after
   1987, as from then it was dedicated to away fans, did
   anyone as far you know mention the idea of dismantling
   those fences at that time and restoring it to an open
   terrace?    You understand what I am putting? - A. Yes.
   Because it was exclusively used for away fans?

Q. Yes. -A. No, nobody did mention that as far as I was
   aware.

Q. You didn't consider it either at the time? - A. No.

Q. Obviously it is a thought now but did you think of it at
   the time, or between 1987 and 1989? - A. No, I didn't
   think that, sir.  It is conjecture if I go on.

Q. As far as you know, nobody else thought of it either? -
   A. As far as I know, no, sir.

0. Nobody made the suggestion to you in any event? - A. No,
   sir.

Q. I don't know if you can answer this one.   As far as the
   Police Operational Orders are concerned, certainly in
   your time, was it altered from year to year or did it
   follow the same pattern match to match, with just
   modifications which came out of debriefing? - A. They
   were generally standard Operational Orders, but when I
   say that, they were generally standard for the three
   categories of match.   In other words, the small match,
   the middle range match and the higher match, and then
   they were adjusted according to the information we
   received respecting the modes of travel and the number of
   fans we were going to receive and from where they were
   coming.

Q. So they followed a standard pattern within their groups?
   -A. Yes, sir.

Q. Adjusted and modified in accordance with any particular
   intelligence or other information you had available? - A.
   That's right, sir.

Q. Don't answer this if you do not know. Do you know
   whether that practice continued? - A. I don't because I
   did not get an Order for 1989, sir.
                                               D. J .   LOCK


Again, in your years, because I don't think you can
answer for any other period, if an incident had occurred
during a match would this have been included in the Order
for the next issue? - A. It depends what the incident
was, sir, but of course, yes, if it was something
obviously needing a remedy we would have changed that
particular system and remedied it.




          Q. So in other words you
                                                           75

                                                 D. J .   LOCK


Q. So in other words you would have been dependent upon
   the debriefing or knowledge^ at the time, in order to
   make the necessary adjustments? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. But not every incident would necessarily lead to a
   change in the Order?   - A. No. I can think of an
   incident which did not require a change in the Order
   but certainly needed something doing. On Penistone
   Road the houses that   flanked the Ground used to have a
   high wire fence, and   that eroded in the course of time.
   We suddenly found out we were getting uninvited guests
   through the fence. Obviously we wanted to do something
   about that so we asked the Club to have it repaired and
   they did, but we did not put that in the Order of
   course.

Q. Presumably similarly if, for example, you had - let's
   just take a pickpocket. - A. Yes.

Q. If a pickpocket had been arrested that would not
   necessarily mean that you would record that in the next
   Operational Order? - A. No, because if we had a large
   match and we had had some incidents of pickpocketing,
   then we would make sure that we had adequate plains
   clothes men to attend the Ground, to work in the areas
   to see if they could pick him up. There would have
   been crime complaints of that matter so there might
   have been a small section which said, and in fact it
   did say, "CID will attend to deal with all crimes".

Q. So it depended on the type of incident as to what
   effect it would have on the Operational Order? - A.
   That is right, sir.

Q. Another question from the Jury: when you were in
   charge - again we are talking about when you were in
   charge - what was the procedure that you adopted if the
   radios either went on the blink or stopped working all
   together? - A. Fortunately that never did happen
   entirely but when we got a situation like that we were
   using some of our PCs who were adjacent to the Box on
   the terraces to go as a runner.  I can only remember
   that happening for a short while. They went out once
   and we only had to do that for a little while.

Q. So what you are saying is you did have problems with
   the radio but you usually managed to muddle through -
   perhaps I had better not use the words muddle through
   but you usually managed to get through? - A. We did,
   sir.
                                             D. J .   LOCK


          Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE

Mr. Lock, can we start with the radial fences, and
their purpose? You have just been asked a question
about whether anyone thought about removing them.
Could you, from your experience, just go through what
the purpose of those fences was?   I think you will
confirm it was not only for segregation they were used.
They were used so that fans could be controlled? - A.
That is right, sir.

So if you had a small number of fans, from the Police
point of view it was much easier to have them in one
pen, rather than having 200 fans running along a whole
terrace? - A. You have answered the question yourself,
sir. That was one of the problems, that if you had
only a small number of fans and you had no fences at
all, and this was the reason why they were designed and
put up by the various Grounds, because there was an
interaction between the fans, and if there weren't
fences you could not control them.

That is control other than for the purposes of
segregation, it is control because you have got a
number of fans on those terraces? - A. And public order
problems as well.

It is also right that they were there for safety
reasons? - A. They were.

So that the Police if necessary could move fans into
certain areas and keep fans from having a lateral
movement towards the most popular area, which was the
centre? - A. That is true, sir.

I don't know whether from your own knowledge you
remember the '81 crushing incident, which was a
crushing in the middle of the terrace?If you don't
remember .... - A. No, sir.

Can I change to a slightly different subject? I think
you told us that when you were in command of the Ground
at Hillsborough Mr. Mole was the Deputy Divisional
Commander but on occasions he would actually be in
charge of Hillsborough on match days? - A. That is
right, sir.

And you would be operating under him? - A. Yes.

So he would have been familiar with the system that you
had been operating with the other Chief Superintendents
at that Ground? - A. That is right, sir.
                                             D. J .   LOCK


And you also said that if he had made any changes when
he took over you would have expected him to have told
Graham Mackrell or yourself? - A. Yes, sir.

Do I take it from that he did not tell you he was
making any changes to that system? - A. He didn't, sir.

And as far as you are aware he did not tell Graham
Mackrell that he was making any changes? - A. I think
if he had told Graham anything, he always made sure --
Graham and I have a briefing in my present position,
long before each match, so that I know what they are
expecting and what the Police are expecting of us, and
how many people are coming.  If Graham had been told
something by the Police I am sure he would have relayed
that to me.

And you were not told anything? - A. I wasn't told
anything. There was one thing I was told which crosses
my mind, and that was that the Police had inadvertently
told the Liverpool fans that the gates were opening at
11.30 and so we had to open them earlier than we had
originally intended.

Yes, I think we have had that from Mr. Mackrell, in
fact. So as far as you were concerned you expected, on
a day to day or match to match basis, that the system
that was being operated was the same fundamentally as
the one that you had operated? - A. Yes, sir.

You no doubt saw that in operation on your tours of
that end of the ground, when you were acting in your
capacity as Security Officer? - A. Yes, sir.

Just so we can make it absolutely plain, you have told
us the fundamental tenet of policing that is hammered
into every Police Officer, that they are there to
protect the safety of the public, in a nutshell? - A.
Yes, sir.

As well as to have regard to law and order. - A. Yes,
sir.

Those are the two fundamental tenets.  Is it fair to
say that the system that was operated at Hillsborough
in filling those pens, whether sequentially or by
letting the fans initially into all areas and then
closing down if necessary, was that designed for both
purposes, for both the safety of those fans and to keep
law and order on those terraces? - A. It certainly was
when I was in command there, sir.

And is that what you expected would be continued? - A.
Yes, sir.
                                                             78

                                                   D. J .   LOCK


Q. And is that because all the senior Police Officers at
   that end of the Ground you probably knew and respected,
   and they would have had that hammered into them as
   well? - A. That is what I thought, sir, yes.

Q. Can we change to a slightly different subject again,
   the capacity and the figures that you actually saw on
   the day? You were asked some questions by my learned
   friend Mr. King about the figures at around about 2
   o'clock. Are you able to remember today if you saw any
   figures, or remember how many people were in the Ground
   at about 2 o'clock? - A. I did see some figures but I
   cannot recall what they were, sir.

Q. Perhaps I could just remind you briefly and show you
   page 56 of the Taylor transcript, and if you don't
   remember now please say so, but if it jogs your memory
   it may be helpful to the Jury.   It is the last full
   question on that page, if you could just read it to
   yourself and see whether that helps? - A. No, sir, I am
   afraid it doesn't.   I am saying then, "If my memory
   serves me right", and I can't remember anything in
   respect of that now.

Q. That is fair enough.  In relation to the information
   that was being passed from the Club Control Room to the
   Police, was that restricted to the figures, an update
   regularly of the capacities in each area of the Ground,
   how many people were in the West Stand, Leppings Lane
   Terrace, South Stand? - A. Mainly that, sir. Other
   things were passed, such as who the doctor was that day
   and other messages, for instance, like cars get parked
   in the wrong positions and are causing blockages, and
   we are trying to move them out of our area because we
   have parking problems and we have asked the Police if
   they could put out over the tannoy that a certain car
   registered number so and so was blocking, could the
   owner come and remove it.

Q. From your own recollection the information that was
   being provided to the Police Control, as on any match,
   would be the numbers that were actually in different
   parts of the Ground? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   That was a regular thing? - A. Yes, it was.

Q.    Was that what PC Guest was there for primarily? - A.
     That was his primary function but I 'phoned, I used the
     radio and the Police themselves came on and asked what
     the numbers were at given times.

Q. Can I take you right back to the questions that were
   asked by my learned friend Mr. Payne in relation to
   large, almost capacity matches in your time as Ground
                                                             79

                                                   D. J .   LOCK


     Commander at Hillsborough, between '82 and later '84.
     Can you confirm that the system that was operated at
     that time was that if a large crowd was expected, or
     indeed if a difficult crowd was expected, the match was
     made all ticket? - A. It was.

Q. By that means, because those fans had to go through
   turnstiles, it was ensured that the capacities laid
   down in the Safety Certificate were not exceeded? - A.
   That is true, sir.

Q. It was put to you why you did not go and check the
   turnstiles.   Is it right that when you were Ground
   Commander there was not a centralised computer
   turnstile count? - A. It is right there was not a
   computer at all.

Q.    So inorder to check the turnstiles you would have to
     go to each individual turnstile, or someone would, and
     get a reading from that individual turnstile? - A. That
     is right, sir.

Q.    So if you go to turnstile 1, get the number, and go to
     turnstile 2 and someone comes in through turnstile 1,
     your figure is almost immediately wrong? - A. It is,
     sir.

Q. So by the time you have done all 23 the figures are
   virtually useless? - A. Yes.

Q. There is only one other matter.  Is it in your
   observations normal for fans in the West Stand, in the
   seating area, to sit down for the majority of the
   match? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And they are made to sit down in the seats, that is
   right? - A. They are, yes.

Q. They are not allowed to stand at the front of the
   Stands? - A. No.

Q. But very often when the match is not in play, either at
   half time or before the match, you will find fans
   standing up and looking over the balcony, trying to
   talk to friends and things like that? - A. Yes, they
   do, sir.

Q. Could you look at the photograph you were shown, which
   was given the number C490? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. If you look at the West Stand itself we can see that
   there are large numbers of people standing right at the
   front? - A. You can, sir.
                                                               80

                                                   D. J .   LOCK


Q. The reason I am asking those questions, we can't see
   the time that this photograph was taken and we can't
   see whether there was anything in play, but from your
   observations would that be the normal scene that you
   would expect when the game is not in play, as opposed
   to when the match is actually going on? - A. I would
   have thought that this was just as the teams were
   coming out because the people at the front seem to be
   applauding.

          MR. MANNING:   I appreciate that my friend Mr.
     Catchpole has gone, sir, but the Jury asked through you
     a question about the radio and I wonder whether Mr.
     Lock could, with your permission - of course, Mr.
     Catchpole has the ability to come back if he needs to
     through you - because I understand Mr. Lock may be able
     to confirm that he himself tried to get through on the
     radio on several occasions and was unable to do so, and
     I think that is an important point that ought to be
     established if you will permit it?

          THE CORONER:    Yes, I think that is a fair
     question actually.

          THE WITNESS:    That was the Club radio, sir.

Q.        THE CORONER:    On the day, 15th April 1989? - A.
     Yes. When I was going down to the pitch on the second
     occasion I wanted to know what had happened about the
     gates being opened and I tried to contact the Police
     Control by radio and I just received no reply.   I don't
     know why that was, I don't know whether there was
     anything wrong with the radio, or whether there was too
     much communication going on in the Police Control, but
     I did not receive a reply.

Q.   That was   the Club radio system? - A. Yes.

Q.   Asopposed to thePolice radio system? - A.     Yes, sir.

Q. You are not saying it was faulty, you are just saying
   you did not get a reply? - A. That is right.  I don't
   know why.

Q.        MR. MANNING:    And just as a follow on from that,
     is it right that if a radio has gone down then all the
     people who were trying to get through on the radio
     effectively are queueing up desperately, wondering why
     their message has not got through and trying to get it
     through, and therefore effectively it creates an even
     more chaotic system, with the talk-over, as each person
     then tries to get the message through that they may
     have been trying to get through for the 2, 3, 4 minutes
     that the radio was off? - A. Yes, sir.
     THE CORONER:   I just want to ask you one, almost
trivial question, after a lot of the weighty ones we
have had.  I just want to ask you, when you came out
the first time - do you remember we tried to pin when
that was? - A. Yes, sir.

And I jogged your memory, I think, when I mentioned
photographers and you said you remembered and gave a
reason why you remembered. You then dealt with Mr.
Clough coming down, you remembered him coming down? -
A. I do, sir.

Somebody suggested a time and we tried to locate it
like that. What I am interested in is when you met Mr*
Mackrell on that first visit? - A. Yes, sir.

Can you tell me where you met him in relation to the
players' tunnel? - A. I came down the tunnel and I
turned left, and I met him about ten yards along that
particular area.  If I remember correctly there was a
television camera sited there and I was adjacent to
that.




              /Q. So you were already
So you were already walking towards Leppings Lane? - A.
Yes, that is right.

The only reason why I ask is because when Mr. King was
taking you through Lord Justice Taylor's Report you
said that you had got halfway between the players'
tunnel and the terracing? - A. Yes.

You saw something and then you recount Mr. Mackrell's
meeting. Was it at that sort of location you met
him? - A. I met him and we turned together because it
was my intention to go to see what was happening at the
gate and as I was walking along I was telling him what
had happened and he said, "Leave it with me.  I will do
it". So that is when I left that to him and I turned.

That is when you came back? - A. Yes, sir.

Do not go. Thank you very much indeed for your help
and for the evidence which you have given us this
afternoon. - A. Thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Catchpole, the Jury have passed
me another note which is not a question. Oddly enough
I have been toying with this idea myself. What they
have asked is whether it will be possible at some point
before we finish for them to revisit the ground because
they want to have another look at the Club Control Room
which they did not actually look at, the Club Room.
They also want to see where the Press Box is and
various things that have come up in the course of the
evidence. They also want to go up into the West Stand
and have a look down, so to speak.  I know the fences
have gone. Do you think it would be possible for the
Club to allow us?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  I am positive it will be possible.
The only thing logistically I would suggest is perhaps
we could get Mr. Holdsworth, who I understand is not
being called as a witness and so there would not be any
difficulties, because he is the man who could operate
and show how the screens work in the Club Control Room.
He is a technician.  I will certainly be speaking with
Mr. Mackrell either tonight or tomorrow in any event
and perhaps I could get a convenient date and see what
we can do.

        THE CORONER:   Yes, that is right, if you can do
that.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  I know that some of the legal
representatives would also be anxious for another visit
to the ground and they have asked me already.  So it
may be convenient to combine the two if the Jury do not
feel hampered by the presence of too many lawyers
again.

     MR. MANNING:  In view of last week's result I am
not going to suggest it be match day because there are
loads of tickets now. What I was going to suggest
seriously, sir, and I bear in mind the difficulty which
you have in listing when we tend to go on rather longer
than you might have thought, whether you thought that
there was merit in that trip to the ground before you
started taking evidence from the people who were
actually working in the Control Box which you have with
PCs Bichard, Ryan, Goddard and, of course, the other
people who were in the Control Box.  I do not know what
view you hold, whether you think it would be better to
take the evidence without having been in the Control
Box or whether it would be helpful to the Jury to have
actually seen what the Control Box looked like before
they started giving their evidence.

     THE CORONER:  I have not really thought about it
but I am quite happy to think about it and indeed if
any of you have any comments on that I would be very
willing to listen to it.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: Since it is the Jury, sir, who
have obviously got their own reasons which we would not
be entitled to know, perhaps they can pass a note
saying whether they prefer to wait to the end or now.

     THE CORONER: We are going to break for coffee now
or tea and you can tell me what you think you would
prefer.   In other words, are you wanting to go sooner
rather than later and before we hear from the people
who were actually sitting in that box.   I am really
willing to do whatever you wish which is convenient to
the Club.   I mean I cannot insist on a particular day
but up to now we have never had any problems and I am
most grateful for that. You can tell me is via a
little note and then I can read it. Whoever writes it
has got excellent handwriting.   I wish you could teach
me how to do it. You should see mine.     Be thankful I
am not sending you notes.

    Mr. Lock, you are now excused. I just wanted you
to stay in case we needed you for this but thank you
very much again for your help. Shall we rise for ten
or fifteen minutes or so and then we are going to start
on Dr. Nicholson. Can I go on a little bit beyond four
or not? You can tell me when you come back.

                   Short Adjournment
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON


     THE CORONER: Mr. Catchpole, the Jury have
indicated they would wish to visit sooner rather than
later, in other words, before we hear the evidence.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, if I can arrange it for the
beginning of next week, would that be convenient, say
Monday morning?

     THE CORONER: Yes, I think that that would be
convenient. Not this week whatever you do because we
must get through.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  I will certainly speak to Mr.
Mackrell if I can today but I will certainly speak to
him tomorrow.

           CHRISTOPHER EDGAR NICHOLSON Sworn

                    Bv THE CORONER

Dr. Nicholson, would you be good enough to give us your
name, qualifications and position please? - A. My name
is Christopher Edgar Nicholson.  I am a Doctor of
Engineering, PhD, I am a Chartered Engineer and I am a
Member of the Institution of Metallurgists. My
position is Deputy Director of the Research and
Laboratory Services Division of the Health and Safety
Executive based here on Sheffield.

That is entirely fortuitous for us, is it not, that you
happen to be located here in Sheffield? - A. Purely
fortuitous, yes.

Dr. Nicholson, I think I am right in saying that after
this disaster you and indeed numerous members of your
staff carried out a number of investigations, not
primarily for me in the first instance but for the
Public Inquiry? - A. Yes, that is right.

Of course, I have had the advantage of being able to
see your work as well.  In order to just get this quite
clear, I am going to ask you to be giving evidence on
various matters not all of which you personally
investigated but you had team members who did a lot of
the work naturally. That is right, is it not, Dr.
Nicholson? - A. Yes, that is right.

You are familiar with it. I think you feel confident
you can deal with it? - A. Yes, I was in overall charge
of the HSE's work on the investigation.

I think I ought perhaps to say to you — everybody else
knows it already — that I want to explore two or three
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON


topics with you. What I am interested in is that you
should try and tell us in as near to lay terms as it is
possible and with the minimum amount of detail, I am
going to say, as to how matters were arrived at because
what we want to find out is the substance of your
discovery and merely to have sufficient background to
realise it is soundly based? - A. Yes, I understand.

To put it quite frankly there is very little point in
telling certainly me, and I suspect the Jury as well, a
great deal of technical and mathematical data which we
will not be able to understand? - A. Fine.

It is not a criticism of you but it may just help you
to formulate your replies? - A. Fine.

What I want to deal with in the first instance is that
I know you have done some work on calculations of the
number of people who came through turnstiles A to G and
also the number of people who came through gate C? - A.
Yes.

So if we could deal with that topic first. The second
topic which I want to explore with you is the
estimation of the number of people who were within Pens
3 and 4 at a particular point in time? - A. Right.

The third topic I want to discuss is the breaking of
the barrier and in particular what I think you have
described is the leaning crowd model which might
explain it. Lastly, and relatively briefly, I want you
to describe the testing procedures on the barrier in
particular? - A. Fine.

That is a general outline.  If we then turn to the
first subject, namely the entries to turnstiles A to G
and gate C. I think I am right in saying that your
team actually carried out a number of studies to try
and verify the quality of the counting mechanisms on
turnstiles A to G? - A. Yes, we did.

Would I be right in saying that give or take a very
small percentage A to G seemed to be working perfectly
satisfactorily? - A. The counting mechanism installed
by Sheffield Wednesday you mean?

Yes. - A. Yes, we found that that worked very
accurately for most of the turnstiles. There was just
one turnstile that was not registering all the counts,
all the turns, that we tried. So the figures that were
achieved on the Sheffield Wednesday print out we
thought were accurate to a degree and we were able to,
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON


by our calculations and by our measurements, to suggest
how far out those figures were.

So, in fact, the substance of your work is and was that
you are confident that the figures you are going to
give me are based on the counts or the calculations you
have done are accurate and correct? - A. Yes.

Tell me then what, in fact, you discovered with regard
to the number? I think you worked on a print out which
was timed at three o'clock? - A. Yes.

I think I am also right in saying that, in fact, there
is no other print out of an earlier time and so that is
the only one you have been able to work from? - A.It
was the only one that was referred to us, yes.

Can you tell me then what, in fact, you calculated as
being the number of people who entered the
turnstiles? - A. Can I refer to my notes?

Yes, I forgot to say that. Please feel free to look at
your report.  I do not expect you to remember the
detail. You just turn to it? - A. Right. Can I deal
first with gate C?

Yes indeed. - A. This was done by analysing the video
recording that was close to Gate C and turnstiles A to
G and we actually counted the people who were going
through the gate and we counted the number of people
who were going through the turnstiles on a careful and
scientific basis. We counted on the first opening 130
people entering. On the second opening we counted
1,800 people entering. That was averaged by doing
certain three second periods but the average figure
came out at 1,800. On the third opening we got a
figure of 90 so that the total gate opening figure was
2,200. Because of the definition of the video and the
difficulty in actually doing the counting exercise we
have added a percentage above that. This is because
each person we actually identified, we are sure that
that is a person and we have added a certain percentage
above that for those that could be missed.  So our
figure is a minimum figure that we will add to.

    The figures that we have added to for the first
opening — so we have termed these figures the best
estimate — the best estimate figures for the first
opening are 150. That is 20 more than our first count.
For the second opening it was 2,000 which is 200 more
than our actual count. For the third opening which was
at a very slow rate we think we have got a good figure
there and we are happy to leave it at 90 which leaves a
                                          C. E. NICHOLSON


total gate C figure of 2,240. We have also added on to
that a maximum that we think could have been achieved.
In other words, this is the very top that we think the
figure could go to and we have increased each of the
figures that I have mentioned by a similar amount so
that the maximum that we think could have gone through
gate C in all three openings would be 2,480.

    Similarly on the turnstiles, as I said, we counted
for all A to G, for each turnstile, we counted the
people through from the time the video started which
was at one o'clock and we found that comparing our
figures with the figures on the Sheffield Wednesday
print out that for A to F they were just slightly out,
3 per cent out, and we think this can be accounted for
by the fact that people were coming in before three
o'clock. So we are quite happy to use for A to F the
actual figures produced by Sheffield Wednesday but for
G, the turnstile that was not operating accurately,
each count was not being recorded, we have increased
that by a number that we calculated based on the
accuracy of our actual observations of the each person
coming through A to F. So we have ended up there with
an actual count through the turnstiles from one o'clock
right through to the start of the game of 7,247.
Similarly we have increased that figure to provide a
best estimate up to 7,494 with a maximum figure of
7,644. So that is the summary of our total figures.

On A to G? - A. Yes.

What was the maximum again? - A. A to G is 7,644.




                         /Q. So if one were to add.
                                                         88


                                     C.E. NICHOLSON



   So if one were to add, and I don't know if you have got
   the figures in front of you? - A. Yes.

Q. Gate C entry. Let's take your best estimate and then
   your maximum of the grand total so to speak of entries
   through that part of the ground? - A. Yes, the best
   estimate figure which is adding 2,240 to 7,494 gives a
   total of 3,734 and our maximum figures are for a total
   Gate C 2,480, plus for the turnstiles 7,644 gives a
   maximum total of 10,124.

Q. Which is remarkably close in fact to the then state of
   capacity? - A. To the state of capacity of that end, yes.

O. Now what it does not of course include as I see it and
   correct me if I am wrong, it does not include terrace
   people who might have come through Turnstiles 1-16?
     A. No, it does not include them.

Q. You did actually I think also estimate, did you estimate
   the gates B and C entries.   I can't remember? - A. No,
   we examined what videos we were shown.   I could not get
   a proper view  of any of those gates in which      we could
   really make -   A and B that is - in which we could make
   anything like a reasonable estimate.

Q. So assuming for a moment that some people came through
   those gates and there seems to be evidence that they did
   and that they   also went on to the terracing, that might
   increase the figure which you have got here? - A. It
   could well if people could get from those gates to the
   terrace, yes.

Q. The other thing you did was you had a look at the
   throughput of the actual turnstiles, didn't you? - A. Yes.

O. I think the easiest way of doing that, you have produced
   a graph, I believe, which shows the number of people who
   went through at different times.  Is that right? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Just bear with me and see if I can find it. - A. It is
   Figure 4 of our report.

Q. In fact you produced two graphs. One of them is as you
   say Figure 4 and the other one is Figure 6. Can you have
   a look at Figure 6? - A. Yes.

Q. That is the Gate C count? - A. Yes.

Q. I think it might just be worth putting it up because it
   gives a visual impression? - A. Yes, fine.
                                                               89

                                           C.E. NICHOLSON



           THE CORONER: Put Figure 4 up first and we will
     give that a number.

             MR. BEECHEY:   Figure 4 number then sir will be
     C493.

Q.         THE CORONER:  Focus your eyes. You can see it?
     - A. That is a graph of the people per hour per turnstile
     on the vertical, on the left-hand side of the ground,
     plotted against the tirae on the bottom axis. So that
     represents the number of people who came in through the
     turnstiles A-G from 1 o'clock rightthrough to the start
     of play at 3 o'clock. You can see initially there is
     a gradual rise up to that point which if you go back to
     the axis on the left-hand side it goes up to about 3 C O
     people per hour coming through each turnstile.   It tnci.
     rises, and this time is about quarter-to-2, rises up tj
     the rate of some 550, another steady rise or rather it
     fluctuates somewhat until you get at about 2 o'clock a
     relatively even rate of some 600, between 600 and 700 .o:
     quite a long period of time from 2 o'clock up to soniethm-j
     like about 10-to-3. At 10-to-3 you can see there iii u
     rapid rise in the rate of entry, but sir up to that period
     there has been three-quarters of an hour of relatively
     steady entry. Our average figure works out to be 660
     per hour coming through each turnstile. At 10-to-3 the
     rate rapidly increased.    That is the time that Gate C
     was opened and we think that the reason for that rise ii
     due to the pressure being taken off the turnstiles as
     the crowd wanting to go through the turnstiles relaxed
     because the pressure was taken off the back of the cioi.'c:
     as people could go round and through Gate C, so we thin.’:
     that is one reason why that could account for an incr^uocJ
     rate of entry from the average of 660 up to well ovu:
     1,000 per hour, just for a very short period, and it tr.en
     drops down to almost down to zero for just after 3 o'clock.

Q. I suppose another reason might be that tickets were not
   being separated if that is right? - A. Perhaps they
   weren't being examined so closely at that time. Thai it
   a possibility.

Q. So if one just looks at this graph for a moment it looks
   as if from well about quarter-to-2 onwards, with
   fluctuations, the number of people going through were
   between 550 and 650 until you get your peak. That is
   right, isn't it? - A. Yes, from that time from quarter-to
   it is something between 550 and 650.

Q. That is for about an hour, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. So would I be right then in saying that whatever impression
   people might have had as to what was happening at the
   turnstiles, the graph would seem to indicate that people
                                                              90

                                        C.E. NICHOLSON



  were actually entering at a relatively steady pace? -
  A. Yes, a relatively steady pace' for at least three-quarters
  of an hour and for almost a complete hour.

        THE CORONER: Now if we put the other graph up,
  that is Figure 6, and we will give this a 'C1 number
  as well.

          MR. BEECHEY:   The 'C' number for Figure 6 is
  C494.

        THE WITNESS: Yes, this is a graph for the second
  opening of Gate C, the main opening really when we
  counted, worked out, estimated that it was 2,000 people
  coming through the gate and you can see that over on the
  vertical left-hand side is the number of people against
  time in seconds on the bottom axis and you can see that
  actually from the time it opened up to the time of close,
  which I think the total time was some five-and-a-half
  minutes which gives you your 300 plus seconds, that the
  rate of entry is relatively even, you end up with a
  straight line which suqgests that the pace at which
  people started to come in it stayed steady over the full
  five minute period.

O. Yes, there is obviously a take off right at the beginning,
   isn't there? - A. There is a little clitch at the start,
   yes, but it is hardly anything.

Q. And apart from that, as you say, it is virtually a straight
   line? - A. Virtually a straight liney yes.

Q. The significance of a straight line as you say it shov/s
   no fluctuation, that the rate was continuously the same
   whatever that rate may have been? - A. Yes.  I think we
   worked out that it averaged out across the width of the
   gate a row of people going through shoulder to shoulder
   it took them about a second to pass the gate entrance,
   so each second there was a row of some 5 or 6 whatever it
   was going through, but that rate stayed steady over the
   whole gate opening period.

Q. I think I am right in saying if you got what, around
   2,200-odd people through in five minutes, that is how
   many a minute, that is about 400 isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. That rate in fact is about double the rate at which people
   were coming through the turnstiles.  Is it about right.
   Have I got it right or not? If you look at the minute
   rate of people coming through the turnstiles 650 per
   hour? - A. Yes, 650 per hour suggests it is some ....

Q. Was that per turnstile? - A. Yes.
                                                              91

                                      C.E. NICHOLSON



Q. So you have got to multiply that by 7 and then divide by
   60? - A. Yes.
Q. Do you want my calculator? - A. I prefer not actually.
   If we say 600 per hour that means it is 10 per rainute,
   multiplied by 7 turnstiles is 70. Is that right,?

Q. Yes, I make it 75 because I took the, yes, so that would
   be 75 a minute, wouldn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. And if you then take,how many did you say through Gate C,
   2,200 was it? - A. 2,000 over five minutes which is 400
   per minute.

Q. In fact there was a substantial increase in numbers who
   were coming through at the minute rate over that period?
   - A. Yes.
Q. Whilst we are on the turnstiles we will just complete this
   last point.  I am right in thinking, am I not, that you
   compared the number of turnstiles which had been allocated
   to the various sections of the ground1? - A. Yes, we did.

0. Just briefly tell me what you discovered on that front?
   - A. We counted the number of turnstiles all the way round
   the ground and then compared what turnstiles had been
   allocated to specific parts of the ground. We have
   already talked about the seven turnstiles that were
   feeding the West Terrace. There were some ten turnstiles
   feeding the North Stand seating; six feeding the West
   Stand seating; ten feeding the South Stand covered seating
   4 2 covering the Spion Kop and eight the South Stand
   uncovered seating, so knowing the capacities of each of
   these areas we could work out how many people needed to
   come through each turnstile on average and the averages
   work out, I won't go through all the figures but just to
   compare them with 42 turnstiles feeding the Spion Plop
   which is some 21,000 people to come in, this means that
   the average person per turnstile that comes through those
   turnstiles is 500 whereas the West Terrace where some
   10,100 people is the capacity fed by seven turnstiles,
   means that 1,443 people needed to come through each of
   those seven turnstiles. This is obviously averaging it
   out to give you a feel for how used the various batches
   of turnstiles had to be. This is effectively three times
   the rate of entry was required at the Leppings Lane end
   than was required at the Spion Kop end to fill both of
   those terraces to capacity.

Q. I think you also worked out the total number of people
   who were in the ground, I don't know if you have got that
   figure in front of you, have you? I have a figure of
   about 48,669 but that would not include the people who
   came in through Gate A and B. Is that right? - A. I
   am sorry, I don't kave that figure.
                                                           92


                                      C.E. NICHOLSON



Q. No, that is the entry through the. turnstiles, through all
   your turnstiles. Can I pass you this.     It is I think
   Appendix 2 if.you find it. It is not terribly important
   actually? - A. Yes. The total count was some 48,669
   for all the different areas.




                         Q. This is turnstile count
                                                               93

                                                  C. E . NICHOLSON


Q. This is turnstile count, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. So to that you have got add however many people got
   through the gates? - A. Yes.

Q. And through Gate C. which we already know about, 2,200 or
   thereabouts, I can t remember the exact figure, plus
   whatever went through Gates A and B? - A. Yes, that is
   right.

Q. Can we turn then to the pens?    I want to do the same
   exercise with regard to the numbers in the pens.    I
   think what you did was that you selected the best
   photographs which you could find which gave an overview
   of pens 3 and 4? - A. Yes.    This was an exercise done in
   conjunction with the West Midlands Police, who of course
   were in charge of many, many photographs taken at the
   time. With them we selected the best two photographs
   from which we thought we could get a reasonable count of
   the people in pens 3 and 4.

Q. In fact you selected two photographs in the end? - A.
   Yes.

Q.   They are known as PR.1/7A and PR.1/8A? - A. Yes.

Q.   I think they are timed at 15.03,   and we have got acetates
     of these and we will put them up so that people can see
     which photographs you used.    One we have already got.

          MR. GRIFFITHS:   PR.1/7A, sir, is C.360.

Q.        THE CORONER:   So that was one of the photographs
     which was used? - A. Yes, that is the first one.   The
     slight gap down the middle is in fact the position of the
     radial fence between pens 2 and 3, so that shows part of
     pen 2 as well.

          MR. GRIFFITHS:   PR.1/8A, needs a "C" number.

          MR. BEECHEY:     The number is C.495.

Q.        THE CORONER:   And this is, I think... - A. In fact
     it was an adjoining photograph.   With the modern camera
     techniques you can take a series  of shots across a wide
     spectrum and this is the next adjoining shot, the next
     negative, if you like, in the film.   You can see in the
     bottom left hand corner part of the radial fence that was
     visible in the last shot.   That is it exactly.

     We were able to put these two photographs together, to
     overlap them, and you can do this very accurately, so we
     built up a picture of some of pen 2 and a considerable
     proportion of pen 3.   This was the best picture we had
                                                              94

                                               C. E .   NICHOLSON


     of faces looking out on to the pitch that was at a
     reasonable angle.   The photograph was taken from the
     centre of the South Stand, on a platform above the South
     Stand, where the television cameras and the BBC
     commentator and this Police photographer was sited - "PR"
     are his initials.

Q. I do know who it is. - A. Having got those two
   photographs together, I pointed out where the radial
   fence was. It was impossible to see the barriers and we
   needed to see those so we arranged with the Police for
   the Police photographer to go back to this precise spot
   that he was in for the match and re-take pictures of the
   terrace with nobody on them.   This meant we could get
   exactly the same area shots as the two you have just
   seen, but with no people on them, so we could then see
   exactly the positions of the barriers from this angle.

     Now using this second set of photographs, we projected
     them on to a computerised drafting table which is really
     a large sized drawing table really, which is
     electronically controlled.   It means we can build up
     pictures on to this screen and so we can transfer the
     details of photographs on to a piece of paper and then do
     calculations to see how many people are in different
     parts of the ground.

     Initially we built up a picture of the barriers, the
     radial fences and the front and back walls and then we
     put on to that the pictures of the people, the two
     earlier photographs you have seen, and then used a
     sensitive pen to mark each face we could properly
     identify.   We in fact having built up a picture, we put
     an acetate over the photograph so we could mark each face
     we counted so no two faces were counted twice.

     In this way we built up as accurately as we could an
     estimate of the number of people in the two photographs.
     Is there another acetate which I could show of the
     outcome of this?

Q. Yes.   Is there one in particular you would prefer?   We
   will use the one with hatching because you will be able
   to explain that at the same time.   It is Figure 5.
   Will that do? -A. Yes, that's fine.

          MR. BEECHEY:   This is C.496.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Yes, Mr. Nicholson. - A. This Figure
     shows the areas of the two photographs that we^have
     already identified, and you can see those outlined as two
     rectangles that are joined together at a slight angle.
     Then each of those dots represents a positively
     identified face.   We tried to put a spot on the person's
                                                           95

                                              C. E . NICHOLSON


   nose so we were as accurate as we could be as to the
   position of that person.   You can see we have removed
   all the people from pen 2.   This was just an electronic
   way in which we can juggle with the images we have on the
   board, and we end up with a head count there of 1,408.

   You can see the right hand edge of the photograph didn't
   cover the whole of pen 3.   There was not another
   photograph that gave us the full span of pen 3, so we
   utilised another technique within the drafting module,
   which was to select a triangle of people, and you can see .
   the two triangles that are superimposed on the bottom
   part of the Figure.   The one that is just being outlined
   now was placed on to the Figure, moved from the left
   position to the right position.   In other words, we were
   trying to get a distribution of the people in that
   triangle and superimposing that on to an area of the pen
   that we didn't have a photograph for.    We are doing the
   best estimate of the crowd we can there.

   The next thing we did, following our photographs taken
   with no people in, was to put the barriers effectively
   into this picture. As the barriers would be at a certain
   height, probably around your tummy, we couldn't really
   just put them on to the photograph so we lifted them up
   to an average height where people's heads would be, on an
   average.   We superimposed the barriers into that Figure
   and then lifted the height of the barrier so it would be
   about the height of the heads.   In that way we could
   divide all those people into rows.   There are three main
   rows of barriers which divides the pen, therefore, into
   four rows.   We then used the barrier positions to
   calculate and count the number of people who were in each
   of the four rows.

Q. Can you tell us then what you found? - A. We found that
   the density of the crowd in the back row, which is next
   to the wall, between the wall and the first set of
   barriers, was 7.5 persons per square metre.    Then in the
   next row forward it was 7.6 persons per square metre.
   Then the next row, which is the one now bearing against
   the barrier that failed, went higher still to 8.1 per
   square metre.   Then we came to the front one.    You can
   see from the Figure that much of it is masked by the
   people who were out on the pitch at the time this was
   taken, which was 15.03.   There were a lot of rescue
   people around and they, therefore, obliterate our picture
   of the people in the pen.

  We felt also that people were at such a concentration in
  this front row that we could not properly discern all the
  heads.   You will have seen some very distressing
  photographs earlier where the crush of people is so great
                                          C. E . NICHOLSON


that it is very, very difficult to identify everybody
that is there.   I think impossible.

In order to get a reasonable figure for the density of
people in the front row, we did some tests in the
laboratory at Sheffield whereby we measured a very small
room, an ante room we have to one of our large
laboratories, measured the area of it and then put people
into that room of known numbers until we reached specific
densities.   In fact this was done in conjunction with
the Court of Inquiry.   Lord Justice Taylor and Professor
Maunder and other people participated in this because
they wanted to understand what sort of pressures and what
sort of densities actually felt like.

We did a test up to ten per square metre, which is
greater than the three figures I have read out already.
At ten, in our laboratory test, everybody was very tight
but nobody was in any difficulty at this pressure.    We
obviously could not take higher pressures than this
because we obviously could not risk injuring staff.    It
was all carried out, I must say, with the co-operation of
the local ambulance people and medical advice.   We
thought that the figure we produced there of 10 was a
reasonably accurate figure for us to assume a density for
the front row.   We then worked out how many people we
thought was in pen 3, based on our photographs, our
analysis on the drawings boards, three measured densities
and one front assumed density.   The total figure we came
out with using that was 1,576 people in pen 3.

So the figure that you calculated on that basis was a
little bit higher than the head count and that is, of
course, because you could not count the people right in
the front segment? - A. That is right.

Did you do the same as you did with the turnstiles and
the gate, that you had a count, best estimate and
maximum, or do you put that figure which you have just
given me as in fact being the best estimate that you can
make? - A. We thought it was a best estimate, but because
each of those dots represents an actual face that we
identified, we consider it to be a minimum figure, but we
did not have a field, because it requires perhaps a lot
of work to establish how many people could be missed in a
crowd.

We decided as this was a high figure in any case we
thought it sufficient and the Inquiry thought it
sufficient for its means at the time.

I think it is probably fair to say that the maximum
density which the Green Guide would have allowed would
have been 5.4? - A.Yes.
                                                          97

                                             C. E . NICHOLSON


Q. So even the back row figure you calculated was higher
   than that? - A. Yes, almost 50% over purely on the back
   row and many times more on the front.

Q. So the fact there might have been even more there
   wouldn't have really added very much to one's useful
   total knowledge? -A. That is what we thought, yes.




        Q   At the moment we have only
                                        C. E . NICHOLSON


At the moment we have only been talking about pen 3.
Presumably you would have done the same for pen 4 if
you had had a photograph, but you did not have a
suitable photograph, is that right? - A. Yes. We did
have some photographs.

What did you do there, because you did something
slightly differently, didn't you? - A. Yes. A shot of
pen 4 was not available that had anything like the
clarity and the angle that this one had.   If you think
about actually looking at a crowd on a terrace you get
a far better view the higher you are. We had a very
good shot of pens 3 and 4 because they were taken up
from high up on the South Stand. There were no similar
shots available for pen 4 but we did have a shot that
was taken from the North Stand at an angle, at a rather
low angle, so we tried to do an estimate using exactly
the same techniques, and we did not think that was a
very accurate figure, based on the accuracy that we
know we were able to achieve for pen 3.

We also had a shot taken at ground level, from the
pitch, which looked across both at pen 3 and pen 4, so
we decided to try and compare known areas. We would
select a square, if you like, on a photograph of pen 3,
and then an identical sized square on the pen 4
photograph, and then compare the numbers of heads we
could count in both those squares. We did this on four
or five different shots of areas of pen 3 and pen 4,
and came to the conclusion that they were both of a
very similar density. So in other words, there were a
similar number of people, similar density of people in
pen 3 as there were in in pen 4.

I think that you took these little squares in more than
one spot, didn't you? - A. Oh, yes.

And did comparisons and satisfied yourself that this
was a reasonably accurate way of estimating these
numbers? - A. Yes.  I think we got something like 50 in
each square, something of that order.

I don't think I have prepared an acetate of these
squares, but I don't think we are going to need it. So
in a nutshell then, the capacities that you calculated
    what was the average capacity? Did you work that
out for pen 3, or is it only in the segments? - A. No.

You have not averaged it out? - A. Yes. The average
density from our calculations plus the estimate for the
front worked out at something like 8.8, I think it was.

Across the whole of the ...? - A. An average, yes.
                                         C.   E . NICHOLSON


But there was a gradient? - A. Sorry, 8.4, but there
was a gradient from the back to the front, increasing
all the time.

     THE CORONER:   (Addressing the Jury) Up to now is
that reasonably clear, what we have done? I find it
clear but then I have had the benefit of looking at
some of this stuff.  Is it clear to you? I am just
wondering whether it would be wiser to stop now.

We are now moving onto the barriers and I don't think
we will be able to get through it in ten minutes, do
you? - A. Not everything on the barriers, but I will be
advised by you.

     THE CORONER:   Do you wish to start on the
barriers or would you rather wait until tomorrow?
Tomorrow, okay.

Dr. Nicholson, obviously we are not going to finish but
could you be back tomorrow? - A. Yes.

     MR. KING:   Sir, rather than leave it in the air,
it may be I am not following it properly, has Dr.
Nicholson given us a figure for pen 4 arising out of
his estimates?

     THE CORONER:   I understood him to say that the
numbers were equivalent.

     MR. KING:   The density was equivalent.  I did not
know whether pen 3 and pen 4 were the same square area.

     THE CORONER:   I beg your pardon, yes.    You are
right, there may be a difference:

Have you got a figure for pen 4 or have you merely got
a comparative density figure? - A. I didn't do the
calculation but it is possible to do it quite simply.
We do have the different areas of pen 3 and pen 4 so it
would be possible to do it.

If it is easy perhaps you could tell us tomorrow? - A.
Yes, fine.

     MR. HALE:    Could he also please tell us what his
best estimate is of the total terracing, compared to
the allowable figure of 10,100, whether he has done
that calculation?

     THE CORONER:   I think I know the answer to this:
                                                                100

                                                C.   E.   NICHOLSON .


Q. You did not do a digital count of the whole of the
   terracing? - A. Not a digital count.  I am sorry, I
   thought ....

          MR. HALE:   I was meaning a comparison of area,
     but of course the density would be markedly different
     so I suppose Dr. Nicholson doesn't know how many people
     he would estimate were in the whole of the terracing
     at, say, 3 o'clock?

Q.        THE CORONER:   I don't suppose you do know that,
     do you, because you did not do that as a sum, apart
     from knowing how many people came through turnstiles
     A-G, plus gate .... - A. If we assume it is purely
     entry by gate C and the 7 turnstiles, then yes, that is
     the figure in the report.

Q. 10,196, as the maximum? - A. Yes.

Q. And somewhat less than that as your best estimate? - A.
   Yes.

             THE CORONER:   Does that answer your question, Mr.
     Hale?

          MR. HALE:   Yes, sir, it does.  I was aware of
     that figure but I wondered whether he had done any
     other calculation to make an actual visual inspection
     of the number who were actually on the terraces?

Q.        THE CORONER:   I think the answer is no to that,
     isn't it? - A. The answer is no.

Q. After all, the Inquiry was interested in the middle
   section basically? - A. That is right.

Q. Obviously the other point about how many people came
   through is very important because one can make some
   deductions from that. - A. Certainly, yes.

Q* The turnstiles and gate C, but you did not go round
   doing this sort of exercise for pens 1-7, serially? -
   A. No.

Q. In fact, I know I spoke to you about this, because I
   did enquire whether you had done it for pen 2, didn't
   I, and it was not a practical proposition, I believe? -
   A. We did one calculation on pen 2 which was based on
   the part of the figure that we removed, if you
   remember, and we did a single strip from the back to
   the front of pen 2 and the average density for that
   worked out to be something in the region of 5 per
   square metre, which was the figure in the Green Guide
   of roughly 5.4.
                                        C.   E.   NICHOLSON


That is quite interesting.  In other words, if you look
at pen 2, give or take, you are probably looking at a
5.4 density.- A. At a strip close to the radial fence.
That is the only one that we had so it is only a single
figure for that.

     THE CORONER:   Put that one up - it was the first
photograph, the one we already had.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   C360, sir.

     THE CORONER:   It is that strip on this side,
isn't it, on the left hand side? - A. Yes. We
projected a strip that is parallel to that radial
fence. You can see the gap down the middle of the
crowd which is, in fact, where the radial fence is, and
we projected a strip down from the front to the back
and the figure was in the region of five.  I would have
to check my report to get the actual figure.

Yes, just have a look and tell us. - A. Yes, we had a
total head count of 150 in a strip, which is figure 9
of my report. So the average crowd packing density in
pen 2 at 15.03 was in the order of five persons per
square metre - in the order of.

Thank you very much indeed. Dr. Nicholson, I have to
say this to everybody who is halfway through their
evidence, you are still on oath when you leave us and
technically you are in the witness box until you
reappear tomorrow, if you can bear that in mind,
please. - A. Fine.

     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, Dr.
Nicholson, can we see you at 10 tomorrow? Warn people
that you might be here until 4.30 tomorrow as well,
because I want to finish Dr. Nicholson, and then we
have to hear Dr. Eastwood and I want to finish him this
week for various reasons.

  (In the absence of the Jury and of the Witness)

     MR. T0ULS0N:   Sir, I just wanted to express my
thanks to you for sitting the hours you have.

     THE CORONER:   It is a pleasure and if we can,
obviously I can't guarantee how long itwill take
because to a certain extent I am in other people's
hands, but if we can I would be glad to complete this
part of the Inquests, as I say, by Friday.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, is it your intention to
postpone those witnesses, the Police Box witnesses,
until Monday?
                                         C.   E.   NICHOLSON


     THE CORONER:    There is no.way we are going to set
to them.                                             °

     MR. RUSSELL:    They will be the witnesses for
Monday, will they?

      THE CORONER:   Yes and no. It depends to a
certain extent on what Mr. Catchpole says about the
Club.   If we were to go to the Club on Monday - I don't
know what we are going to do yet - I am not trying to
pressurise you in any way ....

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I was given a message that it
might be more convenient on Tuesday morning, by the
West Midlands Officers.  I am quite happy to have a go
at both days.

     THE CORONER:   Apart from the Control Room staff
there are a few other people who we need to hear,
people who have been put back for one reason or
another, so we could do those, assuming we have
concluded Dr. Eastwood, on Monday, and we can do the
visit on Tuesday.  Clearly it would be sensible if we
are going to do the visit early, then we should do it
before we have heard the Control Room staff.

«        CATCHPOLE:   If I can I will speak to Mr.
Mackrell tonight and if I am unable to I will speak to
him tomorrow morning.

     THE CORONER:   I take it from what was said that
some of you would like to come and have another look.
I can t remember if you came last time, Mr. King?

     MR. KING:    Sir, I have been there on the occasion
of the Inquiry but I was not there on the occasion of
the Inquest.   I would welcome an opportunity ....

     THE CORONER:   That is fine. What we did last
time, and we will do the same again, for technical
reasons the Jury are supposed to go on their own, so we
     send the Jury on their own, I go separately and
you go separately, and we have just got to make sure
that we all keep apart, but subject to that your
clients, Mr. Catchpole, allowed us a free run of the
Stadium, which was very much appreciated.

    Ten o'clock tomorrow morning then.

       (The Inquests were adjourned until the
            following morning at 10 a.m.)
