0115 987 9002




                                                         7th July 1997

Mr. Christopher P. Dom es,
HM Coroner,
The Medico Legal Centre,
                                                   RECEIVED
Watery St.,
Sheffield,                                        0 9 JI3L 1097
S3 7ET                                     H. M. CORONER’S OFFICE

Dear Chris,

Further to our meeting on 16th May when I returned various papers to you. I have
only just got round to looking at the paper work again.

1. I recollect that you wanted a copy o f the summaries o f the evidence which I
prepared or were prepared for my use. I think that you in fact have the originals o f
these and the set I have is not complete. 1 had intended to photocopy these but on
reflection I do not feel I need to retain a copy and so I am enclosing my set.

2. I also enclose a copy o f my copy o f Mr Hale’s letter to Kenneth Baker MP dated
29th March 1991 which you wanted.

3. You wanted a copy off was the transcript o f the opening proceedings when Sir
Harry Livermore attended. I enclose a copy o f my copy .

4. I have also spoken to Pauline and she confirms that she has a copy o f the file Index
and I have asked her to show it to you. I am retaining my copy Mid have not
photocopied it for you in the circumstances.

5 .1 also enclose a bundle o f photocopies the facing sheet o f which reads Lists &
Schedules. List/Schedule 13 seems to be missing. I cannot remember if I left you with
a copy o f this but in case I did not I am enclosing the set I have (I have copied it for
myself). In addition to the lists mentioned there are four more lists in this bundle
which are headed Barrier, Supporters in Pen 4; Witnesses in Stands; and finally two
pages o f Dr. Forrest’s transcript and a list headed Alcohol levels and related matter
selection.

6. There were a few post retirement letters (mainly linked to the judicial review) which
you thought it would be wiser to retain. I think you meant for the time being but not
necessarily indefinitely and that is how I intend to interpret you advice. I propose to
retain these for a further period but unless I hear from you to the contrary will destroy
them in due course when I think it appropriate to do so. You will recollect that the
bulk o f the papers which I had for the judicial review I have returned. I have found
two typed versions o f the judgement (in fact I thought I had three). I have returned
one o f the typed version o f the judgement.

The objective which I had and have was to get to a position where any papers or
documents I had were of such a nature that you did not object to me having
them and more importantly that there was no objection to destroying them if I
feel that I have no further use for them. Please let me know by return if I have
misunderstood the position.



Yours/sincerely,
          -jATE :        26th N o v e m b e r   1990


      NAME:              Louise Jane Hinton            (2ji)
          DESIGNATION:            Supporter


          STATUS:                 Non football fan - girlfriend of someone who was,


      ASSESSMENT:




                    This young lady attended the match with her boyfriend
                    neither had tickets.             She said she didn't know it was
                    an all ticket ^ffair.              She came by train and taken to
                    the ground on a supporters bus or coach.               There was a
                    policeman on the bus, he did not check for tickets
                    and when it stopped he said "Off and into the ground"
                    This would have been between 1.00 and 1^.30 p.m.                At
                    that time policemen were telling them to keep on the
                    pavements and not walk in the road.               They spent until
                    about 2.40 p.m. looking for a ticket during which
                    time they did notice that there were some fans who v?
)^]   e             were carrying alcohol which was mainly in the form
                    of cans of beer.             She could not tell the quantities.
                    She was more concerned about behavour, everyone
                    seemed happy.             Eventually they did manage to buy a
                    couple of tickets from a tout, joined the crowd,
                    people were shouting "We want to get in, we have got
                    tickets let us in". After that it became crowded and
                    loads of people started pushing behind us.               I noticed
                    that there was a crowd building up behind us.               She
                    noticed a mounted police Officer.               They got quite
                    close to him.             He was shouting for everybody to go
                    back, they wern't going to get in if they were pushing
                    It didn't seem to make any difference at all the the
                    s i t u a t i o n t ' h i s point ^jlst still outside the perimete:-
                    gates they decided to retreat but found that they
                    coundn1t get out of the crowd.               She then describes
                    coming through the outer perimeter gates and finishing
                    up near blue concertina gates.               At that point there
                    were not many people about and in fact she said they
                    asked where to go and he suggested they go into the
                    ground and they would worry about that when they got
                    inside.         This was outside the blue concertina gate
                    and she says there were not very many people around.
                    Her impression was that the perimeter gates which
                    are patrolled by the mounted Officer were shut initially
                    but then subsequently opened.               She does not really
                    know how.          This lady approached a stewart whi was
                    stood near the staricase and was told to go down the
                    tunnel.         The tunnel was relativly clear.        They entered
                    the terraces on the left and she caught a glimpse of
                    the pitch and noticed that players were either on it
                    or perhaps had even started playing,
Post-11" N otes from 3M
Ref. No. 7666                           s
 FROM




                          f r   U   (   £   £




         cl^v/°r c&/?/*C4C7T7? algr^V



DATE                            TIME
                             Louise   Jane Hinton
     PAGE   2

                          lfj terrace she was seperated from
    Once they 9ot on '          pushed towards the net.    I askejl
    her boyfrlend an           Qn      terrace, did you ]hear
     "Did you hear whi'” "¥es"
                            1'      was the answer.   "Once we
    people
    people shouting"?
            snoutxiiy «      oi people were shouting Stop
    igot through the _         we are getting crushed here,
    pushing from behit'»'ldn,t make any difference it was   w
    move back" but it 0n C92 she marked the plan where
    3 ust getting wors • shouting>         she then describes
    s e heard the          towards the front and how two men
                           was asked "Did you see any police
    assisted her.       - side of the perimeter fence"?
        icers on the     ■           j saw then standing up and
      er reply was    e raying to climb over they were tellihg
    w en people were     _      The men around me was shouting
    them to get back         ; what was     .   Qn ins±de but
    to try and tell t l j We alsQ heard them tellin
    they could not                 we just CQuld nQt dQ that..
    peop e to move a <■ jn tighter and she went on to
       ing t en became        ^ice realised what was happening


t   say that once the U jown the front_ Th±s was after
       ey egan to ea
    the match had s,to
    police officers wl«
                              ^    g^e wag adamant that it was
                             were pulJLin the fencing down,
                                  any fans do±ng ±t ^ she sa±d
       e c o u , Hot ren1'l(,|>o or less opposite to where she
    the activity was            0Omehow cleared and she
    WaS *+.                       through the tunnel.   She was crois
    3ven ually left        , .^Lng, she confirmed that there weris
    sxamined by Mr.               tickets and that she did not see
    others trying to U * ’ outside the gate. In reply to
       e      lce      r ? |ciiiod that she joined the crowds
     r * King she conf I ^        gate at abQUt 2>45          she
    3U side the perirn, p0S±-ti0n. of the police officer at
    ^asprobed about tl* * she was asked „The e le who
     he perimeter f e n " ^ and the police officers trying]
     ere trying to ge .           Get back in> what were they
     o    get back in say           what was the problem that they
    trying to get out          ’'t ofI1? Answer »The fact is x
    vere trying to ge - there were actually people on the
    :hink at that poiH • dnd th           were tr in to explain

I   jround who had d i * *
     his to the policy
     °     ^ i°Ut
                                  at the timeV they just wante£
                                   couldn't move".    Question "The^
                              neople who wanted to get out"?
     ouldn't move, t W P ^ rt of crawJLing onytop of
     nswer No they           if)n "How far was the police man frori
    everybody".     Q u e S ^ ^ „He was jugt ±n frQnt Qf ±t he
     ‘ a scene .    ns ^ fence standing".        Question "So
    ’/as just outside      pee w ^s looking into what you were
    iis far as you cou      Mr King went on "I get the
    describing ?    ^e^rilniial:ine before the police realised
     .mpression it was    ^nd then they started to pull down
     what was happening     ( right"?    "it seemed like thatr
     the fen cing, i s ((  ijrross examined by Miss Adelman
     at the time, yes' • j^l; people were on the floor
     she said she kneW (||llCJ       some o| them herself,
     because she wcS st'1
DATE;      2 6th N o v e m b e r   1990                  DAY:   6>


NAME5•     Anthony John Murray            cis)


DESIGNATION:             Supporter


STATUS:                  Father of deceased      Paul Brian Murray


ASSESSM E N T : .....Mote of any registration particulars on pa^e 84
                Mr. Murray gave very composed evidence considerirTg-'ti'hat he
                had lost his son and he was there.




         They left by coach at 10.15 a.m.   They left home at
         10.15 a.m. and arrived in Sheffield at            and
         at the ground at 2.45 p.m.   He did not hear any
         public announcements from the police landrover but      i

         he did see three mounted Officers.    He thinks one was:
         outside the perimeter gates.   He was somewhat concern4d
         for the safety of his son in the area outside the
         turnstiles but eventually he was able to get through
         gate C. As he entered somebody went past him and he
         heard him say "I told you we wouldn't need a ticket"
         or words to that effect........ passage down the
         tunnel and entered pen three.   When he entered the
         players were still kicking the ball about.    He did no1
         know that it was sectioned into pens.   They were movinc
         over towards the right, unfortunately Paul ... was
         knocked, spun round and knocked over.    He bent down
         himself to try and hold onto him but was himself
         knocked over and seperated from Paul and finished up
         near the gate.    I asked him whether the mounted
         Officers were doing anything, he said his impression
         was that the one nearest was trying to bring some
         kind or order but it was not having any effect.    In
         reply to Mr. King he said he went down the tunnel
         because that was the only way he could see.
    DATE:                                                DAY:
              27th November 1990

    NAME.:    ALAN PAUL JONES

    DESIGNATION:    Supporter

    STATUS:


    ASSESSMENT:




V

              This young man left in an official coach from Liverpool at
              ten with two friends and arrived Sheffield at twenty
              past one and went to the Fox Public House. They got
              there about one thirty. He said they couldn't get in.
              to buy a drink and they went to a local off-licence to
              have a couple of cans. He thought there were about a
              hundred people outside. He said they bought six cans
              between three of them. They didn't leave the pub until
              two thirty-five or thereabouts, at which point this witness
              says he had nearly drunk one can. The other one he was
              still drinking. In other words, he had set off from
              Liverpool at ten, he had been in the public house for
              over an hour and he had nearly drunk one can and a bit.
              They went to the ground at between twelve minutes and
              five two which he later agreed was two fifty-five. Despite
              the lateness of the hour, he, thought he would be able
              to get in. He often left it until about that time at
              Anfield. There was a substantial crowd still going towards
              the ground and it was getting bigger as they;got nearer.
              He did not see a Police Land Rover, nor did he hear
              any announcements or a loud speaker. He recalls joining
              the crowd which did not appear to be moving and he also
              remembers a mounted officer but only one. He apparently
              was stopped by officers on his way to the ground near
              a social club because he was still carrying a can. When
              challenged about the quantity, he said they hadn't bothered
              initially. It was only later they learned about the
              off-licence and it was turned two before they managed
              to start drinking.
              Although he said he was quit© close to the mounted officer
              on the outside of the perimeter fence, he-had his
              on, he didn't really pay much attention to him. He didn't
              think the horse was that close to him as to impede his
              progress, though he did think that the movement of the
              police horse affected the crowd movement.
              I asked him, "It was packed in front of you, wasn't it?"
              He said, "Yes".
              I said, "It was moving as far as you could see?"
              He said, "No".
                              - 2 -

ALAN PAUL JONES (contd.)

"Not much point in pushing into it, was there?"
He said, "No".
For reasons which he was not able to give, he appeared
to have no recollection of how he traversed the space
from outside the ground to within the concourse area.
You will remember that he had fairly good recollection
of nearly everything else but this part of the events
in the afternoon seemed, as far as his evidence is concerned,
a total blank. I find this somewhat difficult to understand
because from the little which he remembers he did not
appear to be under any particular stress or pressure
at that location.                                       .
He described entering the-tunnel and being able to see
the players on the pitch and that it was obstructed.
Although therfe was some ambiguity, it seemed that this
obstruction was at the bottom of the slope.                  \
He then described how he stopped behind the stationary
crowd with more and more people coming imto the tunnel
and it getting tighter within it.
I asked him, "You joined them and you were quite prepared
to be stationary as well?"
Answer: "Yes".
"People came behind you and pressure built up from behind.
Is that right?"
"Yes".
"So there was pushing from behind, not to put too fine
a point on it?"
Answer: "Well, yes".
"You lost control of your movements?"                '
"Yes".
"And you were carried with a mass of people forward onto
the terraces?"
"Yes".
He entered the                   . He could hear yelling;
and shouting but was unable to recollect what was said.
He was unable to pinpoint what was happening on the field
when he entered the terrace at the back but he did say
it was getting tight and thatj£r035^feeqinning to hurt.
Ia-at-her- words,r. ho wac                                   -
e'xvc o+- ■ttre*=tnnftPH He d es e^ be sflowpeople fell over
and how he himself was stood up. He marked the plan
C298. He then described how the push which he said was
continuous propelled him against the various barriers
and down the terracing. Things seemed to be eased off
a little bit by then and he managed to climb out. This
witness did see police officers helping people out.
                           - 3 -
ALAN PAUL JONES (contd.)

He agreed with Mr. Payne that on the way to Sheffield
he was stopped by the police who were looking into people's
bags.
On cross-examination by Mr. King, Mr. Jones agreed that
if people had not been allowed into the tunnel, then they
cannot have been pushed any further forward.
                                                                         \




                                                         DAY:
DAT E .,i    27th November 1990


NAME:        ALISON JANE BENNETT (

DESIGNATION:       Supporter

§.?-A.1P-§-L Girl friend of Mr. Low, ticketless fan   (Spion Kop)

A S S E S SMENT:




             Alison's evidence was similar to Mr. Low's. She thought
             they got into the enclosure quite early, perhaps before
             two and was not crowded. She thought that by half past
             two it was really full and she thought at that time
             it was as full as she would normally expect the terrace
             to be. From 2.30 onwards they started being moved forward
             by the crowd. She confirmed that in the beginning there
             was some space ahead of her. Movement at that time
             between 2.30 and quarter to three was voluntary and
             they had control of their movements. They
             on their barriers and at that point she said she wasn't
             worried.
             She was asked what time Dave and Julie separated from
             them and she thought about quarter to or ten to three.
             I asked her "Why did that happen, can you remember?"
              She answered, "Julie had never been to a big match
             before and she started to worry. It was pretty normal
             at that .time. They were able to move away on their
             own volition and they had to do a little pushing".
             Alison confirmed that because she had been at big matches
             before, she wasn't worried at that stage, i.e. between
             quarter to and ten to three. She, too, remembered the
             pre-match warm-up but could recollect players coming
             on to the field or the               . She confirmed
             that pressure was building up from behind and whereas
             earlier they were able to move forward on their own
             volition, this became different and they could not have
             stopped at this point and she became frightened.
             I then said to her, "Now think hard, can you think that
             at that point the game had started or was in play? I
             know you told me you can't remember but I want to be
             quite sure". "I can't remember but I would think it
             would have started."
             I said, "what makes you think that?" Because she could
             hear the crowd shouting around the other end of the
             ground. People around her were shouting but they were
             shouting to get out.
                                        - 2 -


A L I S O N JA N E B E N N E T T (contd.)

She was asked whether she could see people climbing
out and at what interval. She thought about 3 or 5
minutes after she had nearly been shoved to the front.
Her impression from the noise was that the game was
in progress and that this coincided with the point when
people were climbing out.
She went on to say that she thought people were climbing
out before the game. I asked "By how much?*". She said,
"Not very much, a few minutes". (Because this witness
didn't see the match, it is very difficult to be sure
about her timing and recollect as to when certain events
occurred. I am sure she was doing her best but you
will see that she was having some difficulty. She was
shouting because she was in discomfort and people helped
her out over the side fence.)
She described how people were trying to get girls and
children out and that although there were some at
the front they were trying to pass littlfe children
to the front.
Shen asked how this was achieved if the arms were
really tight so that they couldn't move, she said,
"It was quite a way back, they were sending them from a
long way back, down the sides".
She was shown a plan'C297 and she indicated that this
movement was coming from about the third row of barriers
across. She says she saw several police officers in
front but did not appear to be doing a lot to start off
with. She did not hear them shout, "Go back", despite
the fact that she was only two or three people away from
the fencing. Although she was tightly squashed at the
time she was still able to shout. In effect, was able
to do so throughout.
The first time she noticed officers assisting was after
the match had finished when she was on the pitch.
On cross-examination, she confirmed that she was searched
when she entered the ground by a Police Officer.
In response to Mr. Payne, she confirmed that about quarter
to or ten to three, it was crowded but not uncomfortable
and she agreed that when it did go wrong it was some
time after quarter to or ten to three. She agreed with
Mr. Payne that in her view the Police had not realised
what was happening but felt that they should have been
listening to the people who were telling them what was
going on.
                      were asked about a beach ball and
they recollected this being thumped about.
She agreed that there was noise and that she could not
                                            - 3 -
A L I S O N JA N E B E N N E T T (contd.)

hear what was coming from behind her but only from the
people around her who were shouting to get out.
Mr. King cross-examined and she responded in answer to
him that at 2.30 the pen was as full as she had ever
experienced it and that if she had been told that a few
more hundred people would be introduced at that time
she would have thought that they had been mad.
We should, of course, remember that this in'line with
what she had said originally to me but you have also
to remember that quite spontaneously she gave the time
of ten to three as being the time that Julie left them
at which time she repeatedly describes the conditions
as normal. This is not a criticism of her but simply
illustrates the difficulty of establishing the border­
lines between^normality and abnormality or even derivations
of abnormality. This is confirmed because when Mrs.
McBrian asked her, "would you say the conditions were
quite normal for up to 1450" her response was llyes".
Mrs. McBrian then said "But they suddenly changed afterward
to which she again replied, "Yes". Mrs. McBrian elicited
the pick up out of the pen at about quarter past three,
perhaps a little bit earlier. She agreed that it was
noisy.
D A T E .:..   27th November 1990                           DAY: 7



NAME;          DAVID PETER LOWp.

D E S I G N A T I O N ; c;Mppnr-|-pr


STATUS;          Ticketless

ASSESSMENT:




               David came to the match with hir girlfriend Alison and
               three others, none of whom had tickets. They bought
               tickets for the Spion Kop because they were cheaper.
               Having got the tickets, they went to a pub, the White
               Horse. There were 50 to 100 supporters, mainly Liverpool
               supporters and behaviour from their point of view was
               perfectly satisfactory.
               They left the pub about one o'clock and went towards
               Leppir.gs Lane. Having made some enquiries they were
               directed by a Steward to try the turnstile area but were
               refused entry. They went back to the Steward and he
               directed them to turnstile G, they wer*1 allowed through
               without any problems. Tickets were simply taken in the
               normal course of events. In fact, of course, these tickets
               were not valid for that entry. He confirmed that he did
               not have to plead with the turnstile operator. He explained
               that he did not want to go to the Spion Kop because they ha,d
               been there the previous year and they-hadn't been very happ$
               with other Liverpool supporters. Having got in, they went
               down the tunnel. This was a route he had taken on previous
               occasions. He knew that the terrace was divided into pens.
               He made no attempt to move from behind the goal and, in
               fact, entered Pen 4. He said that the pens started filling
               up just after 2 o'clock and it filled up and people started
               swaying about. He described this as an involuntary move ­
               ment. He ascribed it to the fact that it occurred because
               it was tightly packed and people were moving about. He
               remembers the players coming out for a warm-up and going
               back in but he can't remember the teams coming onto the
               pitch or any of the play, though he did in the end agree
               ■'■hat swaying and pushing against the barrier was after they
               had returned                     . He tried to re-position
               himself at the barrier and around that time one of the girls
               then decided to l^ave us. The girl Julie wa^ getting a hit
               fri^hteneH.
                                        - 2 -



    DAl/ID P ET E R LOW (contd.)

          He described a general increase in pressure and this time
          he noticed that it was getting tighter and tighter and
          people were trying to climb over the fence. He said these
          were people ahead of him.without other people coming from
          behind. He confirmed that it was very noisy and that there
          was chanting and singing from people right behind, i.e.
          further back. People where he was located were trying to
          get out. People around him were shouting, anxious to get
          out. He confirmed that throughout he was able to s h o u t .
          and as I understood him, the people further back were still
          chantinq.
           A question: So you are then saying that the people at the
           back were still happy and content and enjoying whatever
           was happening ^nd didn't realise what was going on at the
           fribt.
           Answer:    It seemed that way.   Yes.
           The enclosure gradually thinned out and he was able to force
           his way back out through the tunnel.
           He was asked whether he knew if the ground was licensed and
           he said he did not but he believed it to be a very good
           ground.
           He said he saw police-outside the fence. Initially there
           was a lad in front of him with his hands on the fence and
           he was being pushed back but then he saw people being helped
           over.
           When asked, for how long, he said, "A few minutes".

C          The question was repeated: "I see, a short period of time".
           The answer was "Yes".
           He marked his position when he went into the ground at one
           o'clock and again when he was in front of the barrier.
           Plan No. C296.
           He agreed with Mr. Payne the swaying was associated with
           close proximity and, in fact, was one of the enjoyable thing:
           about standing on the terraces and was not something that
           one would normally worry about. He would have expected it
           to occur in a big match such as this.
           He also agreed with Mr. Manning that if 3 number of neon le
           at t^e back are larkinq about at can s^t up a cascade
           effect.
                           - 3 -
 P E T E R LOW (contd.)
He reminded Mr Manning that he had had three pints and
a bottle of lager by the time he left at one and he
confirmed that the bulk of the crowd had remained behind
after he left, so he could not comment what amount of
alcohol was consumed by them after that.   . . ; r.
Mr. Payne further cross-examined and elicited in a normal
situation crowds were standing shoulder to shoulder
in front.
Mr. Ki/f$asked him to look at C.267 showing a view of
the terrace and, in particular, the people exiting from
the tunnel did so slightly forward from the 'bare wall.
Mr. Low agreed with Mr. King that from a normal position
as described to Mr. Payne, things got tighter and tighter
so that he was, for instance, unable to move his arms. On
return he was absolutely jammed.
In response to'Mr. Catchpole, he was definite that there
was a Steward outside the ground. He can be described
as wearing a yellow jacket with the word "Steward" on
it. He also agreed with him that following a situation
such as this, there will be rationalisations and blanks.
When asking this gentleman whether he would agree that
shortly after him seeing a Police Officer pushing a
young man back but there were officers attempting to
assist fans, he replied "I didn't see no police officers
attempting to assist fans". He then carried on, "Forgive
me if I am wrong about that but I think you told the
Learned Coroner there was a short period of time when
people were helped out of the pens after you saw this
incident". Answer: "There were fans helping other fans
out". "Are you saying that never at any time did you
see Police Officers helping fans out of the pens?"
Answer: "I didn't see any, no." "Do-you accept, in
fact that it did occur but you just did not happen to
see it?" Answer: "Yes."
He was asked whether he could remember the teams being
led out and people panting the air. He said he could
not remember it.
He appeared to take the view that in a normal crowd
it is always possible to get one's arms up without having
to make any adjustment in one's body position, though was
nevertheless, so close that one was compelled to move
by a sway or surge. He also agreed that he was able
to breathe or to shout and that at that point in time
when the Police Officer pushed the person back whom
he described, he was shouting as indeed were most of
the other people, as he had told us earlier. He was
unable to relate it to any event on the field.
C W I D P ET E R LOW (contd.)

       You will recollect Mr. Low was the witness whom we
       re-called when we dealt with the question whether his
       tickets were genuine or not.
       Mr. Low was unable to say how many tickets the ticket
       tout had but the implication of his reply was that he
       could have sold them Leppings Lane tickets as well but
       they were more expensive.
    DATE:     27th November 1990                          DAY:    7



    L—         RICHARD JOSEPH THOMPSON

    DESIGNATION ;     Supporter

    STATUS:


    ASSESSMENT:




              Following some traffic delay, they arrived in Sheffield
c             at 2.30 and outside the ground at about 2.45. He walked
              to the ground a distance of about a mile, so fans appeared
              to him happy and he did notice some carrying cans but
              he could not put a figure on it. He agreed with Mr. King
              that for that type of match he would have described himself
              as coming late. He also agreed that on his approach
              to the ground there was police presence but that at the
              entrance he saw very little and, in fact, felt there
              was no organisation at all.   He also said that there
              was no-one to direct them once they got into the turnstile
              area.
              He was asked whether people on their own initiative people
              are not capable of seeing that there is an obstruction
              and he replied that he would say, "Yes but in a situation
              like that, no, because everybody is trying to get in".
              He gave afairly graphic description of the conditions
              outside the pen///He said, "in my honest opinion if somebody
              had not opened the gates I think you would have had a
              lot more deaths on your hands because it was quite obvious
              from where we were standing that the actual fencing of
              the gate, or whatever system it was, I do not really
              know. It was swaying about and it was quite obvious
              if somebody did not do something, it would have gone,
              it was a simple as that. I am afraid you would have
              had a Tot more deaths on your hands. Well I feel that
              way".
               He entered the terraces via gates, he entered the tunnel,
               and entered pen 4. In his case it would seem that he
               experienced severe congestion, almost from the moment of
               entry and he timed as being at the time when the players
               were warming up. He can recollect that he was in fact
               fairly far back near the tunnel at this stage and he
               described how he heard people screaming. He was pressed
                                          - 2 -


RI C H A R D J O S EP H T H O M P S O N (contd.)
as to whether he heard requests for people to move back
and although he thought it was possible, his response
was somewhat ambivalent, "I would imagine they would
do, yes".
Hewas carried forward by some movement or surge and hit
a barrier with sufficient force to crack two ribs.
Eventually he crawled over people's heads on his hands
and knees and was able to get out through the gates.
He then looked back at his son who was still in the
original position far back. He called to him but it
was obvious to him that his son could not hear him. In
due course his son was freed and rolled over the crowd
and in fact got quite close to the front fence. He
perceived that his son was calling for help and he also
heard a policeman shout "Go back". He took it that that
was a remark addressed to his son, though when pressed
he did in the .end agree that the policeman and son were
not, in fact, 'having a direct conversation.

whether the exchange of conversation was in fact a personal
one or whether the comments of the police officer was
addressed to people generally other than to an individual.
In the event a police lady did have to extricate his
son.
Although he felt that the pressure on the terrace was
worse than the crushing outside, he did agree with Mr. Hale
that the crushing out there had been the worst he had
ever experienced. He was not able to be of much help
with regard to activities on the pitch when he was trying
to get out as his main concern, quite naturally, was
to exit himself.
Mrs. McBrien questioned him about the use of portable
barriers but his view was that if they were just "ordinary
things" they could pick up they would not have lasted
five minutes. He agreed with her that he would have
been quite happy to wait longer if the kick-off had been
postponed.
In a nutshell, then, we have a man and his son who was    T
caught up in a severe crush at the turnstiles, so bad     ,[
that he felt that there would be many deaths some relief
was not achieved. Having entered through a big gate,       I
he exited onto a terrace which was very crowded, in fact
so badly that he couldn't move. He was subjected to
a surge of such intensity that he cracked his ribs on
a barrier, he escaped by crawling over the heads of other
people. His son eventually was rolled down towards the
front. He confirmed that there was an incredible amount
of noise and that despite that he could hear his son
calling for help and he could also hear police officers
on the outside shouting "get back". Fortunately in due
course his son was rescued.
                                                           J
                                                       DAY:   9
DATE:     29.11.90.

NAME:     Robert Arthur Knowles.   C
DESIGNATION:     Supporter.

STATUS:

ASSESSMENT.     A good and interesting witness.   He gave a
                clear account.




  Mr. Knowles left early from Birkenhead at 10.15. There
  were traffic delays on the road around       . He arrived
   in Sheffield at 1.35. He had two boys with him. His aim
  was to get intofthe ground as was his normal practice a
  good half an hour to forty minutes before the game, in order
  to enable the children to get a good position. On this
  occasion because they had had a long journey, they stopped off
  at a pub in the town centre, where they had something to eat
  and drink. Supporters were there from both sides as well as
  local people and the atmosphere was grand. They caught a
  taxi to the stadium, leaving at about 10 past 2. They were
  dropped off at approximately ten minutes walk from the stadium
  which they approached from over a little bridge, turning right
  into the ground. They arrived at about 2.30. They were met
  by a ’bunch crowd’ attempting to make their way into the
  ground. He also noticed that there were people milling around
  on the little bridge. He noticed that there were no orderly
  queues, there was just a crowd. He did see some perimeter
  gates and that there were two police horses in front of them.
  The gates were shut. He together with the boys made their
  way through the crowd and came up to the horse. There was
  a bit of pushing and he also felt in some danger from the
  horse itself. He was noticed by the policeman standing within
  the gate, and because of the two boys, he was allowed to go
  through, the gate being opened slightly. He describes the
  attitude of the crowd at that time as being frustrated, not
  knowing exactly what was happening. There was no indication
  of why the gates were shut. He does however say that there
  was quite a crowd inside and again there were no orderly
  queuing and so he thought that people were a bit anxious
  about what was actually happening. He heard various remarks
  including comments like "I have got a ticket. Why can’t I
  be allowed to go through". When asked whether this was being
  said forcefully or not he said "no, they were shouting but not
  really aggressively". Having now got beyond the perimeter
  gates but outside the turnstiles in the area of turnstiles
  H and G, he says it was literally a free for all trying to



BADABW
                                  -   2 -
Robert Arthur Knowles (cont’d).

get through the turnstiles. There was no sort of queuing or-
anything. There was a police officer in there at the edge of
the crowd. People were trying to get past him to get out saying
they were in the wrong place with wrong tickets, and that they
were’nt being allowed in. This was impossible, because the
gates were closed. He felt it was pointless to try and join
a queue so he stood to one side and watched. There were people
climbing the walls, there were people on the wall trying to
pull people up and there was quite a crush going on, in fact it
was worse than it had been outside the perimeter gates. He
describes it as being a complete blockage with no real movement
but that the area outside the turnstiles was barred on the
right by a barrier and that beyond that, things were moving
quite freely.
By about quarter to three he was getting a little
anxious. He was comparing the situation with other football
matches where policemen are normally stationed by the turnstiles
asking for tickets and forming queues. The situation he
observed was just a crowd of people pushing each other and
trying to gain entrance. He said "obviously probably they paid
money, they wanted to get in and see the game. They were
worried about not seeing the kick-off". He spoke with the
policemen and he was told that the men had been pulled out as
they were worried about getting hurt because they were standing
by the wall and were being pressed up against the wall. He was
told that the policeman had actually being taken out. When
pressed, he confirmed that he recollected that the actual words
which were also said to him were "let them fight amongst
themselves, if that’s what they want to do". The impression he
formed was that control in that particular area had been lost,
had been given up and the matter just been left to the fans to
try and get in any way they could, which left them open to
pushing and shoving each other in an attempt to get through.
Interestingly, he suggested that the concertina gate might be
opened to allow people through and thus relieve the blockage at
the turnstiles. When asked whether he noticed that the crowd at
this stage was becoming agressive he replied ”1 think they were
very frustrated in trying to gain access to the ground. The
ones at the back were pushing and saying come out let’s get in
and the ones at the front knowing that there was nowhere for
them to go were shouting back" please stop pushing, people are
actually getting crushed in the front part. Please ease back"
but in a situation like that you can’t really hear or understand
you are just pushing forward trying to gain access. I don’t
think they could hear anything being shouted from the front".
He was asked whether he heard any loudspeaker annouoncements.
He said that although he saw an officer with a microphone, he
did not hear anything himself. Eventually he overheard a
message to the effect that the gate should be opened and he
managed to enter it. He distinctly heard shouts going up from
the back, a message being passed back that the gate was open and
he said that there was no sort of funnelling or telling people
in which direction to go. He entered the tunnel with others and



BADABW
Robert Arthur Knowles (cont’d).

 exited on to the left side, Pen 4. The back of this terrace was
 quite full but he did not think this was anything unusual and he
 therefore, because of the boys, decided to move to the front.
 Their first aim was to go down behind the goal but noticing that
 it was packed, he told the boys to move left away from the
 centre. They managed to get right down to the bottom and he
 then said "down at the bottom there was a yard or so of flat
 area right next to the front and that was fairly free. There
 was a gap you could walk along so we walked along as far as we
 could go. We then came up against the fence running from front
 to back". He didn’t particularly like it there and he stepped
 back a little way into the terrace and he positioned the boys a
 couple of steps forward and actually on the fence itself. He
 remembered that on entering the terrace, the players were on the
 pitch, the goalkeeper was in the goal in front of them. He said
 that having got their viewing position and had been satisfied
 with it the game kicked off "possibly in a minute or so the game
 did actually kick off". He noticed that the enclosure next to
 him on the left was empty (this is in fact a void area and was
 intended to be so) but he also noticed that the outer pens were
 relatively spacious. The game having kicked off was a shot at
 the Liverpool goal. There was a forward movement from the crowd
 and he was moved against the boys. He found that he could not
 move back. He noticed the people further along were beginning
  to climb the fence to try and get out. He said "I don’t know
 why, I will never know why, I just said to the two boys "climb
 over the fence and get on to the pitch. I just don’t feel
  comfortable, I think there is something wrong". You may feel
  that this inclines at that point he had not yet appreciated the
  seriousness of the situation but instinctively felt that the
  boys should be put into a safe environment. He said that at
  that point he was not being crushed in the sense that he was
  hurting in any way but he was up against the fence, unable to
  move and that did worry him. He thought if I am going to get
  pushed any more from the back, there is nowhere for me to go.
  At that point, it was bearable but any more pressure would have
  been a different matter. People were beginning to shout "please
  stop pushing" and in fact he heard shouts from the back saying
  "move forward". He was unable to say whether the cheering came ^
  from his own pen. He described his son being put back into pen ^
  by a policewoman but confirmed that that pen was in fact empty
  and that his son was in no danger in that enclosure. Somewhat
  later, he noticed a man who appeared to be in a very poor state.
  He describes how a police officer who was standing at the gate
  helping people by pulling them out coming into the pen and
  attempting to give him the kiss of life. He then left the
  enclosure, assisted with trying to rip up the fencing and then
  quite properly went and looked for the children. He felt that
  there was no way of going backward and that the only way out of
  the enclosure was through the fence or over the fence. You will
  probably remember this          of Mr. Hale because he used
   their illustration




 BADABW
                                                              -   4 -

                                    Robert Arthur Knowles (cont’d).


                                    of p^^and was trying to demonstrate with that the fact that if
                                    pressure is applied to columns which are not contained, they
                                    will merge. A proposition which the witness accepted. When
                                    asked by Mr. Payne what was the nearest ordinary means of escape
                                    he replied "back through the tunnel". Mr. Manning explored the
                                    reasons for the trapping at the perimeter gates and the crushing
                                    within the turnstile area. He agreed that there obviously was a
                                    danger of police officers being crushed, but he would have
                                    thought so would have other people standing next to them. He
                                    also could understand the feelings of apprehension which
                                    somebody like Mr. Gillan might have felt. Finally he agreed
                                    with Mr. Manning that at the moment just before the kick-off the
                                    terrace did not appear to him abnormal. He agreed with Mr. King
                                    that he was not aware that the Leppings Lane terracing was
                                    divided into pens and indeed he described them as cages. He
                                    also said that terrace 6 and 7 were virtually empty. That he


            r                       was surprised at this bearing in mind the closeness of the
                                    kick-off and the crowds which were still outside. He agreed
                                     that there was no queues at the turnstiles, that it was like a
                                    bottleneck he said. There was nowhere for anybody to go and
                                     that although, when he approached the perimeter gates were shut,
                                     the fact that there were masses of people within the turnstile
                                     area indicated to him that at some point they must have been
                                     open. He confirmed that he had seen stewards in the concourse
                                     area but that they had stood aside when the gate was open. He
                                     also said that he wondered how it was possible to get on to the
                                     outer terraces. We then had some discussion with regard to the
                                     difference between swaying and surging. The witness himself in
                                     his statement had used the word ’surge’ to describe the events,
                                     having at least described two of these. He confirmed that after
                                     the second surge he had heard screams and shouts from the crowd
                                     against the fence indicating the pain and obvious discomfort.
                                     He was specifically asked whether he got the impression that
                                     people were trying to get out, that there was panic around him.
                                     His response was not in the sense people were frightened, but I
                                     think they were all expecting the crush to ease off. Question
                                     "but it didn’t" Answer"it didn’t". Question, "and you heard
                                     shouts clearly from people wanting to get out" Answer "Yes", He
                                     said that he felt that the police on the pitch side at that
                                     stage had not realised what was going on. Mr. Knowles just
                                     before the end of his evidence was asked to re-summarise the
                                     position with timings. He said "we came out of the tunnel.
                                     There was a fair pack of people at the top of the terrace so I
                                     suggested we make out way to the front of the terrace and to the
     -Ay,I       6                   left because there was a fence down the middle. You could only
      C V \ ^ •           _i_.       go left so I pushed the lads in front of me. We forced out way
\    J</\A,W K ^                     down. It was tightly packed, but you could gain access. We got
\ v 'cO Ct-irt. <2CCV(               down to the front and behind the goal and began to walk along
      — Ma a -Vf C U ^ O il.y i '     the front towards the left of the ground. There was a slight
                                      gap at the bottom that you could walk straight along. You
                                     weren’t pushing past people moving up and down the terrace, It
                                     was a pretty straight channel through. We got as far as we
                                      could at the front.


                                    BADABW
                               5

 Robert Arthur Knowles (cont’d ) .


   We came up on a fence running from the front to the back of the
 ground and I took a step on to the terrace and a
 step up on a large spur of the fence standing holding the fence.
 As the match kicked off I was pushed towards the fence behind
 the boys then it eased off slightly and I took a step back
 towards the terrace. I think somebody had a shot at the goal.
 The ball went over, the crowd moved forward again and I couldn’t
 move. When I went to move back, I couldn’t move as far as I had
 moved forward. It was at this time that further along the terra
 ce towards the goal, people were looking to get out over the
 fence and at that time I just told the boys to get over. As
 they were climbing the fence and I helped them over, as they
 moved out, I was then pushed against the fence and couldn’t
 move". In a nutshell then this witness says that although the
 terrace was very full just before kick-off, at kick-off he was
 in a position where he was satisfied with his position and the
 location of the boys. Shortly thereafter when a kick towards
 his goal had taken place, he for reasons which he cannot
 explain, got the boys to climb out and it was after that that
 he became immobilised by the crowd though not totally and
 initially in any discomfort. He felt that at that stage,
 although pieople were shouting for help, the police on the
 other side did not realise what was going on. We know from
 the video evidence and indeed from his account that shortly
 thereafter assistance was being rendered though it’s only
 fair to say that the fencing itself was not actually torn
 away until about 18 minutes past 3 (video evidence).
 When he was cross-examined by Mr. Catchpole, he was shown two
 photographs C305 which showed the situation at 14.30 and which
 he agreed showed no anxiety amongst the people standing about.
 This was contrasted with C301 which he felt was in fact a bit
 busier than he recollected it and he agreed that for whatever
 reason something had turned an apparently quiet orderly crowd
 at 2.30 into the sort of scenes which he had witnessed
 relatively shortly thereafter. Mrs. McBrien asked some
 interesting questions of this witness and she inquired whether
 he would have been upset if the match had been postponed and he
 said "no provided the information had been passed over”. You
 have to remember that this witness had already said that he
 had not heard any loudspeaker announcements. Bearing in mind
 that last minute announcements were undoubtedly made, you have
 to consider whether or not an announcement of a postponement
 would in fact have been heard and what effect if any that
 would have had on the crowd. He was also asked by Mrs. McBrien
 whether he had noticed the notices for the toilets on the
  right and left hand side of the tunnel and he responded "no".
 The point of her question was whether he felt that access routes
 to and from these toilets should at all times be kept clear
 which he agreed with but the point I want to draw to your
 attention is that this witness had also said that he had not
  seen any other signs directing him to the outer pens. I don’t
  think it is disputed that the signing in the concourse area
 as far as the outer pens was either poor or non-existent, but
  to the tower which he was entering in to. This witness also
 agreed with Mrs. McBrien that he had seen the stewards being
 used to keep exit       clear. He was also cross-examined by
BADABW
                           -   6   -

Robert Arthur Knowles (cont’d).

Mr. Russell re the frustration of the crowd. He responded.
The question which you have to consider is whether even if there
had been such a sign it would have been noticed, bearing in
mind that he did not see quite large signs for toilets adjacent
wanted to get in to see the game, talking to each other, asking
what’s going on and various other questions". He finished up
by saying "you were getting mis-information from different
sources all around the ground". Mr. Russell illicited from
him that just before the kick-off he had not found the terrace
abnormal and that he was satisfied with the position of the
lads up against the fence. His state of mind changed around
the time when there was a shot at the goal and the surge
occurred. Misapprehension was for the boys, he was not in
discomfort himself at that time.




BADABW
                                                      DAY:    9
DATE:     29.11.90.

NAME:     Robert Arthur Knowles.   (id)
DESIGNATION:     Supporter.

STATUS:

ASSESSMENT.     A good and interesting witness.   He gave a
                clear account.




   Mr. Knowles left early from Birkenhead at 10.15.   There
   were traffic delays on the road around       . He arrived
   in Sheffield at 1.35. He had two boys with him. His aim
   was to get into the ground as was his normal practice a
   good half an hoar to forty minutes before the game, in order
   to enable the children to get a good position. On this
   occasion because they had had a long journey, they stopped off
   at a pub in the town centre, where they had something to eat
   and drink.  Supporters were there from both sides as well as
   local people and the atmosphere was grand.  They caught a
   taxi to the stadium, leaving at about 10 past 2. They were
   dropped off at approximately ten minutes walk from the stadium
   which they approached from over a little bridge, turning right
   into the ground.  They arrived at about 2.30.   They were met
   by a ’bunch crowd’ attempting to make their way into the
   ground. He also noticed that there were people milling around
   on the little bridge. He noticed that there were no orderly
   queues, there was just a crowd. He did see some perimeter
   gates and that there were two police horses in front of them.
   The gates were shut. He together with the boys made their
   way through the crowd and came up to the horse.   There was
   a bit of pushing and he also felt in some danger from the
   horse itself.  He was noticed by the policeman standing within
   the gate, and because of the two boys, he was allowed to go
   through, the gate being opened slightly. He describes the
   attitude of the crowd at that time as being frustrated, not
   knowing exactly what was happening.  There was no indication
   of why the gates were shut. He does however say that there
   was quite a crowd inside and again there were no orderly
   queuing and so he thought that people were a bit anxious
   about what was actually happening.  He heard various remarks
   including comments like "I have got a ticket. Why can ’t I
   be allowed to go through". When asked whether this was being
   said forcefully or not he said "no, they were shouting but not
   really aggressively". Having now got beyond the perimeter
   gates but outside the turnstiles in the area of turnstiles
   H and G, he says it was literally a free for all .trying to




BADABW
                                      -   2 -
Robert Arthur Knowles   (cont’d ) .

get through the turnstiles.      There was no sort of queuing or
anything.      There was a police officer in there at the edge of
the crowd.      People were trying to get past him to get out saying
they were in the wrong place with wrong tickets, and that they
w e r e ’nt being allowed in. This was impossible, because the
gates were closed.      He felt it was pointless to try and join
a queue so he stood to one side and watched.      There were people
climbing the walls, there were people on the wall trying to
pull people up and there was quite a crush going on, in fact it
was worse than it had been outside the perimeter gates.      He
describes it as being a complete blockage with no real movement
but that the area outside the turnstiles was barred on the
right by a barrier and that beyond that, things were moving
quite freely.
By about quarter to three he was getting a little
anxious.      He was comparing the situation with other football
matches where policemen are normally stationed by the turnstiles
asking for tickets and forming queues.      The situation he
observed was just a crowd of people pushing each other and
trying to gain entrance. He said "obviously probably they paid
money, they wanted to get in and see the game. They were
worried about not seeing the kick-off".      He spoke with the
policemen and he was told that the men had been pulled out as
they were worried about getting hurt because they were standing
by the wall and were being pressed up against the wall.      He was
told that the policeman had actually being taken out. When
pressed, he confirmed that he recollected that the actual words
which were also said to him were "let them fight amongst
themselves, if that’s what they want to do". The impression he
formed was that control in that particular area had been lost,
had been given up and the matter just been left to the fans to
try and get in any way they could, which left them open to
pushing and shoving each other in an attempt to get through.
Interestingly, he suggested that the concertina gate might be
opened to allow people through and thus relieve the blockage at
the turnstiles. When asked whether he noticed that the crowd at
this stage was becoming agressive he replied "I think they were
very frustrated in trying to gain access to the ground.       The
ones at the back were pushing and saying come out let’s get in
and the ones at the front knowing that there was nowhere for
them to go were shouting back" please stop pushing, people are
actually getting crushed in the front part.      Please ease back"
but in a situation like that you can’t really hear or understand
you are just pushing forward trying to gain access.      I do n’t
think they could hear anything being shouted from the front".
He was asked whether he heard any loudspeaker annouoncements.
He said that although he saw an officer with a microphone, he
did not hear anything himself.      Eventually he overheard a
message to the effect that the gate should be opened and he
managed to enter it. He distinctly heard shouts going up from
the back, a message being passed' back that the gate was open and
he said that there was no sort of funnelling or telling people
 in which direction to go. He entered the tunnel,with others and



BADABW
Robert Arthur Knowles   (cont'd).

 exited on to the left side, Pen 4. The back of this terrace was
 quite full but he did not think this was anything unusual and he
 therefore, because of the boys, decided to move to the front.
 Their first aim was to go down behind the goal but noticing that
 it was packed, he told the boys to move left away from the
 centre.   They managed to get right down to the bottom and he
 then said "down at the bottom there was a yard or so of flat
 area right next to the front and that was fairly free. There
 was a gap you could walk along so we walked along as far as we
 could go. We then came up against the fence running from front
 to back". He didn't particularly like it there and he stepped
 back a little way into the terrace and he positioned the boys a
 couple of steps forward and actually on the fence itself. He
 remembered that on entering the terrace, the players were on the
 pitch, the goalkeeper was in the goal in front’ of them. He said
 that having got their viewing position and had been satisfied
 with it the game kicked off "possibly in a minute or so the game
 did actually kick off". He noticed that the enclosure next to
 him on the left was empty (this is in fact a void area and was
 intended to be so) but he also noticed that the outer pens were
 relatively spacious.   The game having kicked off was a shot at
 the Liverpool goal. There was a forward movement from the crowd
 and he was moved against the boys.    He found that he could not
 move back. He noticed the people further along were beginning
 to climb the fence to try and get out.    He said "I don't know
 why, I will never know why, I just said to the two boys "climb
 over the fence and get on to the pitch.    I just don’t feel
 comfortable, I think there is something wrong". You may feel
 that this inclines at that point he had not yet appreciated the
  seriousness of the situation but instinctively felt that the
 boys should be put into a safe environment. He said that at
  that point he was not being crushed in the sense that he was
 hurting in any way but he was up against the fence, unable to
 move and that did worry him. He thought if I am going to get
 pushed any more from the back, there is nowhere for me to go.
 At that point, it was bearable but any more pressure would have
 been a different matter.    People were beginning to shout "please
  stop pushing" and in fact he heard shouts from the back saying
  "move forward". He was unable to say whether the cheering came
  from his own pen. He described his son being put back into pen
  by a policewoman but confirmed that that pen was in fact empty
  and that his son was in no danger in that enclosure.   Somewhat
  later, he noticed a man who appeared to be in a very poor state.
  He describes how a police officer who was standing at the gate
  helping people by pulling them out coming into the pen and
  attempting to give him the kiss of life. He then left the
  enclosure, assisted with trying to rip up the fencing and then
  quite properly went and looked for the children. He felt that
  there was no way of going backward and that the only way out of
  the enclosure was through the fence or over the fence. You will
  probably remember this           of Hr. Hale because he used
  their illustration




BADABW
         \

                Robert Arthur Knowles   (cont’d).
S' •*



                    of p ^ a n d was trying to demonstrate with that the'fact that if
                   pressure is applied to columns which are not contained, they
                   will merge. A proposition which the witness accepted. When
                   asked by Mr. Payne what was the nearest ordinary means of escape
                   he replied "back through the tunnel". Mr. Manning explored the
                   reasons for the trapping at the perimeter gates and the crushing
                   within the turnstile area. He agreed that there obviously was a
                   danger of police officers being crushed, but he would have
                   thought so would have other people standing next to them. He
                   also could understand the feelings of apprehension which
                   somebody like Mr. Gillan might have felt. Finally he agreed
                   with Mr. Manning that at the moment just before-the kick-off the
                   terrace did not appear to him abnormal. He agreed with Mr. King
                   that he was not aware that the Leppings Lane terracing was
                   divided into pens and indeed he described them as cages.     He
                   also said that terrace 6 and 7 were virtually empty.     That he
                  was surprised at this bearing in mind the closeness of the
                  kick-off and the crowds which were still outside.      He agreed
                   that there was no queues at the turnstiles, that it was like a
                  bottleneck he said. There was nowhere for anybody to go and
                  that although, when he approached the perimeter gates were shut,
                  the fact that there were masses of people within the turnstile
                  area indicated to him that at some point they must have been
                  open.     He confirmed that he had seen stewards in the concourse
                  area but that they had stood aside when the gate was open. He
                  also said that he wondered how it was possible to get on to the
                  outer terraces. We then had some discussion with regard to the
                  difference between swaying and surging.     The witness himself in
                  his statement had used the word ’surge' to describe the events,
                  having at least described two of these.     He confirmed that after
                  the second surge he had heard screams and shouts from the crowd
                  against the fence indicating the pain and obvious discomfort.
                  He was specifically asked whether he got the impression that
                  people were trying to get out, that there was panic around him.
                 His response was not in the sense people were frightened, but I
                  think they were all expecting the crush to ease off. Question
      m           "but it didn’t" Answer"it didn’t". Question, "and you heard
                  shouts clearly from people wanting to get out" Answer "Yes". He
                  said that he felt that the police on the pitch side at that
                 stage had not realised what was going on. Mr. Knowles just
                 before the end of his evidence was asked to re-summarise the
                 position with timings. He said "we came out of the tunnel.
                 There was a fair pack of people at the top of the terrace      so I
                 suggested we make out way to the front of the terrace and      to the
             *5
                 left because there was a fence down the middle. You could only
                 go left so I pushed the lads in front of me. We forced out way
v l v \ K * W vd
                 down.     It was tightly packed, but you could gain access.    We got
i OLvx o ( IO (
                 down to the front and behind the goal and began to walk along
■* Aftu^sO\L^ the front towards the left of thfe ground.        There was a slight
                 gap at the bottom that you could walk straight along. You
                 weren’t pushing past people moving up and down the terrace.       It
                 was a pretty straight channel through. We got as far as we
                 could at the front.


             BADABW
Robert Arthur Knowles   (cont’d).


 We came up on a fence running from the front to the back of the
ground and I took a step on to the terrace and a
step up on a large spur of the fence standing holding the fence.
As the match kicked off I was pushed towards the fence behind
the boys then it eased off slightly and I took a step back
towards the terrace.    I think somebody had a shot at the goal.
The ball went over, the crowd moved forward again and I couldn t
move. When I went to move back, I couldn’t move as far as I had
moved forward.    It was at this time that further along the terra
ce towards the goal, people were looking to get out over the
fence and at that time I just told the boys to get over. As
they were climbing the fence and I helped them over, as they
moved out, I was then pushed against the fence and couldn’t
move". In a nutshell then this witness says that although the
 terrace was very full just before kick-off, at kick-off he was
 in a position where he was satisfied with his position and the
 location of the boys. Shortly thereafter when a kick towards
his goal had taken place, he for reasons which he cannot
 explain, got the boys to climb out and it was after that that
he became immobilised by the crowd though not totally and
 initially in any discomfort.     He felt that at that stage,
 although people were shouting for help, the police on the
 other side did not realise what was going on. We know from
 the video evidence and indeed from his account that shortly
 thereafter assistance was being rendered though it’s only
 fair to say that the fencing itself was not actually torn
 away until about 18 minutes past 3 (video evidence).
 When he was cross-examined by Mr. Catchpole, he was shown two
 photographs C305 which showed the situation at 14.30 and which
 he agreed showed no anxiety amongst the people standing about.
 This was contrasted with C301 which he felt was in fact a bit
 busier than he recollected it and he agreed that for whatever
 reason something had turned an apparently quiet orderly crowd
 at 2.30 into the sort of scenes which he had witnessed
  relatively shortly thereafter. Mrs. McBrien asked some
  interesting questions    of this witness and she inquired whether
 he would have been upset if the match had been postponed and he
  said "no provided the information had been passed over". You
 have to remember that this witness had already said that he
 had not heard any loudspeaker announcements.      Bearing in mind
  that last minute announcements were undoubtedly made, you have
  to consider whether or not an announcement of a postponement
 would in fact have been heard and what effect if any that
  would have had on the crowd.     He was also asked by Mrs. McBrien
  whether he had noticed the notices for the toilets on the
  right and left hand side of the tunnel and he responded no .
  The point of her question was whether he felt that access routes
  to and from these toilets should at all times be kept clear
  which he agreed with but the point I want to draw to your
  attention is that this witness had also said that he had not
  seen any other signs    directing him tothe outer pens.   I don t
  think it is disputed    that the signing in the concourse area
  as far as the outer pens was either poor or non-existent, but
  to the tower which he was entering in to. This witness also
  agreed with Mrs. McBrien that he had seen the stewards being
  used to keep exit        clear.   He was also cross-examined by
 BADABW
Robert Arthur Knowles   (cont’d).

Mr. Russell re the frustration of the crowd      He resPond*J-
The question which you have to consider is whether even if there
had been such a sign it would have been noticed, ^ i n g in
mind that he did not see quite large signs for toil       lskin„
wanted to get in to see the game, talking to each other.asking
w h a t ’s going on and various other questions . He           Up
by saying "you were getting mis-information from differe
 sources til .round the ground". Mr. Russell illici ed rom
him that just before the kick-off he had not found the terrace
 abnormal and that he was satisfied with the position of the
 lads up against the fence. His state of mind changed around
 the time when there was a shot at the goal and the surge
 occurred. Misapprehension was for the boys, he was not in
discomfort himself at that time.




  BADABW
DAY 10                                          pu^kc
                                                r   ,*
                                                     •
                                                     *!
30 NOVEMBER 1990

41. S BOARDMAN                                   INTERESTING WITNESS

Travelled by coach, didn't leave until 11.30. There was a bit of
pushing at the coach station and they had to wait and he got on the
last coach. Came across Snake Pass and didn't arrive in Sheffield
until 14.40. He had noticed a few people drinking from cans.
When he arrived at 14.45 perimeter gates were open, PO letting
people through. POs on foot seen, four mounted officers seen.
Having got through perimeter gates, stepped to one side to avoid
crowd, thought people were being hurt. Saw Gate C open a little bit
to allow injured person in. Overheard people at Gate C "next time
gate opens they were going to push through". Assumed they had no
tickets but didn't know. Did not see or hear LANDROVER. Gate opened
again, 50/100 people went through, police horses stopped them. He
thought the group that made this remark consisted of about 10 people.
His view was that 50/100 people pushed in.^Mounted officer tried to
control crowd, Gate C re-opened, authorised, entered, able to make
his way down tunnel but was bumped, exit of tunnel was blocked,
players were on field, got pushed towards left. On first entry
terrace did not look too bad.
Got separated from his friend because of pushing from behind. Fans
were saying "push back", able to do so a little. Took a little rest,
felt people coming over his head, he was squashed, people were
complaining about this as they felt just as bad. Heard people at
the front appealing for relief but couldn't move back. Helped into
Pen 5 by P0. He was able to tell that the people at the front were
in trouble. He said that the people in the pen were pushing. Told
Mr King that the terraces were bad but not as bad as he had been in
before, that he had control over himself, but he did also see people
in distress who looked quite bad.

  Then saw that the perimeter gates were being shut by P0 but they
then re-opened. He saw mounted officer shouting at the people near
the gate and they were shouting back.
DAY 10

30 NOVEMBER 1990

39. S BERRY                                      SUPPORTER

 Manchester United fan with Liverpool supporter friend.
 Had a ticket for Spion Kop. Went to the "Fox" and decided to try
to get in the Leppings Lane end. Arrived Leppings Lane 14.15. He
 says perimeter gates were shut, saw one PO, heard shouts from an
officer, crowd surged forward, gate opened. He in fact entered via
Gate C (Kop ticket). He describes a police cordon at approx 2.30
or thereabouts. Able to walk through, not stopped, but he says he
saw similar situation in 1988 when people were stopped and couldn't
get through if they had no ticket. Insists he actually saw this
with his own eyes, despite the fact that in 1988 he was going to
Penistone Road end of ground.
At the perimeter gates only one officer. Heard a shout "only one        8
cop on the gate" and to rush him or push him. Shout came from in
front but pushing came from behind. He could see people were pushing
from the back but only limited number got through. Saw mounted
officer trying to calm the crowd.
As he entered the terrace play was in progress, he was able to ease
his way through, cretotied but not oppressive, could have put up with
it if need be. There was then a surge and he climbed out, he thought
gate was open when he got out. He thought in 1988 the flow of people
had almost stopped by 2.30 and agreed that at that time in 1989 it
was only just starting. He thought that people came later in 1989
because 1988 had gone so smoothly and it was numbers rather than
behaviour which caused the problems. He agreed that he himself had
gone to the match much earlier in 1988 and modified his arrival time
in 1989 to 14.45 to 14.50.
                                                                                   1




        DAY 1 0                                              7   f*y\'   ^


        30 NOVEMBER 1990

        39.   S BERRY                                    SUPPORTER

        Manchester United fan with Liverpool supporter friend.
        Had a ticket for Spion Kop. Went to the "Fox" and decided to try
        to get in the Leppings Lane end. Arrived Leppings Lane 14.15. He
        says perimeter gates were shut, saw one PO, heard shouts from an
        officer, crowd surged forward, gate opened. He in fact entered via
        Gate C (Kop ticket). He describes a police cordon at approx 2.30
        or thereabouts. Able to walk through, not stopped, but he says he
        saw similar situation in 1988 when people were stopped and couldn't
        get through if they had no ticket. Insists he actually saw this
        with his own eyes despite the fact that in 1988 he was going to
        Penistone Road end of ground.
        At the perimeter gates only one officer. Heard a shout "only one       8
        cop on the gate" and to rush him or push him. Shout came from in
        front but pushing came from behind. He could see people were pushing
        from the back but only limited number got through. Saw mounted
        officer trying to calm the crowd.
        As he entered the terrace play was in progress, he was able to ease
        his way through, cretotled but not oppresave, could have put up with
        it if need be. There was then a surge and he climbed out, he thought
        gate was open when he got out. He thought in 1988 the flow of people
i   (
        had almost stopped by 2.30 and agreed that at that time in 1989 it
        was only just starting. He thought that people came later in 1989
        because 1988 had gone so smoothly and it was numbers rather than
        behaviour which caused the problems. He agreed that he himself had
        gone to the match much earlier in 1988 and modified his arrival time
        in 1989 to 14.45 to 14.50.
                                                      /^,j£
DAY 1 0
                                                      rusikc**»
3 0 NOVEMBER 1 9 9 0



41.   S BOARDMAN                                       INTERESTING WITNESS

Travelled by coach, didn't leave until 11.30. There was a bit of
pushing at the coach station and they had to wait and he got on the
last coach. Came across Snake Pass and didn't arrive in Sheffield
until 14.40. He had noticed a few people drinking from cans.
When he arrived at 14.45 perimeter gates were open, P0 letting
people through. POs on foot seen, four mounted officers seen.
Having got through perimeter gates, stepped to one side to avoid
crowd, thought people were being hurt. Saw Gate C open a little bit
to allow injured person in. Overheard people at Gate C "next time
gate opens they were going to push through". Assumed they had no
tickets but didrf't know. Did not see or hear LANDROVER. Gate opened
again, 50/100 people went through, police horses stopped them. He
thought the group that made this remark consisted of about 10 people.
His view was that 50/100 people pushed i n . ^ M o u n t e d officer tried to
control crowd, Gate C re-opened, authorised, entered, able to make
his way down tunnel but was bumped, exit of tunnel was blocked,
players were on field, got pushed towards left. On first entry
terrace did not look too bad.
Got separated from his friend because of pushing from behind. Fans
were saying "push back", able to do so a little. Took a little rest,
felt people coming over his head, he was squashed, people were
complaining about this as they felt just as bad. Heard people at
the front appealing for relief but couldn't move back. Helped into
Pen 5 by P0. He was able to tell that the people at the front were
in trouble. He said that the people in the pen were pushing. Told
Mr King that the terraces were bad but not as bad as he had been in
before, that he had control over himself, but he did also see people
in distress who looked quite bad.

  Then saw that the perimeter gates were being shut by P0 but they
then re-opened. He saw mounted officer shouting at the people near
the gate and they were shouting back.
DAY
DAY 11
3 DECEMBER 19 9 0



42: G HURST                         ASSOCIATED WITH K & C RIMMER
                                                          PEN 4

Travelled by car, departed 10.30, arrived 2.15. Troublefree journey,
Leppings Lane 2.30, masses of people, saw mounted officers inside,
edged towards side, entered via Gate C, went to toilet. He said
tunnel was jam-packed solid with people and he was moving slowly
with 'the flow, no room to run (see Mr McMahon). Could see pitch
from tunnel, players getting ready to kick-off. Game kicked-off
just as he exited, crossed diagonally Pen 4 towards Pen 5. Worse
crushing experience ever, been on Kop and Wembley. He entered
tunnel because he thought the 'B ' above it was linked with the 'B '
on his stub. Said he couldn't get out of the tunnel if he had
                                                     fuvr
wanted to. He agreed with Mr Catchpole that it was{,chance that
he had retained his stub.
        DAY 2 3


        1 9 DECEMBER 1 9 9 0



        87.   C G WATSON                           POLICE SGT. 1710
                                                   MOUNTED OFFICER, NOTTS

        Summoned to assist, thought 14.50 but query his timing?
        When arrived Gate C shut. Crowd 2/3,000 people squashed in
        turnstile area. Children being passed to Police Officer.
        He thought area 1-16 appeared in order, with queueing (but see
        other evidence). Crush worse ever. Attempted to put horse                 43
        between perimeter gate and crowd to create breaK, attempted
        to push people back out, methodology relies on people transferring
        forward momentum to backward momentum, did not think it was
        hopeless, horse was catalyst. Gap created, horse moved out of the^n
        way to allow backward expansion. (Compare comments by Mr Jolly,     fix


ib10°   and Mr Bridson). Recollection of cordon position, no recollection
        of landrover or tannoy. People started running around his horse,
        space filled up, felt that people at perimeter gate were pushing,         47 - 51
        horse subsequently had to be retired. Obvious danger to people            49
         but other than those trapped in front of turnstile, had the ability
        to move but did not respond.                                              52-52
        Crowd very dense, caused by pushing, excess numbers in area.
        Hundreds of people ran around his horse, but query Gate C open?           5j5, 56
        He felt that a non-aggressive crowd could safely be let through
        a perimeter gate but that if the mood was bad, things might be
        different.                                              57

         N.B.
         Quite clear that turnstile area was overcrowded but consider
         evidence already heard regarding necessity for counting mechanism
         into a restricted area as well as need to control distribution.
         Clearly no possibility of counting people into turnstile area.
         Position in fact analogous to terracing but there was a police
         presence at turnstiles.
                                       CC/t-t*-*- ~~i                          CiAS'




                                                   C O N F I D E N T I A L

                                                AIDE MEMOIR FOR SUMMING UP




8 JANUARY 1991 -             DAY 25


                                                                                Qpj        fi~(,
GEOFFREY PHILIP BRIDSON                                 LIVERPOOL SUPPORTER



Attended        1988.            Pen 3.        Entered 2.15.       Became progressively

tighter that           year after kick off.                 Very    tight and extremely
                             i

uncomfortable           to       such     an     extent that people were pulled up

into stand.




1989     left     10.15          Liverpool. ,           Sheffield 1315 (with 3/A hour

wait     for     friends.              They arrived at 1.A5).             Had something to

eat.       Set off for Leppings Lane 2.30 approximately.                            Through

turnstiles            1A35       -      1AA0.      Described       Mej-syyyliie     Officer

attempting        to        control       crowd        creating a gap at back.         Other

officer        entered       with        horse.          Horses went into gap and gap

lost.      Entered Pen A - 1AA0 approximately.                        Very busy.       Went

to     left.          More space.          Not apprehensive.          After few minutes

movement        forward          and     over     to     left.      He split up at that

point,     approximately                1AA5     (lost     sight     of     David   RIMMER,

deceased.)             At     that point had been mentioned that crush was

about     equivalent             to     1988.      Tried     to    set stop watch when

players        came     out       - 1A5A.        Unable to do so because could not

move     arm.          After a few moments managed to get arms up to do

it.        Intending              to      watch         match.       Very     tight,    very

uncomfortable           but       not     worried.        Things get worse from then.
                                                            - 2 -


    (BRIDSON cont)




    Became     frightened           at about kick off time.                   No surge, general

    movement        to     left,        escaped     to    Pen        5 - approximately 1515.

    Looked     at clock.           Prior to that had heard cries for help from

    the      front.               Not    heard     until    match            actually   stopped.

    Confirmed           that   he had not reported his experiences to anyone

          "nobody       would listen".            Except in immediate vicinity could
                                   i
    not     hear        crowds.         Uncomfortable           at     1AA0.      Being knocked

    about     but not frightened.                 25 years experience.             Opinion that

    officer        on     track    would      have       been        aware     of crushing.   He

    recalls        punching        air but no recollection of teams being read

    out.




t
                                     fu>t*O              4^4             O
                                                    C O N F I D E N T I A L

                                                  AIDE MEMOIR FOR SUMMING UP



    8 JANUARY 1991 -            DAY 25
                                                                                    /t,     i




Ctf. IAIN DAVID CRAWFORD                           LIVERPOOL SUPPORTER

    Travelled        by car from Liverpool - 9.20.                     Arrived Oughtibridge

    12     noon.          Leppings     Lane       approximately          2.30.       Held up at

    perimeter        gate by steward filtering fans through.                            Turnstile

    area     emptyish."         Crowd build up outside perimeter gates which

    he     thought       were      closed.         Entered        turnstile        area.        Crush

    quickly        developed.'         Stepped       to    one side.         River Don area.

    Mounted officers behind barriers.                     At some point rode through

    despite        plea     from     policewoman not to.                Few officers charged            It
    crowd.          Ro^flU in an aggressive manner.                   Not helpful.         Entered

    the      stadium       1AA8.      Toilet.        Heard supporter say - don’t go
                                                                                      /r
    down      tunnel,        overcrowded.           Looked down, assessed situation, — "~

    felt      it    was     safe.      Thought* players were on pitch before he

    set      off.         Walked     slowly       through       tunnel.           Firni EiH,      not

    frightened            initially         though        crowded.              Crowd    pressure

    increased-             Surge.          Pressed       against barrier, leg trapped.                  n
    Screaming        from crowd (NB: after players were on pitch gfcatec

    j*el atioiultijj       'T U — mat eh        start)         Saw     police      officer       push

     supporter       back       into pen off fences.                 Heard cries from police

    officers        to     push     back     which       was     echoed      and     taken up by

    crowd.          Unable      to relate the time of these events.                        Thought

     the     time    between enter and becoming frightened between 5 and

     10    minutes.          Unable        to    push     back.        Described it as being

     ’like     squeezing toothpaste out of tube’, whilst lying half in

     and     half out of Gate 3.                Helped by three police officers and

     given first aid by another.
         p                                                       21

                                                                 n/v-




L

                                                                /?X*                                     Z. /r'-trj^

      l><^             &                                         <*



     /  ?•*?• jLtflfj                                                        2.C^>4,_____
     eJ&+{a*S j2&\ 2— .                                                             Cj                               ^

                   <*»                ^Jg^ y y/fe^ -                      Uj2*( &                       ^                — *>^       <

    j 9C _ ^ ___

                                            C>~~S___                                                   <by    o<_        <D'i~£
                                                                                                                                             lr<^
             —   ^6?** --------------------------------------
                                                                                                                          >      •       2   j   £f

                                     '£s*~Lj> <*r>*£J? &c&+                                        _         6L £k*J2                        i

    c ^ L j/(,         £C^>                      (Lf             fjLX V       >g>____________                ^      r*               __

                  £l              y J /»v>4                      ~>         r Jj.         ^   ^bl*^ <£ ^<p-64 <->}oJx>
    J^C-/lt.                                 «-                  cic-^)    ^> ,          Jb**& A   ^     I^-*-                t^t»\

                                                                                                             cCz**2<<£*&

     -fCy&9                                               < sr€£)
                                _____ , ______ ____________                                    p»~ + ^cA y £ jg £



                     A*yfL**~f *£■ C^f~CS /^e*t                                                              J£c*y&
                                                          C O N F I D E N T I A L

                                                        AIDE MEMOIR FOR SUMMING UP




        8 JANUARY 1 9 9 1 -          DAY 25




/                                                        LIVERPOOL SPPPORTER
    « R . BRIAN JOHN ANDERSON
                                                          fan    H




        Attended       with        dad,     deceased.            Car.     Left 9 am.      Arrived

        about     1        pm.     Parked 1.30.          Stopped at pub - Travellers Arms

         (about       100 supportersinside).               Left 2.15, Leppings Lane 2.25

         approximately.                   Turnstile area             about    10    minutes.   No

         pushing,       just       pressure.            Distressed.       Ducked in area near
                                                                                                     ZT>
         barrier.           Stood     River        Don ' side.        Crowd in turnstile area

         appeared       stationary.               Gate    C   opened.         Entered on second

         opening.                Tunnel -      through passage.         Entered Pen 4.         Not

         aware    of         players on          pitch but       was     expecting      themto be

         there.
               £i*hMoveda*/on               to    barrier.            First    few    moments not

         concerned.                Normal   to be pressed against a barrier in big
                                                                         ptonceM
                                                                         ,         7/
         matches,           but     was unable to get of it. Separated from    his

         dad.         Hear       people      crying       that they were dying behind him.

         Thinks       he     may    have         lost    consciousness.            Before that had

         noticed       lad       next to him distressed.               Pressure eased.      Pulled

         up     into       the     stand.        Had not felt any surges.            Pressure from

         behind.           Not keen to stand behind goal as he knew it gets too

         full.         Attempted          to      move to left but not aware of fencing.

        ^Overall description not too bad initially^                           Looked normal.
          Ue»Z              ’
                            /**•»»*<«{’ ft-*)                    6> fi/JZ                             2c
         Dad dead by River area.
                                                          flrOrlJ offitOW
                                                        -*/

                                                      W* cn
                                                        C O N F I D E N T I A L

                                                      AIDE MEMOIR FOR SUMMING UP




         8 JANUARY 1991 -             DAY 25
                                                                                              A •+
                                                                                   D**ui
    |0O* GEOFFREY PHILIP BRIDSON                              LIVERPOOL SUPPORTER



         Attended        1988.         Pen 3.        Entered 2.15.     Became progressively

C        tighter        that     year after kick off.             Very tight and extremely

         uncomfortable           to    such     an     extent that people were pulled up

         into stand.



         1989     left     10.15       Liverpool. ,          Sheffield 1315 (with 3/4 hour

         wait     forfriends.           They arrived at 1.45).           Had something to

         eat.       Set off for Leppings Lane 2.30 approximately.                       Through

         turnstiles            1435     -     1440.       Described
                                                                          \7*9c*t£f
                                                                         Merseyrttfe    Officer

         attempting        to       control     crowd    creating a gap at back.          Other
                                                                                                  c7
         officer    entered           with     horse.         Horses went into gap and gap

         lost.      Entered Pen 4 - 1440 approximately.                     Very busy.     Went

         to     left.      More space.           Not apprehensive.         After few minutes

         movement        forward       and     over     to    left.      He split up at that

         point,     approximately              1445     (lost    sight    of    David   RIMMER,

         deceased.)            At      that point had been mentioned that crush was

         about     equivalent           to    1988.      Tried     to set stop watch when

         players        came     out     - 1454.       Unable to do so because could not

         move     arm.          After a few moments managed to get arms up to do

         it.        Intending            to     watch         match.     Very    tight,    very

         uncomfortable           but    not     worried.        Things get worse from then.
(BRIDSON cont)




Became     frightened        at about kick off time.                No surge, general

movement        to   left,       escaped    to   Pen    5 - approximately 1515.

Looked     at clock.         Prior to that had heard cries for help from

the      front.            Not    heard     until   match        actually     stopped.

Confirmed        that   he had not reported his experiences to anyone

      "nobody      would listen". Except in immediate vicinity could

not    hear      crowds.          Uncomfortable        at     1440.      Being knocked

about     but not frightened.              25 years experience.           Opinion that

officer       on     track   would     have      been       aware     of crushing.   He

recalls       punching       air but no recollection of teams being read
                                                          C O N F I D E N T I A L

                                                       AIDE MEMOIR FOR SUMMING UP




                                              2-*
    9 JANUARY 1 9 91 -               DAY



V>v ANDREW     MICHAKT. DODD                                    LIVERPOOL SUPPORTER




   Mini      van.             Left       at     11.00.       Purchased six cans of alcohol.

    Silver        Fox.        Two pints.              Stopped by police on way to ground.

    Threw      four       cans          away.        Admitting to drinking six cans plus

    two    pints.         Parked 1415.                Leppings Lane, 1425.         Had very poor

    recollection              of     situation in crowd.               Seems to have been help

   up     outside         perimeter             gates which were closed. Went down
    (uuf
    roadway.             Gate
                                     u
                                     C was
                                                   ""     pt&kc
                                                            ,o
                                                  open at some point. He was 40 yards

   away     when         he     noticed             it open.    Carried through with crowd.

   Holding         on to Gordon Horn and man in front so as not to loose

   his      footing.               Through concourse.               Middle of crowd and could

   not      see     where          going.              Had     to     go   with crowd.   Entered

    terrace.             Thought - ’Here we go again’.                       Similar compactness

   as     on      previous           occasions.              Sure outside       ground   a^14^5* X~   2.
    because        looked          at    watch.          People streamed in.         Standing by

    barrier,        ducked           under.          Slightly better for a while.         Got to

   the      front.        Pushing and shoving and attempted to move through

   crowd.           Everybody              trying       to     move    and    get into position.
DODD cont.



Expected        such conditions at big match occasions.          On previous

occasions        been in similar situation and lost shoe.         When went

under        barrier     lost "Gordon”. At fences managed to get over.

A     lady     police     officer      pulled him out.   He thinks the match

was     still in progress then.            Heard cries of stop pushing.   He

thought        play     might   well    have been in progress at his first

position.




Check Mr King’s                  camination.
                                               C O N F I D E N T I A L

                                            AIDE MEMOIR FOR SUMMING UP




     8 JANUARY 1 9 9 1 -       DAY 25




Oft TTABT. MATTHEW MPI.T.KR                        LIVERPOOL SUPPORTER
                                                          fe * H

     Travelled       by car.      Arrived about 1.30.         Arrived with father.

     No   problems      getting     in.     Pen 4.                  i.
                                                         Comfortable.           No problems
                                                                                No^problems^
                                                                                                     9
     until     2.45.       Then    became      densely              I.
                                                           populated.           Forced with     iwriUi      <*/

     weight     to     lean     slightly    forward.        When at barrier saw no

     players     or     play.       Pressure     started     building-up from 1445
                         5 St*                              «»*» J c n r ttt,
     onward.          Crush  from 2.50 onward, severe pushing and view of
                                                                ^ Ooth Ur                      &jtuy&r «?
     Mr   Anderson       very distressed- between 2.54 and 3.00. Timing                                     9-7f
     based     on     crowd noise and understanding that players had come

     on   to pitch and kick off.            First time behind goal area in b£g

     match but aware crushing more likely there.




    £*<■&}cJ*
DAY 2 6
                                        ? Jh
9 JANUARY 191

L F CAMPBELL    106.                       SUPPORTER

Departed 10 am arrived 14.20. Stopped on Motorway, just heavy traffi
Alcohol, about 20% of people, checked for alcohol at Penistone Road
(see R Cobb). At Turnstiles 14.40, packed, people began to hurry in,
perimeter gates open, Merseyside mounted officer seen, unable to
control crowd. People were clearly pushing,-nobody taking any notice
but officer should have had more back-up. Excess numbers, mounted
officer tried to close perimeter gate to did not succeed on his own.
Did not enter through turnstile. Got carried aloyng, feet not
touching the ground, through Gate C (compare Mr McMahon). Had
moved out of turnstile crush prior to this, positive he was lifted
off his feet.
Concourse area quietening down, could see players on pitch, able to
walk down tunnel, no problem. Exited, surveying the scene, got
pushed against barrier, ducked underneath, pushing continued.
Became frightened when he saw young lad screaming for air just about
kick-off time. Scrambled back up to tunnel (some time after match
had finished). Had some difficulty getting back, had to push through
In 1988 entered pen 2.30/2.45, too many people, did not enter terrace
His impression was that in 1989 when he exited condition was better
than 1988, not much, but better. When exiting, people still coming
down t un n e l .
                                                          C O N F I D E N T I A L

                                                      AIDE MEMOIR FOR SUMMING DP
                                                                                                 -¥


      9 JANUARY 19 9 1             DAY 26




/H)& _ JOHN GRANT                                           LIVERPOOL SUPPORTER
                                                                                     A,*
      Travelled          by car.Left 10 am.               Arrived Sheffield         12.   Went

      to    two       pubs and          had     six       pints.    Stayed in the pub until

      2.15.        Arrived at 2.30.             His recollection was perimeter gates             j
      shut.           Severe      conditions          outside      perimeter   gates.      One

     mounted          officer      tried       to     get     people     to back off, without

      success.           In due        course did manage           to get through perimeter

      gates.           Queuing         for    turnstiles.          Got to adjacent Gate B.

      Not     distressed          at that point.             Did hear a few comments about

     women        and     children.           Gate B opened.           Entered, went through

      gap     in      wall      towards       turnstile.        Not obstructed in any way.

      No    police       or stewards          there.            People    passing both ways.

     Mates       went        to toilet before going down tunnel. J'Bad intended                         I
      to    go   to Pen 7.           Entered Pen 4, which was packed, but calm,
              /J-J i                   -A           /c<jzJL                                           : i3 n
      saw     nc^fc     play,     not frightened when first entered, moved

      forward.            Shortish distance                then came to full stop against
                                                                                                      n it
      people.           Ahead      of     him       saw     a man over barrier.    White and

      vomited         over      him.     Then severe surge.            Carried forward.    The

      final        position       where he remained until released.                Saw police
                                             - 2 -


GRANT cont



officers       pushing back off fencing after surge but cannot give

specific       time.    Whilst at the back initially able to make his

way,   not      aware     of gate and radial fences, about two minutes

between       entering     the tunnel and coming to initial full stop.

Had     been      to     other   large   matches     and   described   severe

difficulties          in entering e.g. Wembley, Wimbledon final.        Took

one    hour     twenty    minutes     to, get in.    Did not enter until 20

minutes       after     start.      Ticket   not     taken on that occasion.

Turnstiles       just clicked through.         He confirmed to Mrs McBrien

that in that situation not once had been in danger.
                                                         C O N F I D E N T I A L

                                                      AIDE MEMOIR FOR SUMMING UP




9 JANUARY 1 9 9 1 -                 DAY 26




ALFRED WILLIAM LANGLEY                                               LIVERPOOL SUPPORTER



Came        by        car.         Left 9.30.          Arrived 12.45.           Entered pen 1.10.

Pen        4.         Crowded            at 2.20         -    2.30     but     okay.    2.40 became

distressed,              but        he
                                         rhas     claustrophobia.              Got pushed against

the        barrier           at     that      time.          Reasonably confident about the
                                                                                   f.
time        because           he     thought        he       had looked at hia wgtoh (see
                                                                                                             /?.   2^
below).               Managed            to get        under      the barrier and fell down.            IX

Several           people           picked him up, stood him up, facing the wrong
                                                                 T/w/ /u/
way,        i.e.        up        pen.    Told him not to fall^ By this time

somebody              else     was        against        the    barrier.          He     could   hear

crackling              noise.            He     and      others        tried    to     push   man off

barrier.                He        thought that this was just a few minutes after

2,40,           but     on        pressing       said that it was at the same time as

fans       were         being        pulled into stand. (See compilation tape re

timing.)                Then       managed        to turn around.              Pressure had eased

slightly              for a moment.             Was moved forward a bit.                 Things were

very        tight,           very        confusing,          very frightening.           People were

trying           to     climb up the pen.                    Police Officer was pushing them                       2&
back.             Police           officer       was         swearing     at    fans calling them

"animals"               etc.             Described           officer     as    bald    headed    man.

       ?                (Aol*-            Lu.
                                                   - 2 -




    (LANGLEY cont)




    Had    not    seen     anything of players on pitch.                  Had seen Gate 4

    open     at   one     point,      then closed again, not sure'when.                 Had

    great     difficulty        in    relating     times.          That     happened when

    photographer        was     taking       pictures.     People swearing and very
(   angry    with       photographer.
                                 i            Officer’s comments about behaviour

    may have been at that time.



    Shown     photograph at 1446 of Pen 4.               Agreed that conditions on

    that     photograph looked totally different to what he described

    and    his    times       might    therefore     be     wrong.    Also agreed not

    initially        aware      of    immediate     area     and     that     pockets    of

    crushing      might       have    been     formed as people were moving away

    from    people      who had fallen.          Could hear chanting behind him.

    Did    not    think that further back would have taken much notice

    if     they   were    watching       match and it was too far for them to

    help                                                                          anyway.
DAY 26

9 JANUARY 1991

105. H T HOLLINGHURST                     SUPPORTER

Charge nurse. Travelled by car, departed 10.30, parked 2.15,
stopped at Sheffield end of Pass 1.15 for food. Alcohol, odd
ones seen drinking from cans. Arrived Leppings Lane 2.25, about
500-1000 people estimated. One mounted Merseyside officer seen
trying to get people to queue, not successful, everyone being
pushed, people distressed and coming out, frightened outside
turnstiles, people shouting "don't push, people are getting hurt"
etc, made no difference. Entered by turnstile, into tunnel about
2.50 to 2.55,based on players being on pitch. Entered Pen 4.
Intended to go to NW terrace, position initially fluid, around
kick-off time became oppressive, increased over next few minutes.
With crush increasing could see a young man distressed. When crowd
relaxed after match stopped, checked young man, no sign of life,
(Paul Carlisle). Compared with 1988, Pen 3 quite crushed then,
which is why he wanted to go to NW terrace, worried about injury
in 1988, people climbed up into the stand at half-time.
DAY 26
                                        2

9 JANUARY 191



L F CAMPBELL 106.                           SUPPORTER

Departed 10 am arrived 14.20. Stopped on Motorway, just heavy traffi
Alcohol, about 20% of people, checked for alcohol at Penistone Road
(see R Cobb). At Turnstiles 14.40, packed, people began to hurry in,
perimeter gates open, Merseyside mounted officer seen, unable to
control crowd. People were clearly pushing, nobody taking any notice
but officer should have had more back-up. Excess numbers, mounted
officer tried to close perimeter gate to did not succeed on his own.
Did not enter through turnstile. Got carried aloyng, feet not
touching the ground, through Gate C (compare Mr McMahon). Had
moved out of turnstile crush prior to this, positive he was lifted
off his feet.
Concourse area quietening down, could see players on pitch, able to
walk down tunnel, no problem. Exited, surveying the scene, got
pushed against barrier, ducked underneath, pushing continued.
Became frightened when he saw young lad screaming for air just about
kick-off time. Scrambled back up to tunnel (some time after match
had finished). Had some difficulty getting back, had to push through
In 1988 entered pen 2.30/2.45, too many people, did not enter terrace
His impression was that in 1989 when he exited condition was better
than 1988, not much, but better. When exiting, people still coming
down tunnel.
     DAY 3 2       I -!*



IIS. GARY OYITCH

    Friend of P Goodman. Entered ground more or less same time. Stayed initially
    with Marion and Inger at the front, then joined Philip Goodman at the rear.
    Couldn't see, made his way back to the front at 2.40. Had to force his
    way through. Stood next to Marion. Thought there was a tight crush from
    about 2.40 onwards. Remembers team being announced and discussing names
    with Marion. No further recollection of events except for three surges,
    On the first he climbed onto fence and was told to get down by fan, surge
    gave him space to .do so. On the second surge he did not climb, the third
    surge left him pinned against fence, unable to move. Could see Inger getting
    worse from then.     Unable to relate surges to events, except in so far
    as they occurred after team announcement - probably lost consciousness.
    Could not get through the gate which was close by because he was trapped.
    Eventually freed himself. Remembers police officer patting his face through
    the fencing to try to revive him.
         DAY 3 2   \1 •   9/   •




    If?. A LEI6H



        Mr Leigh travelled by train. Arrived early in Sheffield. At the station
        was told to wait. Ticket not checked but accent recognised. Waited about
        20              minutes to half an hour, entered bus, not checked for tickets or alc
        Arrived Leppings Lane 11 am. Went to pub "Horse & jockey", queued for
C       1| hours and was given one bottle of Pils. Left pub at about 2.10, got
        something to eat, went down to ground 2.40. Got through crowd, not too
        bad. Through turnstile, entered Pen 4. Initially not too bad, was near
        the back singing, then heard one name announced of the players, Ian Rush.
        From then massive surge, carried through barrier. Estimated time from        1
        announcement to surge about five minutes. People distressed around him.
        He was not too bad. Shouting and screaming to Police. Remembers one
        officer, couldn't hear what he said but believes in his mind that he said
        "shut up you dickhead". Couldn't see or remember anything that occurred
        on the pitch. After that everything more or less hazy. Ended up between
        Pens 4 and 5 and helped out in that area.


c


C
21 JANUARY 1991



D PERRY                          LIVERPOOL SUPPORTER

Travelled by car, departed 9.30, arrived Sheffield 11.30. Entered
stadium 1.30, onto terrace 2.00, Pen 4. Initial evidence that
terrace really became bad at about 3 pm or just before. Challenged
re statement (2.30 he had said). Upshot of his evidence I think was
that they were tight like sardines at 2.45 but things did not really
get significantly bad until the teams came out. The crush was like
a normal one except that it didn't relax. He said he was not pushed
a great deal as they were unable to move because of the packing.
He said that at some point earlier someone had been trapped against
the barrier but he had come off and wasn't hurt. He described P.O.s
making people go back into the Pen but it would appear that this
was simply by signals, finger movements, which were obeyed. There
was one episode where he said P0 tapped a person's hand to make him
go back. He thought this occurred at about 3.10 to 3.15 but said
that he didn't know what was happening on the field and there did
not appear to be large numbers of people around. He also agreed
with Miss Addelman that he did not know what words had passed
between the officer and the fan or on what that fan was standing.
    21 JANUARY 1991
    /*-
    -W A TAYLOR                              PART OF SERIAL 16

 Went round to Gate 3, acknowledged the gate officer. There was some
 discrepancy as to when they went round. Initially he said players
 were on pitch. When challenged by his statement (kick-off had occurred)
 he said that that must be right (compare all the* other officers'
 accounts). Great-, deal of noise. Gate officer standing looking at
 gate from edge of pitch. Noticed gate opening, five men ran out, they
 did not seem distressed or in any trouble. He caught hold of one and
 pitch officer and possibly another, put all of them back into pen.
 Gate was shut. He said there was no difficulty in getting them in,
 nor any protest. They were not distressed in his view. He did not
 hear any screams, in particular did not hear "let us out" or "God
 help us" (Hooson). There was nothing that he saw to suggest imminent
 danger but he did agree that the crowd was very densely packed, more
 so than he had seen before, but he could only see their faces, his
 attention was fixed further back. He did not notice until considerably
 later people at the fence. He described people gesturing, spitting
 and swearing. He was again asked about the fan he took back,(Mrs
McBrien) He had no recollection of any conversation with the fan,
nor was any sign of fear or panic on his face. The gate opened
again, three more fans came out. He was about to put one back when,
for some reason, he realised that help was needed and started pulling
people out and doing his best. He said at the time he did not see any
reason for not putting the fans back, he now realises that he was in
error then, but it could not be undone. As far as the people who
ran out were concerned, both the five and the three came out freely
without any difficulty, there did not seem to be a great surge behind
them. He thought the problem arose when people tripped over, others
fell over them and crowd    pressure did not allow them to get out.
He confirmed that, reading between the lines of the operational order,
the intention was that people should not be allowed on the pitch and
that he had received no brief re overcrowding.

*    The man he escorted back to the pen offered no resistance, he was
     holding his right arm.
                                                              /cont...
    DAY 3 4



    21   JANUARY 1 9 9 1

    fC/
    Ifff TAYLOR (continued...)

    From the time of arrival to the time of first opening, closure and
    re-opening and rescue, could be measured in seconds and he also
    said he had no real idea of the passage of time. Oddly he kept
    referring to the fact that it seems slow to him*, although in fact
    it went very fast. He could not see what, if anything, the pitch
    officer was looking at when he was gazing into the pen.

•
21   JANUARY 1 9 9 1


PC COOPER                       PART OF SERIAL 16
Was asked to go on the pitch. Got to just past Gate 3, players on pitch,
he faced the pen, he could see people pushed against the fence and
could hear shouts and screams but took it that these were simply in
a normal forward push which would relax in a moment. He noticed the
gate bursting open and a few fans coming out. These were put back,
he was unable to see by whom. Gate was then shut. Within 30 seconds
of this he could see that fans were distressed, gate was opened and
people initially came out on their own. He did not think they were
particularly distressed and was intending to usher them into Pen 2.
It was shortly after this that assistance was required to get people
out. He assessed that only three officers could work at the gate and
for a time stepped back. He remembered formation of a conveyor belt.
He also recollected instructions to form a chain but was unable to
recognise either Greenwood or Nesbitt.
He confirmed that he acted on his own initiative and did not receive
instructions. He agreed that the fans were put back when people looked
distressed but at that time, in his judgement, this was simply a push
forward, part and parcel of a normal football match and he did not at
that stage see it as a serious incident. He did not remember where
the gate officer was located.
             DAY 34

             21 JANUARY 1991

         \y± hr sp&ritt                     FATHER OF ADAM SP^RRITT

             Wife's name Janet Elizabeth, Housewife.

/            Walking down Halifax Road 2.15. Many people, no drinking. Leppings
             Lane arrived 2.30. Decided not to join the queue. Stood by River
             Don, was talking to friend, quite happy to wait. Noticed big gate
             open and entered ground. Surprised no ticket check. Went on to

• c          Pen 4. Able to get to front. Took up position with son close to
             perimeter gate. Quite satisfied, teams not on pitch. Noticed Alan
             Hanson. Said to Adam "the bossman is playing" and Adam responded,
             then immense pressure, like a vice, no surge. Turned Adam round to
             face him, called towards police officer outside, close by, no
             response from officer. Feels sure Adam would be alive if officer
             had opened gate. Tried to lift Adam over fencing, unable to do so.
             Quite sure Adam had fainted by then. Lost consciousness. Thinks
             he was in match-viewing position for one or two minutes before
             players came out. He was not aware of any other shouts or noise.
             P.C. was just looking at him but did not react at all.




\   \'
        DAY 3 5



        22         JANUARY 1991

\2>%.   RODNEY JOLLY                                       f o

                                                             .......................-




        Mini-bus. Left 10.30, arrived 2.30. Heavy match traffic. Contrasted
        parking arrangements very unfavourably with 1988, not stopped nor had
        tickets checked either. Said 1988 arrangements were far better,
        tickets were checked and people not let through. Said he actually saw
        this happen, people were told not to go to the ground (fHFr K T R flM c:rP TPT )
        (contrasts other evidence about searching coaches and checking of tickets
        e t c ).
        Arrived at turnstile, huge crowd, stood back with Jon Paul, thinks he
        was outside perimeter gates. Saw Gate C open, entered, walked through,
        down tunnel, no problem, relatively easy access, took up position about
        halfway down at 2.55, no discomfort, things got tighter, surge, moved
        to within three feet of gate. Shouted to P.O. that had a boy there,
        officer appeared not to take any notice, could see that he might not
        have heard him (he could not distinguish what was being said around
        him). Could see the gate, it appeared to him to open twice at least.
        People were going out, in ones. When asked why he couldn't get out,
        he said he was prevented by people ahead, did not know where people
        escaping were coming from. Agreed he could not see what officer could
        have done to get him out. Lost consciousness and revived on terrace.
 DAY 3 9

 2 8 JANUARY 1991



 141. MR McMAHON

 Travelled by car, approached via Nottingham. Area within turnstiles
 and perimeter gates congested. Crushing but didn't feel in danger,
 had arrived at about 2.25, jostled about for about 20 minutes, had
 seen several POs including mounted officers. Mounted officers had
 been outside perimeter gates, officer ;within .turnstile area as well.
 Could see officer shouting to people to move back. Was assisted
 under funnel bar and directed to Gate C, surprised wide o p e n , ' / W ^          n,
 trickle of people going through, waited for his son near turnstile,
 did not see any POs or Stewards in the area, no crush or rush in
 concourse area, did not see anyone fall over or lose shoe, or get         Si
 knocked over. Entered tunnel, this was fuller, progress was                        I°
 shuffling, entered Pen 4, players on field, initially able to move
 to left because he wanted to get to the sides. About one minute or
 two before kick-off it became unbearable and noticed man bent over
 barrier, not able to push back at all. Noticed people being pulled         /
 up behind him, he had been spun round, felt that they must have had                 II
 more room as he could not have been released at that point. Thought
 possibly some little more room up at the back. Did not notice
 anyone being pulled into the terrace when he entered the pen.
 Did not like it behind the goal, thought this was a young man's
 area, full of excited people who might not mind being crushed a bit.
 He thought that one person could have diverted the crowd coming
 through Gate C to the sides. (Contrasts A M Dodd, Thorpe, Beadsley,
 etc).
 Saw no distress, nor any children being passed to mounted officers.
 Insists entered through wide open gate. Remembers perimeter gates
 being shut and opened. Approved of shutting.
 Did not hear tannoy or landrover.



                                                                                    17-,
               £a_   j           — £7--

fty ix l& 'h & h
/J?                                                                             u
DAY 3 5



2 2 JANUARY 1 9 9 1



W M DUCKWORTH                             GOOD WITNESS

Travelled by train, searched on numerous occasions, partly because
he was carrying a bag but at no point was his ticket checked.
Relationship with Police friendly. On approaching the turnstile
he noticed a couple being arrested and two POs l.eaving. Entered Pen 3
at about 2 pm. Recollects beach ball incident at 2.40, some surging
then, not concerned for himself but worried about a couple of youngsters.
Incident carried on for a few minutes. At about the time the players
came out he was pushed by strong surge forward. In itself this did
not worry him except that the surge did not move back as normal. He
was still not too concerned at that point as he expected it would
right itself irv'a short time. He then remembers two girls crying and
                I
being lifted up and taken out by the Police. Following this, two or
three were not allowed out. It seemed obvious to him that the
Police could not have realised what was going on. By this time he
was up near the front. He remembers the pitch gate opening in the
time between the players coming out and 14.59, and it was after that
he finished up at the front near Mr Baron. The Police were assisting.
The time interval between the girls coming out, pushing the people
back, and helping, was very short. He put his head down so people
further back could climb out more easily. He could see St Johns
Ambulance man giving oxygen.
He felt the opening of the gate created more problems for him because
of crowd movement towards it but he also thought it probably helped
to save lives. He thought that the way to clear the pen would have
been from the rear. He initially said that he knew that people at
the rear knew what was going on and did go out but, during r e ­
examination and cross-examination he in the end said that his friends
had left because they were worried for their own safety and that they
did not know what was going on. He also said that at 14.35 approx
one of his friends lost a shoe which got caught in the barrier, this
had worried him but it really wasn't anything. As far as the people
exiting through the pitch gate were concerned, and climbing the fences,
these were certainly initially able to move under their own steam.

                                                         /cont.
21   JANUARY 1 9 9 1



W M DUCKWORTH (continued...)

He felt that because of his position and his wedging, he would have
to go up over the fence rather than go out at the back. His timing
in relation to the St Johns Ambulance man seems somewhat faulty as
he obviously placed him as quite early on.
It was obvious to him that the people around him were both distressed
and complaining, but he did not think it was obvious to the P.O.s
when they pushed the people back and, although initially he said he
thought people at the back knew what was going on, he then recanted
from that.        f
2 8 JANUARY 1 9 9 1



144.   J SINGLETON

Entered stadium between 1.45 and 2 pm. Pen 3. Took up position
on platform right against Gate 3. Did not move from that position
until he left the pen. O.K. until about 14.50, then pushing began.
Not really concered at that stage. Got really bad at kick-off.
Was worried but not for his life, just before gates sprung open.
He saw a P.O. outside the gate. He was looking in but he could hear
shouts behind him to get the qate open but officer did not appear
to react at all.''The gate burst open owing to the pressure and
he and James came out. P.O. grabbed them and pushed them back in.
It was difficult and manouevre was completed by sutting gate. He
did not protest nor did he say to the officer that people were
injured or distressed. He was not aware of the extent of the
problem, did not see what was going on behind him. He w ^ , ^ 4 / ^ /
surprised at being pushed back in because of the cries^ Within
less than a minute gates sprung open again. This time escorted by
same officer towards the right. He looked back and could see the
gate remained open, people coming out, he didn't look into the pen,
therefore unable to say what could be seen. He did not see Beardsley
hitting the crossbar. Felt surges just before players came onto
pitch. Did not hear anyone call out behind him, re a child (Mr Jolly).
    DAY 4 0


    2 9 JANUARY 1 9 9 1



    149.      R B K IN G                            SUPPORTER




    Travelled by car with Eric Hankin and others. Departed about 10 am,
    arrived 12.30. Beehive Pub, full, he had three pints, others the
    same. Left pub 2.15 with his friends (ten). Noticed surprisingly
    few people, nor did he see any POs. Leppings Lgtne entrance 2.25 to
    2.30. When he first got there it was reasonably quiet, no crush
    at turnstiles but within two minutes people seemed to come from
    everywhere, very sudden, crush developed, saw people ducking under                J
    barrier, getting in front of others, making things more difficult.
f
    Saw couple of officers outside who did not appear to be doing
    anything but, after challenged with statement, agreed that statement
    was correct and they could not have done much. Once inside saw
    3/4 officers receiving verbal abuse. Whilst in concourse saw
    Gate C wide open (presumably 14.52). Went /into pen via tunnel
    after Gate C had opened. Tunnel OK. Went onto'terracing, five
    of them together, packed but pushed their way through as he thought
    people were not bothering to move. Initially still with friends.
    Up to this stage experience normal, was then carried forward a
    short distance. Realised there was a problem, could see gate in               /         7 c,
                                                6 cr [ycctJ     d          A*   U ~ ~      J y-
    front, decided to make for it./ Could hear t O s shouting "push back"./.         /
    Said he didn't understand what they wanted,
                                                        Ls\st-f-(-d-
                                                                with me rind Mr
                                                                                 ■*?/-*")

f   Payner and Mr Russell that he was pushinq forward to get out and able
    to force his way through. Also agreed with Mr Humphreys that movement
                                                                                          (O
                                                                                       ts— -'’"'*
    was involuntary.    Accepted that people in front would be getting                    ^£l— -
    crowded. When moving forward did not see any injured people, just
    wanted to get out. Three of the friends got out through the gate
    more or less together.—        rc(      <2 ^        0 /7 ^,      oeV

    N.B.
    Travelled quite a long distance towards the front, probably panicked,
    evidence tended to agree with propositions
    (CHECK TRANSCRIPT).
    Query 14.55.

                                                                                         2^>
3 0 JANUARY 1 9 9 1



156.        J L CASE                                    SUPPORTER




Together with Singleton and Sephton, standing right against gate.
Had some difficulty with timing. Heard team announced at which
point he appeared still to be OK but did not see them come onto
pitch because during that time pressure had increased. On the
other hand said strong pressure occurred just at kick-off but he
didn't see kick-off. Recollects surges, with one main one,
recollects seeing officer, pressure getting worse, the officer
saying it would s 6 rt itself out. Gate opened, he was pushed back
by PO, gate shut, he did not protest, nor did he say anything to
the officer. His dad was objecting too. Gate opened again and
he got out. Darted to his right because he did not want to be put
back again, but in fact people were being let out of the gate then.


oh   ~                 //   / -----------                  .
                                            -   j   °               of#-'!*-o yi
                                                                           ,




f j& s j-     J jffK   >3   2 l cr
DAY 41


3 0 JANUARY 1 9 9 1



145.     R E SEPHTON                          SUPPORTER



He entered early with Mr Singleton, was right against Gate 3
immediately behind Singleton and Case. He was OK until 14.5 5 ^ ^ ) ^ - , / ^ ^ .
It was as he would have expected at a normal big match. Jl^fTack-off
was having difficulty breathing, people qroaning, not a normal noise,
people shouting for gate to be opened.^ Gate sprung open on its
own accord, he got half-out but was pushed back and gate was shut
by PO. Just before gate sprung open, the PO outside was speaking              OttE'CIC'
                                                                              IR AN 56W PT
into his radio, unable to hear his voice, gate not opened by PO.
After the gate was shut, PO continued to speak into his radio and
looked worried. Within half to one minute the gate sprung open
again, this time he got out, not put back, went towards right, could
see people against fence who looked frightened, they did not look
blue. After he had sat down he returned after a few moments to
collect his coat which he had forgotten. Able to retrieve it from
outside. People looked about the same. Time interval between two
openings of gate was very short.
Said he was comfortable until a few minutes before match started
and others were the same.
                                                                                       rPT
Mentions three surges, two forward and back, the third didn't relax.
                                                             taj-r
    DAY 41


    30   JANUARY 1 9 9 1

                                                                 fin   2
    157.     A BROWN                        R E L A T IV E




    Travelled by car, departed 10.30, arrived 1.30, Leppings Lane
    between 2.15/2.25, searched at turnstiles, went on to terrace.         77

    At 14.45            went back, 14.55 players on pitch, didn't see
    them but could tell from the cheers. Got pushed further, got
    tighter and tighter. When players kicked-off got pushed to within
    eight feet of front. Surge at kick-off, nothing unusual about that,

f   what was unusual was that it did not relax. It was at that time
    he became aware of abnormality. He was surprised how few people \
    were in terrace when he entered about 2.25 because his experience I
                                                                                /



    was that you had to be in your place | hour before kick-off to J
    get a reasonable view.
    Did not see anyone transferred between pens 3 and 4, saw people
    climbing over fence. Initially people pushed back by Police, it
    took them a few minutes to realise and then started helping.
    People being pushed back coming from behind. People were squashed
    up at time when people were being put back in pen, and people
    around him he thought were dead.

                   /*w         ^             Q.2-*
I
                                                               taj-r
DAY 4 1,


30
                                                                   fin   1
157    A BROWN                                R E L A T IV E




T rav^|led by car, departed 10.30, arrived 1.30, Leppings Lane
betw ^ ,1(1 2-15/2.25, searched at turnstiles, went on to terrace, t i t     11

^   -|/|,45 ^ ^ ' w T r r ^ went back, 14.55 players on pitch, didn't see
then) )>ut could tell from the cheers. Got pushed further, got
tighiMr anc*     gh t e r . When players kicked-off got pushed to within
e i g M ^eet     f ront- Surge at kick-off, nothing unusual about that,               ^
what ^ as unusua^ was that it     not relax. It was at that time                  /
he be|,:'inie aware abnormality. He was surprised how few people \
were jn terrace wfien he entered about 2.25 because his experience I
was fiat you had to be in your place I hour before kick-off to J
get d reasonable view.
Did          see any ° ne transferred between pens 3 and 4, saw people
d i m m i n g over fence. Initially people pushed back by Police, it
took ^ em a ^ ew m inutes to realise and then started helping,
peopjfj being pushed back coming from behind. People were squashed
up at ^ me w *ien PeoP^e were being put back in pen, and people
arou(|il him he thought were dead.

                                                a,*'
31 JANUARY 1991



160 S GRAY                                 SUPPORTER
                                           ASSOCIATED WITH J McBRIEN
                                                 H.
Departed 9.30, arrived 1.40, parked a long way off, did not see any
excessive drinking, arrived Leppings Lane 2.40.
Spare tickets - 20/30 requests, mainly away from ground, people
walking away (compares with Ruth Cobb). No LANDR0VER or TANN0Y
seen or heard. Saw four police horses, entered via Gate^C^tunnel
clear. He was ahead of crowd and speeded up to keep ahead.
Knew players were on pitch from noise and could see them from the
tunnel entrance. Entered PEN 4, took a few paces, almost immediately
concerned, people being taken into stands. Felt surge from behind,
carried half-way across terrace, kick-off after surge. Total time
sequence short from surge to squash. Exited eventually on the
concourse and tried to resuscitate John McBrien.
When walking across concourse after entering, pace was fast, crowd
behind him was travelling faster than he was and picking up speed. p

Present in 1988 but was in one of the stands. No recollection of
people being pulled up from terracing that year. His main concern
on the terraces was the number of people, he did not see any POs.
Tunnel was clear apart from solid crowd at the end. He would not
have wished to push into the crowd. He went in sideways to avoid
the main route but felt that it would have been difficult for the
crowd that was coming down behind him to have stopped.
31 JANUARY 1991



162.   C JONES                              SUPPORTER




More accurate with regard to timing than .Griffiths I think. (See
comments re entry under Griffiths) LANDROVER and TANNOY not seen
or heard. Says he did push into the crowd but he didn't know his
route. Police officer seen around coaches.
Tunnel empty. Exited from tunnel, thought Pen 3 looked full, moved
into Pen 4, stood at back, thinks at that point players were about
to come out. Tight but satisfied, players were already on pitch.     ^   53
Sudden surge, unable to keep his feet, carried forward near the little
gate which was shut. Heard people screaming, said Police lady kept
repeating that she hadn't got a key, but subsequently modified this
to perhaps she meant she did not need a key.                             60
Unable to recollect her position, never saw the gate open.
Interesting comment in that he appeared to be able to discuss with
his friends the police lady's comments re key. Heard other shouts
but was unable to distinguish them. Confirmed that at 14.54 he
was reasonably comfortable, it was just like an ordinary derby at        56
Anfield, you expected to be pushed at the Anfield Kop and that is
how it was. More concerned about the little children at the front.
Identified his friend Carl and probably himself on photograph C367
(timed at 14.59) with Sgt. Swift. Friend definitely out and he
almost certainly at that time. Query therefore his estimates on
timings.
DAY 4 2                                            c ^
31   JANUARY 1 9 9 1



163.      A OWEN                            SUPPORTER




Travelled by mini-bus, departed 11.30 approx, arrived 2.15.
Leppings Lane 2.25, big crowd, entered via T/S. When questioned
his first response was that there no queues, just pushing, but
backed off and said that there was none and that he got through in
4/5 minutes despite the fact that this would mean that everyone in
front of him would also have got in in the same time.
He did not see or hear the LANDROVER or TANNOY. He was not
uncomfortable in T/S area although there was some pushing.
Entry through tunnel normal, Pen 3, knew about radial fences.
 Initially stood at the back, then moved forward to Position 2 on
Plan, was there when beach ball was being patted about, left that
position about time players came out because he was being hurt in
that position. He was able to leave and make his way towards the
front. It was whilst at the front that he felt surges, got out
 shortly after kick-off. He had last seen his friend Gary Church at
Position 2, associated this with players coming out. He remembers
two openings of the gate. In cross-examination he thought he moved
from Position 2 to fence between 2.50 and 2.55 which was when he lost
Gary. He knew he had got out just after kick-off and felt he had
 been at the fence for about five minutes. On the other hand, he also
was sure that Liverpool was on the pitch at 14.54 when he was still
 at Position 2.
  He said that they went down the tunnel in 1988 and were in the
'Same pen.
1 FEBRUARY 1991



169.   T M MOORE                     F R IE N D OF P HEWITSON



Left about 10 am in a van, very unsure about times (lively witness).
At least three of a group of six did not have tickets. He probably
had a stand ticket which he and P Hewitson had bought between them.
At some point, which was never clearly established, he swopped it
for two terrace tickets. Having got to Leppings Lane he saw it was
very crowded and says he withdrew to the bridge where he noticed
that the perimeter gates and turnstiles appeared shut, based on
lack of movement. He says he was near a senior officer who apparently
spoke into his radio requesting Leppings Lane West End gates to be
opened. He also says he was near a TV cameraman and that they were
directing him with regard to the the pictures (if that is right it
is unlikely that he was on the bridge but rather a little parapet
where Supt Marshall and the BBC cameraman had been). He did not
see or hear LANDROVER. Although his evidence was difficult to
unravel it sounds as if he Bptiqed; that the perimeter gates were
being opened and he took a shortcut and clambered up the sides to
try to get ahead of the crowd. He thought that outside the perimeter
gate was quite a dangerous situation. Having entered through Gate C
he made his way down tunnel. Halfway down another friend stopped and
said he was going back out for some reason. He says he then handed
him his unused ticket for re-use. He agreed subsequently that if
everyone were to have done that it would have been very dangerous as
it would have meant that the capacity would be exceeded. He said it
was just an instinctive thing. He eventually entered terrace, he said
they had a choice, did not know about the railings, got tight about
halfway down, thought of going back, unable to do so. He was close
to the barrier that broke, did not see it but he felt the terrace
concrete move and heard a sound, two or three loud bangs, tilted
forward. Statement was put to him that a few minutes after match
had started he heard the sound, but his evidence was not clear. In
addition there were some ambiguities about the timing when they managed
to buy their tickets or exchange them. He claimed initially this was
done on the motorway in stationary traffic but it seemed as if he and
Paul did not get their tickets until nearer the ground.
At the ground at about 2.30 or later.
This witness was quite interesting but there are a lot of inconsistencies
and his recollection of events was poor.
4 FEBRUARY 1 9 9 1




172.   S M U L L IN                          F R IE N D OF E R IC HUGHES



 He mentioned that Mr Hughes had told him that in 1988 he, Mr Hughes,
 had been on the terraces with another friend and that the latter had
found it a little bit scary as he didn't like crowds. The witness
 himself had been in one of the stands.
 In 1989 a group of them travelled in two cars, departed 11 am, arrived
2.15, Leppings Lane 2.25. It appeared disorganised and crowded. The
witness had a similar experience outside turnstiles at Derby and
made u d his mind that he would never get in such a situation again.
He and Eric had got separated in the turnstile area with Eric being
ahead. Witness stepped to one side and stood close by Gate C where
it was calmer. Gate was opened wide, he noticed steward and couple
of POs but they were not checking t i ck et s, .he just walked in. He
found his friend who got through the turnstiles, having been to the
toilet they entered tunnel, it was the only route he could see.
They intended to go to the corner. Tunnel was clear apart from w a l 1
of people right at the exit. They had a bit of difficulty getting
through this crowd but it is not unusual to do a little bit of
forcing just as one enters the terrace. He confirmed to Mr Isaacs
that it was a matter of "excuse me" and wriggling through, but he
went in carefully and did not create a surge. On exiting the tunnel
he realised the players were on the pitch, he noticed Hanson, commented |
on this to Eric'. Had moved slightly down and was just surveying the \
scene, signalled to Eric to move towards the right-hand front corner,
there was a terrific surge which carried him almost to the front. He
could see a Policewoman at the gate. She seemed to be taking advice,
a PO came along and opened the gate. Prior to that he had noticed a
young boy immediately in front of him in some difficulty. This lad
was extracated with some difficulty and he then followed. The
Policewoman directed him towards Pen 1 and another lady officer opened
the gate to Pen 1 to let him in. It was clear. He was pretty confident
that he was one of the first, if not the first, to enter Pen 1 (see time
schedule which put this at just after kick-off). Whilst in Pen 1 he
was near the Police control box. He remembers being told that Beardsley
had hit the crossbar and saw officer go onto pitch to stop the match.

                                                                 /cont.
172.   S MULLIN   (continued...)



There were shouts towards the control box for something to be done
but in this respect his evidence was a little difficult as he seemed
to relate this to Mr Kelly coming up to the box. He remembers
people shouting at Kelly and blaming him.
He confirmed that if he had been given a choice he would not have
gone down the tunnel. He also confirmed to Mrs^ McBrien that when he
exited from Pen 3 he did not realise the seriousness of the situation
and made his way down to Pen 1. \He might well not have gone if he
had known and would have wanted to look for Eric and others. ~ H e ,
expected the situation to ease itself. He found that at football
matches one always gets situations which are a little bit 'naughty'
but they always sort themselves out. He confirmed that his entry onto
the terrace was careful and did not creat a surge.
4 FEBRUARY 1 9 9 1



173.   P DUGGAN                              SUPPORTER



Keen football supporter. Attended match in 1988, Pen 3, travelled
by coach, arrived Leppings Lane 2.30. Had free access down tunnel,
it was not closed nor were there any directions given. He had been
near the front and having a broken arm that year was anxious not to
be in too crowded an area. As far as he was concerned, it was fine.
(Compare his evidence with Kenworthy, Devonside and another supporter
who claimed police were directing people away from Pen 3 at 2 pm,
whereas another supporter said he was directed at the exit of the
tunnel to go along the back at about 2.20?). He was stopped three
times, tickets checked, but he didn't see anyone who didn't have a
ticket, therefore cannot say what would have happened in that case.

                            *                                    .   &
1989 - travelled by Amberline coach, departed "TO.30,] arrived T pm , j
then had to spend a little time looking for a chemist for one of
their friends. Leppings Lane entrance 1.55, clear entry, PEN 3
about 2 pm. Fairly crowded at entry but once through that, the
terrace was fairly empty. Up to about 2.30 nil of note. 2.30 Martin
left pen to get some food. Returned 15 minutes later. Recollects this
was point of time of the beach ball. Gave evidence that it was very
crowded from 2.30 onwards but in due course agreed that as far as he
was concerned, until kick-off he was not uncomfortable but the pen-r
was filling up. When play, ers were on pitch pre kickoff, people
started coming below the barrier and he was gradually being moved
forward. He was not near the barrier when it broke. He noticed
just before kick-off a couple of kids being passed over the fence.
Said he saw the gate open and one of them being put back in. It
closed again. He did not see it open further. He recollects the
barrier, or part of it, hit his legs and knocked him down. He thinks
it was point of time when Beardsley hit the crossbar, he didn't see
this but recollects there was a roar a few moments after kick-off. k
There was also a surge at that time.
   4 FEBRUARY 1 9 9 1




  172 .   S M U L L IN                           F R IE N D OF E R IC   HUGHES



  He mentioned that Mr Hughes had told him that in 1988 he, Mr Hughes,
  had been on the terraces with another friend c*nd that the latter had
  found it a little bit scary as he didn't like crowds. The witness
  himself had been in one of the stands.
   In 1989 a group of them travelled in two cars, departed 11 am, arrived
  2.15, Leppings Lane 2.25. It appeared disorganised and crowded. The
  witness had a similar experience outside turnstiles at Derby and
  made u d his mind that he would never get in such a situation again.
  He and Eric had got separated in the turnstile area with Eric being
  ahead. Witness stepped to one side and stood close by Gate C where
  it was calmer. Gate^was jap.ened w i d e ^ h e noticed steward and couple
  of POs but they were not checking tickets, he just walked in. He
 found his friend who got through the turnstiles, having been to the
 toilet they entered tunnel, it was the only route he could see.
 They intended to go to the corner. Tunnel was clear apart from wall
 of people right at the exit. They had a bit of difficulty g e t t T ^
 through this crowd but it is not unusual to do a little bit of
 forcing just as one enters the terrace. He confirmed to Mr Isaacs
 that it was a matter of " e x c u s e j s g L j ^ ^               but he
 went in carefully and did not create a surge. On exiting t h T tunnel
  e realised the players were on the pitch, he noticed Hanson, commented
 on this to Eric. Had moved slightly down and was just surveying the I
 scene, signalled to Eric to move towards the right-hand front corner,
 there was a terrific surge which carried him almost to the front. He
 could see a Policewoman at the gate. She seemed to be taking advice,
 a PO came along and opened the gate. Prior to that he had noticed a
young boy immediately in front of him in some difficulty. This lad
was extracated with some difficulty and he then followed. The
Policewoman directed him towards Pen 1 and another iady officer opened
   e gate to Pen 1 to. let him in. It was clear. He was pretty confident
that he was one of the first, if not the first, to enter Pen 1 (see time
schedule which put this at just after kick-off). Whilst in P e n ! he
was near the Police control box. He remembers being told that Beardsley
      it the crossbar and saw officer go onto pitch to stop the match.
    DAY 44
    172.     S MULLIN   (co n ti n ue d .. . )



    There were shouts towards the control box for something to be done
    but in this respect his evidence was a little difficult as he seemed
    to relate this to Mr Kelly coming up to the box. He remembers
    people shouting at Kelly and blaming him.
    He confirmed that if he had been given a choice he would not have
    gone down the tunnel. He also confirmed to Mrs McBrien that when he
    exited from Pen 3 he did not realise the seriousness of the situation
    and made his way down to Pen 1. He might well not have gone if he
    had known and would have wanted to look for Eric and others. He
    expected the situation to ease itself. He found that at football
    matches one always gets situations which are a little bit 'naughty'
    but they always sort themselves out. He confirmed that his entry onto
    the terrace was careful and did not creat a surge.




9
                                                         f-
    DAY 4 5                                             b /&.     /   W   ^   A

    5 FEBRUARY \ 9 9 1



    180.      R J GREAVES                             SUPPORTER



    Coach travel (Sunspan), departed 10.30, arrived 1.00 pm. Coach
    was checked for alcohol and tickets, arrived Leppings Lane 2.25,
    big crowds, entered through Turnstile, POs outside turnstiles, not
    doing much. Saw two police horses within perimeter gates, in his
    view causing confusion, incapable and unable to do their job because          77
    they had allowed too many people in and they didn't know what they
    were doing. Supporters were asking officers to form queues. He
    thought by the time he got there it was too late to achieve this

*   but they just wanted officers to do something but he did not feel
    that either he o r fany other supporters could have helped themselves.
    He did not think, despite all this, that the crowd were pushing,
    just toapacked.
    Having entered through T/S saw people being searched by POs.
    Did not notice concertina gate open, free entry through tunnel, into
    Pen 3, no difficulty in choice between pens but could not have got
    back once he entered. Entered about 14.40 to 14.45, no recollection
    of b^ch ball, took up position in line with R-H goalpost, OK, bit of
    movement, moved to about 6 yards box where it became very tight.
    Heard players announced in this position, recollects players coming
    onto pitch. Recollects game initially, in Pen 3 at that point,


*   assisted into Pen 2, having made his way across virtually the whole of
    the pen, room being created by people exiting. Saw fans on the railings
    shouting to people to go back but no officers. In 1988 he had entered
    at about 2.25 via tunnel, free passage, no stewards, gates not closed,
    always thought Hillsborough not a very good ground. Crowded in 1988,
    comparable to how he was immediately behind the goal.
    1989 claimed that fans were pulling people over and Police were not
    having any of that, but then admitted he had only seen one. He knew
    the officer he had described was PC Grunhill, Merseyside Policeman.
    When asked whether the crowd was eager to push forward, he said not
    eager, everyone was trying to get into the ground, nobody was wanting 1
    to push forward.   He did agree that he heard appeals not to push,     (      86

    and he further agreed that neither the police nor the crowd could do
    anything, it was just too packed. He confirmed that although officers         88

    were saying "stand still" there was movement forward and he in fact
    did move forward, thought that the Police had lost control.
                                                                      /cont...
    DAY 4 5



    180.      R J GREAVES ( c o n t i n u e d . . . )



    When cross-examined by Miss Adelman, he again insisted that he saw no
    PO on the fence but the one case he described occurred after he had
    got onto the pitch and it was his impression that the POuas pushing
    a person back into the pen gate. He felt that the Police were
    restricting the flow of people trying to get out by their presence.
    He also said that the exit to Pen 2 was very congested. He agreed
    with Mr Payne that if the Police were trying to .get the people out
    that was fair enough but in his view they were creating more havoc
    by being there.

%
5 FEBRUARY 1 9 9 1



182.   D MACARTHUR                              SUPPORTER



Very distressed lad, friend of the Glovers.
Travelled by car, departed 11 am, arrived about 2.15. He had a
stand ticket, tried to get directions from PO, told to follow the
crowd in. Entered apparently through A-G, just continued to follow
the crowd down tunnel on to terracing. Says ha had no idea how
he got into the ground, did not realise he had entered via big gate,
just followed crowd. Movement was a cross between walking and running,
entered terrace, thought players were on pitch judging by the roar
and also could see their heads, but thought that was five/ten
minutes later.   '
Having entered terrace he realised he was in the wrong place, got
carried further forward to near barrier, did not initially think it
was serious because he had been in similar situations before, but
then it became tighter and tighter, became very upset when describing
someone close by who appeared to be dying. Helped out by WPC.
Never saw either of the Glover boys in the pen.
DAY 4 6 /   49


6 FEBRUARY 1 9 9 1   /   1 3 FEBRUARY



186.   B J DOYLE                                 SUPPORTER



Mr Doyle departed by car 11 am, arrived Sheffield 1.20. Had one
pint at pub, Leppings Lane 2.20, saw some police horses, there
were no queues. One of the horses was stationary but the other
was moving about, not very impressed, he tried to queue but there
were too many people. His brother lifted a couple of lads up and
gave them to a mounted officer for safety. Entered via concertina
gate. Went down tunnel, OK, at tunnel exit there were people but
he was sucked into the terrace. Teams were just coming out.
A man made his way out and as he did so punched him in the throat,
he was carried forward, feet not touching the ground. Got to crush
barrier, ducked under it with his friend. Tried to get over to the
right and succeeded. Game was in play, managed to climb into Pen 2
over dividing fence (he had a vivid memory of an old man who was
stuck there).? Beardsley had just hit the cr ossbar^ judging by the
r o a r . He recollects seeing a Police Sgt with a stick walking up
and down. They were were screaming at him, no response. He managed
to get over to Gate 2, it was still shut. It was opened and he ran
out. He said the officer at the gate and the Sgt. appeared not to
understand what was going on. He ran, took up position on the fence,
tried to help people out. He insists that there was no P0 on the
fence, that he was one of the first of the supporters but he didn't
see Gate 3 open and that the match was still in play. He recollects
hearing a voice from the stands addressed to him personally to go
and stop the match. He also made some comment about a WPC and a P0
who were unhelpful to him and he remembers another three officers
who appeared to want to chase him when he came out of Gate 2 (CHECK TRANSCRIPT).
CROSS-EXAMINATION RESUMED DAY 49
I re-examined him regarding the Sgt with a stick, he felt confident
that he had seen this. I put it to him that South Yorkshire officers
do not have sticks and he also agreed that he had seen them at Anfield
but he was pretty sure that he saw what he saw.
                                                             /continued...
186.   B J DOYLE (continued    2)

Miss Adelman put a series of photographs to him, starting at 15.02
and 15.04 which showed him in Pen 2 looking out, both photos showed
gate to the pen open, he then looked at photo 15.05 where he is not
seen on the perimeter fence. At 15.07 he is seen on the perimeter
fence, query cigarette, Gate 3 open and POs. He still maintained
that he had not seen any POs and he had earlier said he had not
seen the gate open, but it is clear that it was adjacent to him.
He confirmed that he had been up and down twice and thought he had
been on the fence for quite a considerable time. He also eventually
agreed that he had based his assumption that the match was in progress
on seeing Grobeler and it could be that the match had actually ceased
when he heard the shout to him to stop it. He was thanked by Mr King
on behalf of the relatives for all he had done.
                 (
Mr Doyle's evidence is a good illustration of (a) the effects of
memory, (b) attempting to reconcile what someone believes to have
happened, i.e. that the Police did nothing, with the events, and
(c) how mistaken that can be.
(It is clear that Mr Doyle has a strong view about the inactivity
of the Police as, even on the photograph where they are seen on the
fence, he asked whether in fact it showed that they were not doing
anything.)
                                              \jU ^ c-kll
DAY 4 6


6 FEBRUARY 1 9 9 1



185.      T S P IT T                             SUPPORTER



Friend of Mr Seddon.
 He said arrived Leppings Lane 2.35. He saw LANDROVER but did not hear
 any announcement. He was pretty sure that the Landrover was in position
when he arrived. This would put the arrival time considerably later,
after 2.45. On the other hand he was certain th-at the turnstile area
was more of less deserted of people and the whole of the crush was
outside the perimeter gates which were shut and controlled by police
horses. He didn't think the crush was excessive but he did see young
people and teenagers climbing over the gates and walls and he confirmed
that there was crushing at the gate and that people were getting under
the horses, he thought to escape the crush. He was challenged over
times but was sure the turnstile area A - G was clear. The gates at
some point were opened and he entered, initially turnstile area was OK
but for some reason turnstiles were not operating and then people began
to get crushed. He entered via Gate B and then down tunnel, entered
after match had started. He thought crowd at exit of tunnel jutted
in by about 5 yards , no pushing, with people choosing to go left or
right. He did not agree with Mr Seddon that their position was easy.
He felt more crushed but although he has admitted to feeling pressure
he could not say he was in fact in a crush. He saw PO gesture to go
back. He felt shortly after that a surge forward which he thought
might be linked to Beardsley hitting the crossbar. Having said that
he was fairly tight, on being challenged with his statement he agreed
that he had said it was quite comfortable on the terrace where they
were and that Mr Seddon and others were able to read their programmes.
He also interestingly said that just before entering the terrace a man
with a boy came out, the boy was crying, the man did not look too
distressed and said it was "murder inside" but neither he nor anyone
else turned round, they all went forward.
DAY 4 8


1 2 FEBRUARY 1 9 9 1



192.      INSPECTOR BULLAS                   POLICE INSPECTOR
                                             SERIAL 13

Located up on West stand, operational order, directed mainly to law
and order matters, no specific reference to watching for overcrowding
or safety but did not think he needed that, nor did he think his
serial did. At about 2.45 at front of stand, looked at crowd,
appeared to be completely normal as far as he wa's concerned, happy,
content, go od 7 natured, playing with beach ball etc. He was then
distracted to some problem on his stnad, when he next looked players
were on pitch. After that and probably before kick-off, he noticed
what appeared to him to be like a wedge of people (ref molten lavagO
entering Pen 3 and coming to a stop. There was no gap behind it, in
contrast to the previous swaying which he had noticed. He realised
straight away there was something wrong, tried to radio control x 3
and was unsuccessful because traffic/noise. Tried to signal to
perimeter track officer, eventually attracted the attention of one
on R-H side of the goal (probably opposite Pen 3), officer moved
forward to approach fence. He formed the opinion that the officer
did not understand what Bui las was trying to convey to him. Found
it difficult to explain what it was that gave him that impression
other than the officer seemed merely to approach .the fence. His
last glimpse of him was looking into the pen. Mr Bullas decided to
go down to look, left his serial in situ (he would have been wrong
to denude the stand). As he left the stand by the nearest staircase,
he turned round and could see one of the gates open. He then made
his way down into the concourse, taking a few moments (query how long)
He saw a few people coming out, there was no mass police presence
(compare Mr Tissington), he did not see Sgt Morgan and Inspector Sykes
He went down the tunnel, there were POs in it, he advised them to go
forward to get people out. He was definitely not the first officer
in because he saw a WPC bring someone out. His view was at that time
the only physical means possible to relieve pressure n/'v-'' —

He was asked whether he had seen people using the radial fence gates
and he confirmed that he had seen people passing backward and forward
over the period of time when intermittently he had looked down, and
he confirmed that he was aware of the policy of fans finding their
own level. He had agreed at LJT that he knew the pens had capacities,
                                                                /cont.
    i


        DAY 4 8



        192.      IN SPEC TO R BULLAS ( c o n t i n u e d . . . )



        although it is clear the Safety Certificate does not actually specify
        these. It is not clear therefore what the basis of his understanding
        is or was. What he was sure about was that he did not know the
        numbers. He agreed that assessment of over-capacity depended upon
        judgement. Put to him that waiting until people were distressed was
        in fact too late.

        He also dealt with assisting a youngster of 14 out of the tunnel.


P



P
DAY 4 8


1 2 FEBRUARY 1 9 9 1



190.      R LATHAM                                 SUPPORTER



Travelled by car, departed 10.30, stopped in Snake Pass pub, played
his guitar. Arrived Sheffield 2.30, Leppings Lane 2.40 - 2.45.
LANDROVER not seen or heard. Entered through concertina gate, wasn't
quite sure which, thought it must have been Gate C. Was told by some
official not to enter but was carried along with the crowd, he thought
he would get arrested. Commented to his friend -that they had got in
without tickets and that this was another Watford. He explained that
he had been to a match at Watford, wasn't quite sure which year, query
1988, when the crowd was let in through a big open gate but in Watford
they had entered very calmly.
He did agree that in the concourse the crowd was not disorderly and in
his view would have responded to being directed away from the tunnel.
On getting to the tunnel he could see players on pitch, he managed to
get onto the terracing, R-H side, made some reference to the teams
being announced but was pretty sure that they were on the pitch when
he was on the terrace. Team announcement was 14.51 and it looks as if
he entered after 14.52 so it is unlikely that he       would have heard it.
As far as he was concerned, the tunnel was the only entry. His
evidence was difficult to follow but it seemed that at kick-off things
got rather more hectic but he and his friend conversed that they were
OK. He also mentioned that there were screams and shouts but he did
note that someone who could shout must be OK, it was the ones who
could not shout that were in trouble.
He says he had been there in 1986 but there were       no    radial fences then
(he is wrong), said he did not realise there were fences in 1989, he
didn't actually get to one but apparently the message was passed across
that people could not move laterally. Recollects goal being struck,
remembers one or two people being passed over the railing, couldn't
get them over and they dropped back. Said it was quite common for
people to be passed forward if they fainted. He didn't think gate
was open after Beardsley hit the crossbar but agreed that he hadn't
seen it properly and that his timing may be hopelessly out. He did
hear people shout to push back but also confirmed that he saw POs
indicate that, he did try but it wasn't possible. Another fan tried
as well. He eventually left via tunnel.
1 3 FEBRUARY 1 9 9 1



193.      B L SCARRATT                      MERSEYSIDE FIREMAN
                                            LIVERPOOL SUPPORTER

 Travelled by Amkrline coach, departed 10.30, arrived 2.00 pm., checked
 for alcohol by Police, not for tickets, note that some alcohol was
 found on this coach. He went to a pub after arriving, had 1/2 pints (?),
 left 14.40, Leppings Lane 14.45. Entered through turnstiles. He
 was sure it was kick-off time. He had actually' seen a gate open
 but didn't check which one, query Gate B in view of his position.
Approached tunnel, said tunnel was full, people wall to wall,
 impossible for people to urinate at the side, progressed propelled
 by crowd but not worried as this was large match. Said that it was
 like automatic flow towards the tunnel with no fanning out, in
contrast to 1988 when he remembers 5 or 6 POs who were directing
people away from the tunnel and thus leading to their dispersal in
the concourse area. Entered terrace, match undoubtedly in play,
progressed about ten steeps down with his friends (4 / 5 ), not
comfortable, went back and took shelter, so to speak, behind brick
tunnel entrance wall. People still entering tunnel. He thinks he
was in second position when Beardsley hit crossbar, wasn't entirely
sure about whether he was told by people around him that that had
happened (he heard a loud roar while still in the tunnel). He said
he helped people up into the stands, he saw POs enter the terracing
between 3 and 5 minutes after he had got to his second position,
Saw almost immediately (one minute) someone being carried out. His
friend went out to help, came back and told him to go out as he
would be of more use out there. He also said that whilst at the back
he had seen at around the same time, i.e. 4/5 minutes after Beardsley
hit the crossbar, a P0 motioning people off the fence and pushing them
off (query touching their hand). He said to Miss Adelman it was
possible to motion with one hand and push people off with the other.
Not able to identify officer.
DAY 4 9

13 FEBRUARY 1991



194.      S P T SWEENEY                     SUPPORTER



Mr Sweeney came by train, arrived 12.05, went to Sheffield United
ground, had a couple of pints, got a lift to Leppings Lane, had to
walk to ground, arrived Leppings Lane 2.40, entered 2.50 (although f
he didn't look at his watch, he seemed determined that his timings
were right). He went down tunnel, no problems, went left, Pen 4,
took up match-viewing position, was able to look at his programme
and although congested did not consider it to be unusual for the
type of match at that time. He thought it was about 2.55 (caveat
on time), he said he couldn't remember players coming out nor any
of the match. He recollects that there was a surge which carried
him forward, became very packed, he was panicking, he thought he
was dying, he managed to climb onto the barrier where he had a
bird's eye view. Saw P0 outside,shouted towards him but he did
not appear to take any notice. He had been facing the wrong way
before he climbed onto barrier. Did not see the gate open but once
it was open some space appeared and he was able to get out. He did
not see Sgt Swift. He said quite freely that he panicked.
(Map Ref. C461).
I put to him the part of his statement at bottom of Page 2. He said
it wasn't right, it hadn't been written by him and it put the wrong
slant, but when I actually took him through it, everything he had
told me was exactly as in the statement, apart from he said in the
statement that it was as the players came out that it became more
packed and seemed to be a large surge and he had momentarily seen
the ball kicked. He now said that was not ,.the case.

In 1988 he seemed to recollect that tickets were checked distant from
the ground but could not remember what time he came, he said 2-ish,
which he then interpreted as meaning any time up to 2.40, and he
also said there were POs in the concourse area who were signalling
to people not to go down tunnel, he didn't remember the gates being
shut.
13 FEBRUARY 1991




195.   P EDWARDS                                  SUPPORTER



Arrived by car 12 noon, couple of pints, Leppings Lane about 2.25,
described condition in turnstile area as being "panic-stricken" for
himself and others, frightened of being crushed into the wall.
Entered through turnstile, didn't see a gate open, went down tunnel
which was clear. Had been before in 1980, remembered ground but on
the day had forgotten that it was possible to get round sides. Said
that in 1980 tunnel was in fact blocked off. Four of them went down
tunnel, entered Pen 4, very packed, moved to the left, players not
yet out, this was about 14.50, heard cheers when players being
announced as he was making his way across. Concerned for his
safety, gradually got worse, expected it to get more packed as
kick-off approached, worried because he realised that there were
more people outside and he assumed they would all be coming in
behind him. Pressure constant but felt surge around kick-off time.
Only saw one player, goalkeeper, several surges, big surge at kick-off,
went forward with no return. Fairly near the back, could see all people
below him except those immediately against fence and they seemed in a
worse condition. Saw gate open and shut, did not notice POs. Would
have been able to get out of the tunnel by turning round but once on
the terrace it would have been very difficult. Agreed with Mr
Catchpole that tunnel was most direct route, that he would not have
looked around for alternatives. In 1980 says two central gates were
blocking tunnel, not told why, went around side, having got round
went towards centre, very crowded at centre than at wings, positioned
himself near the fence because he was worried about how packed it was
in the centre. He said a wide part of the central area was packed.
2 7 FEBRUARY 191



211.   J O PACKER                    PART OF SGT.SWIFT'S SERIAL

First in line, entered ground from gym. Thinks he was walking past
Pen 4 just as kick-off was taking place. Went past gate of Pen 3
up to radial fence, turned, Gates 3 and 4 were both shut when he
went past them. When he faced the pen he heard a man shout near
to the centre that someone was dead. He immediately called his
colleagues to open the gate. He did not do so himself as he was
too far away. Three officers around the gate, didn't know who
opened it. Seemed to recollect it shutting once. Interesting
observation that he thought shutting it would relieve pressure on
the people at the bottom because of people coming over the tops.
Didn't see anyone being put back. All happened within seconds.
People coming out initially were running and spilling out in great
numbers, under their own steam.
Subsequently left and attended on Supt. Greenwood. When he walked
past Pens 3 and 4, initially not overly concerned, was alerted by
the man crying out. Had not heard fans screaming in Pen 4. As he
walked along he glanced into the pen and could see and hear people
saying they were being squashed, they were in discomfort but not
to the degree that had developed, he was looking sideways.
Discomfort was caused by surging. They just looked like normal fans,
some were penned in, 2/3 rows back there was nobody shouting. They
were penned but not squashed against the fence to any serious degree.
The time interval between observing this and hearing the man shout
out was perhaps ten seconds. He thought someone had gone to the
ground and been trampled.
Unable to say what had happened to the gates prior to his arrival
at 15.00.
Unable to identify himself on C326a timed at 14.59, with gate open.
21#.   R GREEN                                 PS.993

Serial 9, associated with escorting of Nottingham fans. Their
behaviour was not impeccable either. On completion of duty he
went to the Gym, had a meal, was summoned to go to Gate A at Leppings
Lane. Advised to go across the pitch as it was quicker. When he
entered field area players were on pitch warmir>g up. Unfortunately
he was unable go give any further specific information on timings,
apart from saying that he thought when he opened the gate it was
very near or around kick-off, but he didn't know. Walked along
North stand and then past West stand, noticed Pen 6 fairly sparsely
populated, couls see concrete. As he went past Pen 4 he noticed
condition of fans, considered them distressed and that assistance
was required. Attempted to radio control, no reply, would have
asked for assistance, restriction on entry to the pens and medical
assistance. Did not see either Gate 4 or 5. Met PC Illingworth
almost behind goal going in opposite direction, rushing, appeared
pre-occupied, didn't take with him, did not see any other officers
other than PC Tattersall and one other who had               him.
Got to Gate 3, decided it had to be opened, did so, people spilled
out. They were not seriously injured, although one girl was very
distressed. As people began to encroach onto the pitch he walked
them to Pen 2/1. He had no recollection of other officers at the
gate at that point. He did not shut the gate but he left it
unattended. He did not see it burst open, he did not see PC Packer
or his colleagues or Sgt Swift at Gate 4.
His evidence is very difficult to fit in to the remainder, bearing
in mind the evidence of Sgt. Swift's serial and indeed Mr Case and
his son and friends.
He does not carry a stick.
215.   D L CASE                                SUPPORTER



Father of Jamie Case. In Pen 3. From 14.50 onwards crowded but as
he would expect for a match of this magnitude. Things got tighter
when players came out. He was very uncomfortable but had been in
that situation before in crowded terraces. Increase in jostling
and surging. Major surge at about 15.00, squashed against fencing.
Confirmed story of son and friends re opening of gate x 2, no
recollection of P0 involvement, gate not shut after he exited on
2nd opening. Photographic evidence at C519 where he is located
at 15.00 outside gate 1. He confirmed account of conversation with
P0 where he said something to the effect that "it has got very bad
in here" and response was "it will sort itself out". Not able to
identify officer. Jamie saying "I have got to get out Dad" and
going white, conversation with officer and gate opening - all
virtually instantaneous. Time interval between opening of gates
was short.

Bearing in mind the visual evidence, he had clearly got out by 15.00,
i.e. just after kick-off,and managed to get down to Gate 1. Things
had not really become significantly bad until after the players were
out and probably a few moments later. Police intervention proved
unnecessary because of the spontaneous opening of the gate.
He had not realised the seriousness of the situation.
DAY 7 2


18.3.91

234.      PC SMITH

Statement was read. He confirms that he was a track officer, that
he had lots of experience, he policed the 1988 match, that people
had come out onto the track, confirms he went for a meal, came
back about 14.50, centre pens were full. He recollects the gate
opening once, nobody came out and he shut it. It then burst open
again, people tried to get out, other serial officers (? Sgt
Swift's serial) assisted with sorting it out. He describes
three surges, second surge there was some shouting, after the
third surge the, screaming sounded different, he then tried to
radio for permission to open the gates. His evidence in many
respects ties in quite well with that of Mr Case and also other
officers. It is difficult to reconcile Sgt Green's evidence with
his and indeed everybody else who was around that gate.
                                          Vincent Hale & Co.
                                                    Solicitors

Telephone: (0742)                                   Nash House                   Vincent Hale Solicitor
Office 325842                                     140 Upperthorpe                Consultant:
Home 345214                                          Sheffield                   Gerard Vincent Hale B.A.   (H o n s.)
Fax     325644                                       S6 3NF

                                                             29th March, 1991
       Dear Sir,

       HILLSBOROUGH - future disasters

       vrm   nfV
               cricketer» footballer or tennis-player and they will all tell
       Hnuovo run-outs, penalties and line-calls that were obviously wrong.
       However, even a wrong decision keeps the game going and avoids c h a o ^


      o r d J L ^ v Cm i s ^ k p ar% 0nl^ differ nt i n .their consequences. Apart from
      likelv tn ho u             ’    evidence is falsified or suppressed the verdict is
      anH     n       ^ wrong.        Supporters of a cause can argue the case for years
      and occasionally, bring forward new evidence which leads to a
           !6rent verc?lct- Eve" when the verdict is correct, objectors can
      tt2ndTLaS1X
              reUrn&               USe the reCOrd for uPse« i n g a verdict at present
                                years, so there is no reason for anyone ever to give
      up *


      h L f S t?eref0re n,0re imP°rtant than ever before that the law does not
             ™less restricting the right of anyone to call evidence and be
         presented, so that verdicts may be seen to be correct.

      There shouid never again be a public enquiry and inquests of the
      separate°rpnrp              The Jaylor
                                   °n
                                     eniluiry was rushed through without
                                           individual police officers.           As a result,
     heard o? M r t n f M 10*               °Tproperly  considered. When it            yds
     HiH tint               iat 11         inquests, the result was gratifying but
                                        ,0r the                  of the                 ^

     The coroner was scrupulously fair to all parties but the rules do not
     allow advocates to call their own evidence or address either the
     the°part°olavedJbJy °h     faCts and              iXi
                                             was not Possible to demonstrate
              played by a body of people as distinct from individuals.

     ^ h n n i V h 6 n6Xi trafedy ~ and there Will certainly be one - the enquiry
     coroner s i t t i n g u i i ^ h        ?iffe r e n t    W*V-    The        should have a
              Sltting with him and the inquests should be conducted
     mav intn ho     and .more basically as to medical cause of death. A jury
     without foulin^th      °nly ” rgent recommendations should be made,
                 ling the waters for subsequent, more thorough, proceedings.

     Matters relating to negligence and crime, which are properly tried in
     thatrno0 n n S
                  d l n f i Uld J*   Carefully « d it shou^d'be made clear
     aooronriaending is made on liability and contributory fault, where
     happened wiih                                °Tpre-judge             other proceedings, as

     VINCENT HALE

     Solicitor for a senior police officer.

                                                       ©
    The Right Honourable Kenneth Baker, M.P.
    The Home Secretary,
    Queen Anne's Gate, London.
HTT.TflTjORCPGH DISASTER.



Before I start with the Inquests proper so to speak there are

one or two remarks which I feel I would like to make, these

are general comments and the first one is of course to say that

in common with anybody else who has been in any way associated

with indeed not associated with this incident, I very very

much regret the tragic loss of lijpe which has occurred and

I fully understand what a terrible, well I don't fully understand

but I try to understand what a terrible shock and loss and pain

this must be for all the families involved and it isn't of course

helped by the fact that in addition to losing loved ones, they

have to have the trauma such as it is of Inquests and other

 investigations and inquiries and the inevitable delay which

 occurs in a major disaster situation such as this.

 I        no comment whatsoever about the incident it ielf or what

 happened before the match or around that time because of course

 those questions will be not only the subject of a judicial inquiry

 which we are all familar with now, but may well also have to

 be investigated within the scope of the Coroner's Inquestion, but

 I do want to say this, that after the events, I have nothing but

 praise for the way the temporary mortuary was organised, the allocation

 of officers to help with the identification and to deal with the

 very traumatic but essential work of ensuring that one knew who

  one was talking about and it is really due to the extraordinary

  good work which was done that it was possible to identify people

  as fast as in fact it turned out to be possible, and I want it understood,

     speaking for myself as Coroner, I have had the utmost help in trying

     to perform my job with Wiese deaths from all the police officers,

     from the most senior ones down to the most junior ones, and in

     particular, I want to mention the junior officers because it was

     they who had to be allocated to the body, it was they who had to

     accompany it, it was they who had to do the identification, it was
SILLSBORCTJGH DISASTER.



Before I start with the Inquests proper so to speak there are

one or two remarks which I feel I would like to make, these

are general comments and the first one is of course to say that

in common with anybody else who has been in any way associated

with indeed not associated with this incident, I very very

much' regret the tragic loss of like which has occurred and

I fully understand what a terrible, well I don't fully understand

but I try to understand what a terrible shock and loss and pain

this must be for all the families involved and it isn't of course

helped by the fact that in addition to losing loved ones, they

have to have the trauma such as it is of Inquests and other

investigations and inquiries and the inevitable delay which

occurs in a major disaster situation such as this.

I make no comment whatsoever about the incident itaelf or what

happened before the match or around that time because of course

those questions will be not only the subject of a judicial inquiry

which we are all familar with now, but may well also have to

be investigated within the scope of the Coroner's Inquestion, but

I do want to say this, that after the events, I have nothing but

praise for the way the temporary mortuary was organised, the allocation

of officers to help with the identification and to deal with the

very traumatic but essential work of ensuring that one knew who

one was talking about and it is really due to the extraordinary

good work which was done that it was possible to identify people

as fast as in fact it turned out to be possible, and I want it understood,

speaking for myself as Coroner, I have had the utmost help in trying

to perform my job with bfcese deaths from all the police officers,

from the most senior ones down to the most junior ones, and in

particular, I want to mention the junior officers because it was

they who had to be allocated to the body, it was they who had to

accompany it, it was they who had to do the identification, it was
  that's pretty hard, not only for the relatives but also for the

  officers, and I think one must acknowledge them.

  I think it is only right as well for me to say that we couldn't

  have performed the organisation method of moving the bodies

  backwards from the hospitals to the temporary mortuary for

  identification and then all the bodies to the Medico Legal Centre

  if the ambulance service hadn't volunteered, not only crew

  and vehicles but also organise themselves so that they dealt with

  all the transportation, not a hitch, no problems, none at all,

  and I am exceedingly grateful to them for their efforts in that

  respect.

     you will of course appreciate, this building which is a purpose

  built building, and which houses not only the Coroner's Court

  but houses Pathological Departments but also the Mortuary, has

  a substantial capacity but we are not normally expecting to deal

  with numbers of such as we had on Saturday, but it's right I

  think to say, that this building was an expensive venture for

  Sheffield when it was built, but in a situation such as this, I

  think it has been justified, because it is exceedingly unlikely

  that we would have been able to deal with the deaths in the manner

  in which we were, and with               which we were, because

  one of our prime objectives has been to minimise the delay

^^to relatives, so that they can proceed with their funerals, we

^^cannot undo the events, but having been faced with that situation

  I wanted, as far as possible, to minimise unnecessary trauma

   to the family and as I have just said, if we hadn't had the facilities

   and I think the people, the City Councillors who took the decision

   years ago to put this building up, they may now feel that they were

   in fact justified, ^>ut of course it's very satisfactory to have

   a building, you also need the st>.ff to actually carry out the

   post mortems, and I have to thank the teams of pathologists, and ,

   technicians, and other members of staff who spent a great deal

   of time, but -who completed all the post mortem work in order to

   enable me to begin opening the :Inquests this afternoon.   I owe them
                                                                                                                      O                             <                     pi
                                                                          6pi
                                                   H*              o'                          (0    g     <1   o                 c+
                                                                                                                                                                          (o
                                pi          |(T>
                                                   0)    &         (0
                                                                   H*                   >§•    a
                                                                                                           (0   P
                                                                                                                (0    P           H      (0         (0
                                                                                                                                                         &
                                                                                                                                                         o
                                                                                                                                                              &
                                                                                                                                                              o
                                                                                                                                                                          CO
                                                                                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                                                                                                tr
                                                                                                                                                                                (o    i(oo 10
                                o
                                      <0
                                      CO
                                      *     O'
                                                   e+
                                                   O     £         I                    (0
                                                                                               a
                                                                                               c+
                                                                                               to
                                                                                                     ?
                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                           3
                                                                                                           (0
                                                                                                                p     <D
                                                                                                                            B            ?               cr   cr          4*
                                                                                                                                                                          H
                                                                                                                                                                          O'
                                                                                                                                                                                ?
                                                                                                                                                                                CO
                                                                                                                                                                                      <o
                                                                                                                                                                                      pi  tr
                                                                                                                                                                                      to »<n^




tremendous
                                            <D     O                      O                          CO               (0
                                o     o     <D     <D/             3.     o       co co        e+          §                (o    O
                                                                                                                                  H*     «c+                  (0
                                                                                                                                                                          (0          p<
                                or*   H     P
                                                   &
                                                                   e+
                                                                   cr
                                                                          H*
                                                                          S-      n            I     1
                                                                                                           vs
                                                                                                                g
                                                                                                                M
                                                                                                                   g        o
                                                                                                                            H)    4O     e+
                                                                                                                                                              vs                e+
                                                                                                                                                                                      5‘ B
                                CO
                                      <0                 P                H-      (o I
                                                                                                           c+
                                                                                                           O    CQ Mc+      H>                                                  P.
                                                                                                                                                                                CO
                                                                                                                                                    ?
                                      <                            CO                pi              B                      0)                                epi         e+
                                (0    (0
                                       p
                                                   H*
                                                   5
                                                         P
                                                         C<D O     H*
                                                                   e+
                                                                          O
                                                                          g      p.
                                                                                                     (It   o    S'    ^           e+
                                                                                                                                         I                                cr
                                                                                                                                                                          (o
                                M
                                       o
                                            O              p
                                                                   e+                                CO
                                                                                                     o
                                                                                                           (0   3 S
                                                                                                                (0    <0    e+    B e+
                                                                                                                                      O             (0
                                <      H

amount of work in re la tio n
                                O     (?5   <D     tr
                                                   (o
                                                          C(0O r   <e     s*
                                                                          0
                                                                                  oH)   I(T>   I     o'
                                                                                                           n
                                                                                                           o
                                                                                                                             cr
                                                                                                                            (o
                                                                                                                                  O
                                                                                                                                  (0
                                                                                                                                      er            (o   p    o           H
                                &           e+                                          H*           (0                     vs    CO S              (o        p                 (0         O
                                       P
                                       p«          pi                                    y                 S'                                       p    ?    CO                H>
                                Pi
                                       CO   P.     (o    tr        cr            3                                          pi                 o'             p     ^d     l    H)
                                                                                                                                      (0       (o                               H-
                                                                                                                            8
                                            a             (o       (o            £                              B                                   p    c+   F      o
                                      %            6     <<                1t>
                                                                           <            &      tr    (0    £    pi                                  o'   »    P      &     o    (0
                                &
                                CO     H*                                                      (o    pi    (0                        ^8             H                b          M
                                o       O   p                              co           a                                   «+    <§                (0   O'   4      c+    g    Pi
                                                          $                                    H*     o'        tr                             pi                          (0              ?
                                H                                                              p     vs         (o                             (o   e+   e+          O     CO
                                                                                                                                                                                i§.        3
                                H*    ■*e                 8               ?c+                              8
                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                                    O         <      H)   •
                                K1          (0                                                 e           c+   o                                                                          CO
                                (0    M                   pi                            c(o    i*    £                0                        8f
                                                                                                                                                    pi   s.   r      <1   so
                                      m     &             <D       f             tr
                                                                                 (0
                                                                                                     (0    e+   £(o
                                                                                                                                  f            o
                                                                                                                                                    O    rf
                                                                                                                                                         u*
                                                                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                                                                              (o
                                                                                                                                                                     H*
                                                                                                                                                                     <     e+              gcr
                                e+
                                O     B     CO            &                      4(0                 c+          4    >d          Vi     oCO   pi   jj
                                                                                                                                                    H*   o           <5
                                                                   (0     (0                         (0    c+                                            f3   c+          c+
                                c+    o.
                                                   c+
                                                                   M      P
                                                                          O
                                                                                               I     O
                                                                                                           O'   c+
                                                                                                                       &
                                                                                                                                  &
                                                                                                                                          (0
                                                                                                                                               B
                                                                                                                                                    m
                                                                                                                                                    C+
                                                                                                                                                         e+   cr
                                                                                                                                                              (o    M
                                                                                                                                                                          &
                                                                                                                                                                          <t>
                                      §«+ ■g       O               &                                       (0   cr                B            pi        e+   vs    ••
                                           4                       H*             I     c+                 O    (o                       o               tr         B
                                      CO •c+             M*
                                                                   (0
                                                                                  (0    cr
                                                                                        (o
                                                                                                     O     P
                                                                                                                o     1pi   8
                                                                                                                            e+           <3    8    r
                                                                                                                                                    CD
                                                                                                                                                         (o
                                                                                                                                                         H»
                                                                                                                                                               cr          &
                                                                                                                                                                           CO   (0
                                                                                                                                                                                (0
                                                         s         CO            O'
                                                                                 (0     o
                                                                                               pi    P.    t
                                                                                                           (0
                                                                                                                o     M     O     9c+
                                                                                                                                         pi              4    %
                                                                                                                                                              (o
                                                                                                                                                                    §
                                                                                                                                                                    e+     s    Pi
                                                                                                                                                                                           CO
                                                                                                                                                                                           p
                                      i     H            e+                      <D            c+
                                                                                                     H*
                                                                                                     e+         8     O
                                                                                                                      CO    P            o     f    IT   O                 e+
to this m a tte r.




                                                         cr        £ g           p      (o           H*    c+                            p          (0   O    o'    e+     (0   c+
                                      *     8            (o                             4      rH-   (0    cr         to          H      (0         P                      4    O
                                                                                                     CO    (o               tT    (0     m               A    (0    P.                     Pi
                                                                   tr            <3     &            *                      (0                      pi        P            O
                                                                   (o                                                                               O    (0                P
                                      *     §                                                  5                                  8      co         P         pi     P     CO
                                                                                                                                                                           (0
                                                                          o                                                 §     c+                <0   P    (0    0Q
                                      &     B
                                                   c+
                                                   cr                            j
                                                                                               6
                                                                                               h
                                                                                                                      coo   P
                                                                                                                                  CO     i(0        «    c+
                                                                                                                                                         H»   &      P
                                                                                                                                                                           CO
                                                                                                                                                                          •*    <          I
                                            (0     (o              em     e+            o'     Vi    £                      p     O'                p    O    H-     O'
                                                                                                     (0                           (0     o                           o                     o
                                      8     P
                                            e+     H)               e+    &
                                                                                 3      H
                                                                                               o’    (0
                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                CO    §
                                                                                                                                  o            Pi
                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                    pi
                                                                                                                                                         P    &
                                                                                                                                                              (n     f3
                                                                                                                                                                     e+
                                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                                          p
                                                                                                                                                                          pi
                                                                                                                                                                                i          p
                                      8     H*                      4(0   (0            §                  cr                     2                 M    c+   c
                                            Q      8                      O
                                                                                               4     P
                                                                                                     o          H*          S     1      S'              cr   H*     e+   (B*
                                                   c+               CO
                                                                                                                m     £                        £    c+   (o   e+     U*   (0
                                      &     &                             Q                    n>
                                                                                               8
                                                                                                           p
                                                                                                                                  c+
                                                                                                                                         i     M
                                                                                                                                               CO   pr
                                                                                                                                                    P-
                                                                                                                                                         H*
                                                                                                                                                         H
                                                                                                                                                              S'    (0    P
                                                                                                                                                                          H
                                                                                                                                                                                s.
                                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                      e+    £                                                                         oCO   (o                      a         e+    <      e+
                                                                                                                                  otr>
                                      (0                           CO     O       b            er          o                                   c+
                                                   !                      <D            H)                 c+                                       S'   S'   cr
                                                                                                                                                              (o    o
                                      §                  o'        §(0            e     H*           o     O
                                                                                                                I                 Vi                     (0
                                                                                                                                                         M
                                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                    K
                                                                                                                                                                           <
                                                                                                                                                                           H*
                                                    (o   P                                                 H)   H*                                       *d   M
                                                                                                                                                              H*
                                                                                                                                                                           e+
                                                                                                                                                                           U*
                                                    o    CO        o                                            e+
                                                   >d              H)
                                                         O
                                                         O
                                                         H
                                                                                 Ito                                  o
                                                                                                                      <
                                                         B                                                            <
                                                                                                                      D
                                                         (o                                                           pi
                                                         H




                                                                                                                                                                                                 J
SIR HABEY LIVERMORE.



Mr. Coroner, I am grateful for your kind expressions of sympathy and

I will see that my clients and the other bereaved families are

mario fully aware of your sensitive remarks.   I would also like

to add my thanks to the officers who helped in the delicate

task of the removal of the bodies and the process of identification.

All the staff who assisted in expediting the necessary process

which resulted in us being here at this moment in point of time

and I would like to thank again on behalf of all my clients and

the bereaved families, all the people and organisations of Sheffield

who have assisted th«§ bereaved families since this terrible tragedy

occurred.
Mr. Coroner Liverpool at the moment is a heartbroken city.     The people

are upset they are disturbed, they are sa.d and they are also angry.

They are angry not only that such a tragedy has occurred, but also

because of the dreadful and untotally insensitive remarks made

yesterday by the President of TOP .A. The tragedy will never be
                    by the
forgetton or forgiven/ people of Mersyside, nor will t&e remarks

 of Msr.Cz&Cftgi^S      however many times he may apologise.
OPEMIHG OF THE INQUEST ON THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER.



The position as you know, is that until the Inquest is being

completed I cannot issue a final certificate to the Registrar

and as a result it isn't possible to issue, the Registrar General

or the Registrars cannot issue a death certificate as such.     It

is my intention, in the course of the next few days, to write to

each individual family, a letter, and if you wish I can write

to you in the case of your clients, and we will be enclosing

with that letter a document which we have titled An Interim

Certificate of the Pact of Death and subject to the proviso

that the cause of death has to be formally proved at the

Inquest we will disclose on that document the cause of death

as given to us by the pathologist.   This is not entirely

satisfactory but it's the best we can do.    The Inquest

itself of course, I haven't yet determined when I will be

resuming, nor have I determined it's form, nor have I finally

determined whether the Inquest should be before or after

the ti'uflitional inquiry but it is almost certain that it will

be after the judicial inquiry and that is why I said that

 there will be a considerable delay because I have no

 control over the judicial inquiry and to that extent I

 am in Justice Taylor's hands but he does understand, he

 knows the problem in concluding Inquests cause.

 RTR   HARRY   LI7EBM0BE.
 Mr. Coroner, what is worrying my clients, the families is that they

 axe anxious to bring their children, husbands home and have them

 buried, now when is that going to be possible?

 In the case of your clients, now as soon as you wish.     This is the

*Aiole purpose of the exercise so that the bodies can be moved and

 that the burials can take place.    I have had a letter from the

 Police Authority which I requested, and they have no objection to

 the release of the bodies and I am going to admit that letter

 as documentary evidence in every case.
                                            2   -



         Q.   So that the bodies can be, they can take them away to-morrow?



         A.   Indeed.




    's




i
                                •    \
                      ' \
                     \ 2              _
                    v*>Jo                                                & / u j£ * 6 4 s •>*!    q/*     / o^/»y        /


                CT C > < x £                ,/j <£P                              ec       rfyjftrv*      'Tfrne’____________



                                             "^l L z &             o     -------------------------------------



               I f p J O                                   T & t S A / D ' f




**),           f L - » o w r £ 0              O / ^ r ' / w ^ / t                               tfc. r r o + J   —   / ^ ( 5 * C e p s s s   &**




si___



 ?    .        /    <r/y **g?       g > /     jQ   y   t   f       tje   /




                   '7~V CXgfyrCt*pf                                  /-~v-~<}

          >N
                   y w* » i / (_


./Ju--,            - t v ^ ^ t - v                                           #   <    £   / %




/S ’           J U /T z                                                                   4?//<L*3aLrz<j <J>f/7y ja ^ 'C /tS fjig g


     /s ~ ,               S u   r f o u r t h s ,


      / b .___ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 3                               .


 _        !1_____ 4- .
          /tf.              0 U x S ( 0 f
     CLOSURE OR               DIVERSION AT TUNNEL IN 1988

        164     J KENWORTHY                                   Blue gate shut about 14.30.
        165     B DEVONSIDE                                   Blue gate shut about 14.30.
        189     G HUTT                                        Blue gate shut about 14.30.
        168     J THOMAS                                      Claims fans diverted at 14.00, entered via
                                                              side, but attended with his friend Anthony
                                                              Owen (163) who says they entered via tunnel
        174     S GAINS                                       Tunnel gate shut.
        180     R J GREAVES                                   14.25 says gates not shut.
        218     PS HIGGINS                                    Says gates shut (? how long).
     48         R CREASER                                     Describes option of shutting gates.
     207        D LOCK                    ,                   Option                          and possibly shutting gates
     212        B L MOLE                                      Gates not shut to his knowledge.
                                              r-
     201        A SEAMAN                                      Claims no danger from shutting gates.
     209        DR EASTWOOD t                                 Prefers inner gates to be shut, specially
                                                              provided for this purpose.

                j   >*        £/£/> t) / '         P- ft*}

   1 /   6                                                        j-a     t   -   / f   0 P    ,-              cioiici?




  /W.           n    -    A       ~   U                       1   ‘t i   J'

X t %                                                                                         f > 4   h a q   <l 6 * J




              i . K . .




              A. O            *                          4^
                                                                         Co-ACH


    W&             TO A                             Cj&Prt^W            Co .                 .SejrftOtea?               OrfeCktd?                   ~D^.P                Pr&
    sn              UJifvaUV"                                                                                                                    O jy ia^ clU/           a • 3o f <+r
                         o    - -               ■                                                                                                                              /
    51?              MuVV'CU.’i                                                                                                                     •)o.''S'
                      r ......... ;         "                                                                                                                              i • 2 -0
    v*>               l&Ut-S                                                                                                                         to c o
    4~ 1             riCnv^uACtvt                                                                                                                     1 V. Zo             2 ,'S -o

                      VV t\W»-N                                                                                                                      I O -1.0

    M-4-             1^'cAajXVi) So>~\                  $fcv/„ coolc-Ws avT,W    .                                                                   \ t .o o             '2_-«-feC'
                                                                          ---- J.....              1 .......     •
     <-VY            ^W uJsVsvU:                         1^ "2.° ooa<-Ufe\.             ?a*~A- '                                                                         z ' ici/2r
                                                                                    f          i
                      R ac JUo ,v ^.s                                                              w o.               A7d .                         lo '<ro               “Z .- 1 ^
- / W
    • / '7
     to r              W CXAA^a Itr^v                   (.C^ujunc,                                                     Mp .                          ft. Zo                /'         .
                                     V--             ■■ ------ "1 • v/.          - / ...—
     112_             P^-A-VVvvtr '7 ’                                                                                                                                   ( ' <SV«?V7X
     //S'                              j                                                      i

     tile           ■Y O ^ M lew-                               Qa K(At*&                          A/b               lA/c ,                         °t ■ t ' f             Z'C,{~
                            I ...... *'
     1S /              W~Zim\ lhrr\                                                                                                                   ■                   ^ -0 -^

     t\r                                                        Q m Js&/ 11\AM-                                            -                                               /- cTS

     lUrJ                 ^^OU-VUcm; ^                          A VAAjst^Uw^                                            A/   O                       11 o~o                  / c<Jb
                                      o
      i (pi ~7 C v i f f i i h s l                               At         (-               —t9 '             OU^: Coacli Sfecsi>Ckt3
                                                                                                            " .........                               il ■ (Tb
                                                                 ^                 -\
                     C   i '               <
          iU X \       . J o ^ S J ■— =>                                                          S c^mS be^U. C^cvJCsI l^            ''sf-rt k'Ci^fcC) .
                    J ^-J....... ...............
                       - f 1/16 UAtXO                            1/V^A^scT 11 vU-'                 1/V6                A /o .                               lO:£b          /-ID

                           C ^ q q CU-V                                                             ‘AJ-d               No                                  jo , i o .
                           ^ ...- X i..........-..
                           O iC U v a s                         ^Vl'vJfefcfltUUr                     'U-"                                                   il^T            1- l o
                   ............L        .........
      p r                 A^olWv'OljR.fc-'                        ^ asJrw A ccw i                    ! /                                                    it'lo         ol • H-O

      tffO                L^Vfc^W tS                              S>UlA«s p c u ^                                                                           to .-^ o        1-00
                                                                          I............. .
         \^q              U . A^ V                              t/ \   UA»jbfcM I l/Ur                                                                ^ I 10am              /•0"0
               I                                                                                                                                       /
_   . ta 3              S ^ ir r a - H "                        A\Akkb/^WAr                                                  t ld .                     )D-1>0            3 -CT>

          tr ?           (W r x r r                               fW V \A v ^                         M o.                Nc .                          ^0-3>O              \'^-D




                                           #        ^     f
                                4-1        L L .           3.
                                i ) /J   rK       rJ j   - 77/J/E*               '

NO.   NAME                  ENTRY             PEN        SURGE       TIME              FULL


29    L J HINTON            C                 4                      14.55

30    R THOMPSON                              4          Yes         14.56

31    D P LOWE              T/S               4                      7 14.50/15.00     ?14.30

32    A J BENNETT           T/S               4                      14.50 ~ >         714-30

33    A P JONES             ?                 ?

34    STEPHfiLN lIONES      C                 3                      715.00 +

36    K CARROLL             c                 3                      15.05

37    R A KNOWLES           c                 4                      15.00 +

38    M C GOULD             c                 3                      14.54

39    S BERRY               c                 4                      15.00

41    S BOARDMAN            c                 4                      15.00 +

42    G HURST               c                 4                      15.00 (entered)

44    G RICHARDSON          c             3                                  -




64    D A LACKEY            c                            +           15.00

82    P J GARRATT           T/S               4          +           1^.54 +

       A-    b.   C l u ,
                            7/»               i                       Jf.




                            r b
                                              a
NO.   NAME             ENTRY    PEN     SURGE     T IM E      FU L L




 97   I CRAWFORD       C         3      Yes        14.54 +
 98   B ANDERSON       C         4      No        (14.50 +
                                                  (
 99   K MULLEE         T/S       4      No        (14.54      14,45 - 14.50
100   G BRIDSON        T/S       4      No         15.00      14.45       't 14.54
101   A M DODD         C         4      No        14.55 +
103   J GRANT          B         4      Yes       15.00       15.00 +
104   A LANGLEY        T/S       4      Yes       Difficult   14.40 — ^ (see t e x t ) .
105   M HOLLINGHURST   T/S       4      No?       14.58 +     14.54
106   L F CAMPBELL     C         4      Push      14.59-+     14.54 — >
107   D RICHARDS       C         4      Push      14.59.      14.54
108   N G LANGLEY      C         4      Yes       14.56 +
110   T HICKS          T/S       1       -      (14.50/15.06) 14.50-*
111   P HAND           T/S       3      Yes       15.54 +
                                                 (14.50)?     14.45
                                                                          %
112   S FORTUNE        T/S       3      Yes       14.55       14.50     C 14.40)
113   J REX            T/S       3      Yes       14.50       14.45
114   C K FLENLEY      C         1       -        14.59       14.59
115   L TUDOR          T/S       3      Yes       14.59 -     14.30       14.45-^^14
116   P J TAYLOR       T/S       3       ?        14.54 -
                                                  14.59       ? 14.45
117   P GOODMAN        T/S       3       -        Not distressed.
118   G OYITCH         T/S       3      Yes       ? 14.50     14.40 —^
                                                    14.55
119   A LEIGH          T/S       4      Yes       14.50 announcement of team.
124   E SPEARITT       C         4      No        14.54
125   A WATSON         T/S       3       ?        14.50 -     14.25 (large crowd)
                                                  14.54
126   L M STEELE       T/S     Stands    ?         ?
127   D P STEELE       T/S     Stands             14.54
128   D PERRY          T/S       4      Yes       14.54 -     14.45.
                                                  15.00
    NO .      NAME                ENTRY           PEN     SURGE               T IM E                        FU L L




    131       S HAMILTON      T/S                 WzdS:                           ] £ - o (



Z' 132        G BARON         T/S                 3       Yes                 14.40-14.50                   Unconscious 7 tir,

6    33
              W DUCKWORTH     T/S                 3       Yes                 14.54-14.59                   Concern for yngst
                                                                                                            at 14.40.
    135       S CAIN          T/S                 3       Yes                 14.54                         14.45
    137       A CAMPBELL      T/S                 3       ?                   14.507-14.52!
    138       R JOLLY         C                   3       Yes                 14.55 +
    141       R McMAHON       C                   4       No                  14.54 +                       14.54
    142       A BOOTH         T/S                 3       Yes                 15.04                         15.01
    143       J FITZPATRICK   T/S                 3       Yes                 15.00 +                       15.00
    144       J SINGLETON                         3       Yes                 15.02 approx                  14.50
    146       C STERRITT      T/S                 3       No                  15.00                         14.50
    147       I SOUTHGATE                         3       Yes                 14.55                         14.50
    148       J GLOVER        T/S             3           Yes
                                              J                               >
    149       R KING
                                              3
    150       H CLARK
                                          A
    151       S CLARK
    145       R SEPHTON       T/S                 3       Yes                 14.55
    156       J L CASE        T/S                 3       Yes                 14.54
    157       A BROWN         T/S                 3       Yes                 14.55
    158       M ROBERTSON     T/S                 3       Yes   L(c’£ )


    160       S GRAY          C                   4       Yes             /lT)54
    161       C GRIFFITHS     C                           Yes             /XlP'T ?
    162       C JONES                             4       Yes             t   ^ r 6 +~          C   ?   c   I i ‘



    163       A OWEN          T/S                 3       Yes
                                                                              1   I
                                                                                                                       ? ?            /r
    164       J KENWORTHY     T/S                 3 .
    i6>r”                                                             } $ '. - & & ' + ■

    166     • HORROCKS        T/S                 3       Yes         /
                                                                                                              p -a L         o f /X ~ X "


    167       N STEWART       T/S                 3       Yes                 15.00                           14.54
    168      J THOMAS         T/S             3           Yes        7                     /-                 /4-iT^.        —
 169         T MOORE          C
         NO.     NAME                                       E NT R Y       PEN     S URGE                TIME                                          FULL

    /^171            P J SMITH                              T/S            3       Yes                   2.45 - 2.50
         172         S   MULLIN                             C              3       Yes
         173         PDUGGAN         l O ' W                               3       Yes             1


t   I    174         G   GAINS                          T/S                3                                                                   /(/ r *         *-
                                                                                               \         f tj p *
         175         A HOLLIN^ALE                                                  Yes        c- I   f 1® ^
                                                                           2

         176     P TWYDALE                                                                     /il~ I      C ‘ <-? <r>*»
                                                                                                                                     %     s   C J V       <   ''-'ut.
                                                                                                                                 t
         177     N SAVAGE                               T/S
         / >%    r ’.jfi C c U i y                                                              fj<■C
         179     N ABBOTT                               C                                      /r°'                                                                 r—e»o 4 - .
                                                                                                                                                       k*J      t

        184          I SEDDON
        185      T PITT                                 B              J          Yes                          Cs *o l J j


                                                                                                     ?         1 9     *9                         1 <t         JT^
        180      R GREAVES                              T/S                3
        181      L LLOYD                                C                  3      Yes                    ir*3                                                         —X
                                                        <S_
        183      T LLOYD                                               3          Yes                14.54 +                                       14.54
                                                                                   ?                      ?
        186      B DOYLE                       £                                                          <•


        189     G HUTT                                  f/s                2
        190     R LATHAM                                C                          ?
                                                                                                     /r*°
        191     A DUNCAN                           T/ r                3          Yes f i -        /v r v * ^                                                  iu^


        193      B SCARRATT                         T/S                J                           I           £>“■ "t~                                              tyiccA



        194      S SWEENEY                                             4         Yes                 1
                                                                                                     •



        196      I FEARNS                           T/S                3         Yes               14.50-* /*'■*>
        197      T COOPER                                                        Yes
        199      S TRACEY                                                        % L T ~ r S )



                                                                                                                             c j i l   '               ^

    \ % r        f                                  t       Ij t       *          X^4

    1                                              lj
                                                               r ~



                  L A N D R O V E R / T A N N O Y

                               LANDROVER                 TANNOY
 NO.    NAME               SEEN HEARD UNDERSTOOD    HEARD UNDERSTOOD
 27     R WRIGHT
 28     A MURRAY
 29      LHINTON
 33     A P JONES
 34     S L JONES
 37     R A KNOWLES
 38     M GOULD
 41    BOARDMAN
 45    HEWSTONE            Y       Y        Y
 49    SYKES               Y       Y        Y
 58    WILSON              Y
 64    LACKEY              Y
 73    SCHOLEY
 87    WATSON
 167   N STEWART
 169   T MOORE
46     WARING                                         Y.      Y ?
47     McKAY                                                  Y
48     CREASER             Y      Y
57     P S SMITH           Y      Y
160    S GRAY
161    C GRIFFITHS
162    C JONES
163    A OWEN
164    J KENWORTHY
148    J GLOVER
141    McMAHON
158    ROBERTSON
159    BALL
171    P J SMITH
174    G GAINS
175    A HOLLINRAKE
176    P TWYDALE
177    N SAVAGE
178    T CULLY
                                 LANDROVER                     TANNOY
    NO.   NAME               SEEN HEARD      UNDERSTOOD   HEARD UNDERSTOOD

    179   N   ABBOTT
    166   D   HORROCKS
    183   T   LLOYD
    184   I   SEDDON
    185   T   PITT
    190   R   LATHAM




\

                         f
    I    y
    it


/


                                   MOUNTED OFFICERS' OBSERVATION


             28.    A J MURRAY               Trying to bring some kind of order.
             39     S BERRY                 Trying to calm crowd.
             41     S BOARDMAN              Officer shouting and people shouting back.
             87     G WATSON                Officer trying to break the crowd,
                                            transferring momentum/catalyst.
             97     I D CRAWFORD
             100    G P BRIDSON             Gap created by officer but lost by poor
                                            manouvering.
             138.   R JOLLY
                                                               T ; f j : i r r * 5 r r y r ? -» r r r . r ' r                                SiWg!¥ TaiW M ..y U




                                 Composite Plan showing Locations of Deceased last seen Alive.


                                                                                                                TUNNEL

                                     5 iTNttru

                             15 (M l




                                                                s&
13.3m




                   g3—      <9         mmZ7




                                 15 14 #     33
                        m        m      r        W



                                                                                                 m
                                                               O E E _ 3 E

                                                      GATE 3                                                             GATE 4

        STANLfY TOOLS                                PANINI
                                                                                                                                  Fur THAI                         TENNANTS L A




              , 2 * 0|j
                                     Composite Plan showing First Locations when believed D eceased


                                                                       TUNNEL

             o                 zs
             t"" ......... *   *•...r—“ ■—1 ■t - ‘
             0           5                      I
                                                                         % to­




        rn
13.3m




                                                     ~yr
                                                                                                      JSK
                                           - M W




                                                                                                            8 # .,# .<

                                                       GATE 3                    GATE 4
                                                                                                                                    J

                 STANJJY TOOLS                        WNINI     C i&                      F iy THAI                      TENANTS LA.'
Appendix I:
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
Hillsborough Ground.
                                                                                                                                                                C*S3><^
                                    (fit .HO.   Ilfil -MO.
 I             1   A.J.Hurray        ?'*        C3M           A J.     1d                                                    C/*    *   R.MeMahon          71    C429     P.J.3tiit.h
                                                                                                                      47
.?         r.?n?   L.ltinton        ?•>         C342          JJ                                                      48     Cj.        A.Booth            72    C430     S.W.Hullin
 3         C.?0T   n.J.Thompson     26          034 3         A.W.uangley                                                                                  73    C432     P.Duggan
                                                                                                                      49     C396-      J .Fi t z patnck
'*                 f>.P .Lowe       27          C345          M.T.Hollinshurot                                                          J.Singleton        74    C433     G.J.Gains
                                                                                                                      50     C397
«■,        C?Q7    A ..1 .Bennett   28          0346          L.F.Campbell                                                              R.E.Sephton        75    C434     A. J.Hollmrake
                                                                                                                      51     C398
6          C29fl   A.P.Jones        20          C347          0.A.Richards                                                                                 76    C435     D.P.Twiddle
                                                                                                                      52     C399       C.A.Sterritt
7          C30?    r>.Jones         30          C3%           P.Hand                                                         C400       I.Southgate        77    C4 36    N.M.Savage
                                                                                                                      53
B          C303    K.Carroll        31          C357          S.Fortune                                               54                R.B.King           78    C439     H.F.Abbott
                                                                                                                             C40I
9          CIO'.   R.Knowles        32          C358          G.R.Rex                                                                                      79    C441     R.J.Greaves
                                                                                                                      55     C402       J.C.Glover
 10        C306    H.C.Could        33          C361          L. Tudor                                                                                     80    C442     L.D.Lloyd
                                                                                                                      56     C403       H.J.Clarke
 n         C307    3.A.Berry        3'.         C362          P.Taylor                                                       C410                          81    C4<3     D.J.Macarthur
                                                                                                                      57                D.R.Lycett
12         C30fl   S.K.Boardman     35          C363          P.V.Goodman                                                    C412       J.L.Case           82    C444     T.W.Lloyd
                                                                                                                      58
u          C109    G.Hurst          36          C364          G . O ’Yitch                                                   C4J3       A.M.Brown          83    C445     G.I.Seddon
                                                                                                                      59
J4         C3n     G.Richardson     37          C365          A.D.Leigh                                               60     C414       M.Robertson        84    C446     T.S. Pitt
15         C3I2    R.G.Hewstone     38          C368          B.Spearntt                                                                                   85    C447     B.J.Doyle
                                                                                               tunn el                61     C 4 15     R.C.Ball
16         C320    D.Lackey         39          C369          A.J.R.Watson                                            62     C416       S.M.D.Grady        86    C455     G. W.flutt
*7         C325    P.J.Carrett      40          C372          D.Perry                                                                   C.B.Griffiths      87    C457     A.Dune an
                                                                                          15                          63     C417
18         C335    A.M.Grier        41          C374          G.M.Baron                                                                 C.Jones            88    C460     B.L.Scarratt
                                                                                                                      64     C418
»9         C336    o.M.Hughes       42          C375          W.M.Duckworth                                                             A.F.Owen           89    C461     S.P.T.Sweeney
                                                                                                                      65     C4t9
20         C337    I.D.Crawford     A3          C376          E.B.Gillatt                                                    C420       J.L.Kenworthy      90    C466     P.Edwards
                                                                                                                      66
2\         Clift   B.J.Andernon     44          C378          S.Cain                                                         C422       M.Horrocks         91    C467     I.J.Fearnn
                                                                                                                      67
22         C339    K.M.Mullee       45          C379          A.Campbell                                              68                H.K.Stewart        92    C468     T.A.Cooper
                                                                                                                             C423
23         r.v10   G. P . Bndson    46          C380          R.Jolly                                                                   J .Thomas          93    C470     S.A.Tracy
                                                                                                                      69     C424
                                                                                                                      70 „   C425       T.M.Moore          94    C518     D.L.Case




                                                                                                         £



       m

                                                                            L9/R^iS


                   m                                                     ®§2



                                           4618 C hO
                                                             3Qfed   a»85
                   5ZS®32


                                                                                                                                                                          11       57® '
                                           GATE 3                                                            GATE 4                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                       GATE 5



      STANLEY TOOLS                  F ttN N                                     C IS .                           FLY THAI                                        TENNANTS LA.



      SCALE
      0                                                          Location of Witnesses on the Leppings Lane Terraces^                                                               — -               ***   l5>
                                                                                                                                                                                 ( p m <u ~*Lc A   .. 13131*10
                                                                                                                                   ■*!-------                   <iS£7
Flan       Coroners     Name
fieTTHo.    Ref.No.                                     LcP ation of Witnesses within the Ground                                                            S h e ffie ld W ednesday
1          C290       R.M.Wright
                      T.K.Hilton
                                                                                                                                                            F ootball C lub
2          C310
J          C352       T.Hicks                                                                                                                               H illsb o ro u g h G round
 k         C359       Dr.C.K.Flenley
5
6
           C370       L.M.Steele                                                                                               "o o 'A.
           C371       D.Steele
7
6
           C373
           C377
                      S.Hamilton
                      E.B.Gillatt
                                                                                                                         *\\\              .
9          C408       S.Clark
10         C409       K. Lawson
11         C421       B.N.Devonside
12         C428       M.A.Dickinson
13         C431       S.N.Hullin
14         C*37       T.E.Cully
15                    B.J.Doyle
16         C*56       R.Latham
17         C4S6       Inspector D.Bullas
16         C469       A.Atkin
                                                                                   Gym nasium
19         CA71       S.Ellis
20         C476       S.R.Curry
21         C480       P. A.J.Eason
22         C461       P.Wells
23         C520       R.Thomas

            \\
                                                                                                                                          Lighting
                                                                                                              Police                      Tower
                                                                                        First A»d
                                                                                        Room

                                                                          NORTH STAND

                                                                                                                                                     CCTV




                                                 m




                                                                                               Players
                                                                                               Tunrwl


                                                                                                                                      Lighting



                                             Lighting
                                             Tower                                 10
                                                                                                                                                                        &
                                                                                   UTH STAND
                                                                                                                       la .m


                                                                               r ^ o •ractors Entranot |
                                                                  O ffic ial   ^    £ 3 r~ ~ ~ )         C ar p»rn

                                                                                   Light
                                                                                   Towe

                                                                                           D        O    N                                                            J> &=*■   Tiea-uj.
                                  150 lect
                                                                                                                                     c -                               ^


  .1                                                               ' I -------
                                                                            i i---
                                                                                y i^i v Yc , ----
                                                                                             S_
                                  -V ^ P ^ -T                     AS.COV4 <.Vr -                       UiPPi(N)Ci.S_ L a NC-g                    / ^           ^   y   o      , ^

                                                                            f ^
                                                                      RC - Mr T ,                                   3 -^o *
                                                                    (3 -1\ rc^/W )

                                        \o -\S                                                                      S '-* /-
          05\                                                                 -                                    2_ ,v+ o /■Cr

           '3>o                                  -                          2 ■3 o                                  3L-*+*
           1>3                              \c                              A' 2 c .                                  2 ■' S' i '
           Sm *                                                                                                     3 t( Sci

~ \     #>U                            u .^r                                              ,                      'L- l>o

-I/ •   * ^7 f                        io.<C                   ,            \-V7                                   2 'l>o

          ^           qi n            \ i .<td                                1 >30                              i^ -ir

                     §7 A                                                     L W
          q -7                                                                                                    l-Zo           .

           HI                               R .                                \ -
                                                                            k'^o
           iriTi                             \0'v'C                          i*vr                                 1 .3 o i^                                            ........
           \                                                                                                             \
            \o '                                 \i. cm                       a ^ r                                ’^ S 3& ZLOS

              \o"b                               \o i©o                           \ "2—'ACrtr-r>                     '7 .^ 0            •
        A\OH-                                    °Ul>o                                                                *, oc - s r *                                        i.-o
        ”     _
           \o i                                  \o ‘"bo                              \ST                              z- z C
              \ o\o                                  \o*cro                          ao                                Q.' L+° •
                                                                                   3 1 '^                             X ‘^ o a^'TO-'*
 -.... ... -.. \ o7
                 ..!.....
                          f t.©acV\ \
                \oS           S'fVMei'' /                ' 30                      1‘ So I i.cr>                           H.. 2.0
                                                                   -........... -........ V........-
                IU                                                                  } Y. l O                                \'

                i 12- ~ ?                         •? • 3>o                           11'T.O            -------
                                                                                                                            ‘X'HO           o -^ > P » D ^ V
                                                                                                                                               rt              .
                        I .................... ......... . "
                 n% 1                                                                              '

                 \\4-                                                                 \''ST                                      I'^o
                   \vT                                                                 \'3 o                                     2'20 .
                   \\\o                               ^-\S                                                                       2-2.5"
                        nV     V
                   \ '1  rVnj'w^i                                                     -V^ca-                                      V»2o            .


                     n®\      (W   m?)
                                                                                      (^J^SVf ^ 1
                     1


;

                             L    szjvt^                                            C c     K'HtsNTCX ^

                                  ?.c ^          . ^        ^                \




                                                         /TlMiislC,S              cerv\ <-^1

        E C S 1.
                                                       f>V«LR\Vfc 41             IflRRwe-
        v\1\tmcSs m                                    ^»Wfc^p'ife.k_o           LfcPf i*/c,<, Un/fe / ^Ro^.Q---        '’’"•fc&.ftft'ce?
          \XM- ,

           •'u                   W-'So                      i >\T                       Z ‘»60     <M>pvtrX
                                                                                             -       f-f
                                                            i-4 S'
' _ Jj4StoJ.
          11:27
 ..                              °\ '1>0                    \Mo                             \-3 o .

—
                                  s/J
                                  6

                                  o




            \Vi*                                            Vt-lc                           1 O ,v~* .

            a S'                                              1 p n-,                                                      i-^ r •

                                  io» 2rO                       t•2>©                     iprvi — 2-'t^
             '38                  'O-.yj                        ^*3e

            l'-rto           .    \0 •2 o                       VL-Xo                         *v^C

             * H-y                   CKm                        \ prt.                                                   t •!£>

             14*                    \\ aim                       ~X- f>ro

                                    K),b-o        ....          '1 -3,0                     >2*af - ^ »2©

-.. W i ‘o                          ^■t+'T

          •:.                       9<a.C                        a ’obT                           •<5•£tT

             lS7.... .              iv -2)0                      < <3o                      a ■15" - Z'-a.**

              /5Y                   I'3>o                        H-Zo                        a - ^ D - 5 'To
                                                                  2.
            i n          .           )| -cro                     tif. iO                         2 -3 o

             /fco                     9 ‘30                       1't+o                          2 'L+O

              ibl                      il<cr0                     3 •H f stfePKti-v
                                                                           II' ' - .— .....          .... ... ■■■"...
              ib\                        H'3 o                    a -< r                          3 -as"

               l W                       /o-3o                      f*3 o.                        2 '?.^

    .       . My/m.                        %o~o                     io-5 o                         a«4 o

               lb?                         10 .firo                 1‘lQ-                          2 ‘Ao

-------- Z k                               /-0 -6D                  4 --Hr                            a.ii




                                                                                                  »       VJ   /
                                                                          {M   l   f\l CfS>          (xc r n i        -•^
UilTA/frSS            M5                                                                                                           L&PPliMCS L.AKJC-                   f&Rfu^ccS

        n -L -                                      \ l <oe>                              •2 ^ ' IS -                                   2 .'2 .iT

         m                                          \o .io                                    I ,OD                                      i'S ir

         \1 \                                           m s -                                 ) -lo                                     3 'is h -2 x >

         nr                                             11-3 d                                5 -^ 0

          n 6                                           °t- 07)                               A -<5-G                                    Q 'io

         n l                                            I I -CTD                              2 - <T£>                                   P 'lS O

         n 'i>                                          / i ,<td                                  / 'e r a                               *a-l6

         n °i                                                                                 /2'S^>                                      /'/i'
                                     /
                                                        io -lb                                (    -DO                                   2 .'Z ^

    %     n                                             / 0 *cf0                              / -lo                                      Q ’ !>& (a^nDv&v\

         f t ~u                                          ii.cn>                            z -i'f'
                                                                                          /ZL      f Shx,^*>
         l%2>                            V/   1 .L .J    y >&>                                                                          Q . 'l S ' I z ^ ' d
                                                                                                                                                1
         I'H ^ j ISS                                     I0,<s&                           12-10                                          2 .2 o /^ .V iT       .
               i
         \XL                                             U.C>6                                    ) .? n                                    2- ' Z o

         m                                              ^ - \ o Qw%                               \ .t>o                                   2 •i+ o <=MpprtTV
                                                                                                                                                     rr
         \°lo                                            lo.^o                                2 -'3 , o                                          M-O v ^ r

         \°U          f T r * ; n)                                                                to, 1,0                                    V'l>o

                                                          t o . 1,0                               2 -<ST>                                    2, - M" cT.

!         \ CVM'         ( VvaiAl                        vae                                  ix - 5 ) ''
1 •               ^                                                                               1a ‘ o o
                                                        '.O. t'UaLl>•'—                                                                      2. - Z :T

         ^ lo          — -f^VrQ\n}\                                                                 -f \ . Mr-) 1
                              .— ;■
          H       7                                                                                  \-So                                      i-^c>

                                                                                                     \ \ -CTb                                 ^ 4 ^

           m                [ T'VtUA/C \                                                            12. ,v<"                                   1 '( 5
                           -v”     ...../ ■
      ^ i*l1 ^
             3 ^                                                                       V-<4jr                l&u-is tV                      ' • 0 r>-> -~VAJte^s*V \o '«•>- •

             IK                                         • lX-\o                ^taVffcS              VnJ        S+WrP'tTlfci^O )                  1' l>o-

                                                                                                                                               £ r 1 + s /z -fO .
                                                                                                                                                       /
                                                          n-Io                                        2. ' V o                                 P '^ O - ”
                                                          to • 3o                                    a. /r                                           20
               k x
                                                          / 6 - -20                                  a . so
                h  3
                Li tf                                      /;. <ro                                   2 .«m“                                   £ - scr r            *   c )
                                                          /J. tfS*                                   A -30                                    ,2 . ^       -Aypi&X
                At S'
                  5T9                                     /o< lo                                    /Q- iT ^ fX '^ o                          3.-+C}
                  k *+                                                                                14-     'CTO   f i^aiilkxi
                                 T I C K E T                C H E C K S


    1988

    39.     S BERRY'               Claims saw people turned back in Leppings
                                   Lane at Penistone Road roundabout but was
                                   not going that way himself.
                                   (? is he r i g h t ) .
    46.     INSP. WARING           Claims no filtering system in 1988.
    48.     CH.INSP.CREASER        Claims no filtering system in 1988.
    189.    G HUTT                 Claims ticket check outside sswssptema gate.
    114.    C K FLENLEY            Ticket check at Catchbar Lane.
           T u U >7<0
    13%     A - ~ 'Tc* ' i ' Y     'Ti'okt.i?        cJuc.-kc.*£                         |          4      ?

            }tZ   -CT- 7-//o       <£.*9 T C S S < & 9 ' ~ *                                            /*•*'&’
                                                                                                              >   <*/*»•*
                            f


, 64        D LACKEY               Expected ticket checks, previously done in 1988.
    131.    S HAMILTON             Was checked for alcohol not tickets, Penistone Rd.
    86.     R COBB (PC)            Checking for alcohol but not for tickets.
    109.    SUPT. MARSHALL         No filtering for tickets.
    58      E J WILSON             Moving ticketless fans on.
    183     T W LLOYD               In mini-van, had ticket checked.
    138     R JOLLY                Claimed delays due to excessive minivan checking.
    199     S TRACEY               Ticketless fans identified and moved on near bridge.

    111                                  /J< 0                               ^         <2, &

                                                                                               ft
2 l o                                     i,                   h                 **-



           1&.*.    0



p    r                              ‘‘T ' t c M d       <          2   K j
                                 j            y




                       ESTIMATEfi-TICKETLESS FANS


45     R Hewstone                             Approached for tickets
48     Creaser                                200
63     Turnstile Operator                      20
66     Turnstile Operator                     150
67     Turnstile Operator                      30
68     Turnstile Operator                     150/200 approx 30/50 offering money
69     Turnstile Operator                      70      approx 20     offering money
72      L Proctor                             100 *
77     M France                                20
85     R Beads.ley                             10/15
86     R Cobb                                   ?
94     PC Butler                               12
96     PC Washington
142    A Booth                                    Some
160    S Gray                                     20/30.
 -bo -       — Ciex.'H 5>                         i c r o y n - O O esJr . A k J R j


TICKETLESS/KOF WITNESSES

29      L   Hinton                                Ticketless                       P4
                                                  ll                               H
31      D   Lowe         ^    , .
                                                  ll                               ll
32      A   Bennett
                                                  ll                               ll
38      M   Gould
64      D   Lackey                                                                 3
159     R   Ball                                                                  ¥
39      S   Berry
179     N   F Abbott                              No ticket purchased.
 187    L   D Lloyd                               5 people, one ticketless, all
                                                  searching for ticket.
189     S Tracy                                   Ticketless entry.
                               T U N N E L

NO.   NAME           ENTRY           COMMENTS                                            DAY/PAGE


30    R THOMPSON     Gate C          Tunnel clear until end, then blocked.
                                     People shouting "get back" at rear of
                                     terrace/tunnel.                                      8/9
                     Gate C          Tunnel obstructed at end, crowd
                                     stationary, pressure from back, players
                                     on pitch, query game kicked-off?                     7/96
34     S JONES       Gate C          Query late entry, sufficient room for
                                     people to wee in tunnel, exit clear.
                                     Compare perception of A P JONES (33)                 7/18
36     K CARROLL     Gate C          Tunnel packed with people but able       to
                                     walk, slight two-way traffic.                        9/23
Is     M C GOULD     Gate C          Clear but many people walking, exit
                           f         blocked, not concerned.                              9/89
41     S BOARDMAN    Gate C          Tunnel exit blocked (15.52 +)
42     G HURST       Gate C           Jam-packed, slow-moving,                            11/4
                                      compare Mr McMahon.
141    R MCMAHON     Gate C?         Tunnel     full, shuffling gait, exit blocked.      39/
199    S TRACEY      Gate ffc-       Tunnel     full, shuffling, exit blocked?            49/
44    G RICHARDSON   Gate C          Tunnel     full, bit of pushing.                     11/
      R G HEWSTONE   T/S(late)       Tunnel exit blocked, stood at back,                  11/
                                     group of 5 or 6, pushed through, saw
                                     person come out with child, nobody
                                     appeared to take any notice, witness                        a «q   *’
                                     exited from tunnel.        ./ / •             - r                    ^
49    G SYKES                        Entered tunnel after match over, people              13/
                                     at back appeared to be unaware and
                                     watching, could see people climbing out.
59    K RAWLINSON    Gate C          Tunnel steady stream, exit like brick wall, 17/2-6
                                     went back out and entered North stand.
      T CULLY                         Entered tunnel, exit crowded, decided to            45/
jji     -t- t
      fi-            M . c                                         Y

64    D LACKEY       Gate C          Tunnel     clear, players seen on pitch.             18/
175   G HOLLINRAKE                   Tunnel     clear, exit blocked, pushing hard.        44/
183   T W LLOYD      Gate C          Halfway down tunnel increase in pressure,            45/
                                     walked more quickly, crowd coming behind,
                                     like walking into brick wall at exit,
                                     pushed forward by pressure.
       ,                            T U N N E L
NO.   NAME               ENTRY    COMMENTS                               DAY/PAGE


184    I SEDDON          Gate B   Tunnel clear, exit blocked, match in   46/
                                   progress.
185    T S PITT          Gate B   Tunnel blocked at exit 5 yds back.     46/

      ft     T k o m M            -r~*°rfUc

                                              Zs>u,tJ




%
                           1
               '        '1 '°                                                                                                       ^         ^        a.,                                          /*v         -^ -5
                               ^ 3       .                        ^                       ....... —                           Ct^fZj                          oJi     £<*'ft<os       *»   oj       -jdcygQ^

                                                                                                                       ...
                                                                                                                              3 /       *»*       CrCC*>M#          C-»                                             ,

                       - ?>                                                                          <^<0               _.. . ^                                                  ,-        /cViZ          c 6 t & ? . -             ..
                        1.                       1/                                                                          "'"—»                 U&&-b                  -(<-J»£*,(, y
                        - £ ■ — ^ C^ " 7                                  CflWjO^C                   <5^ C               __     ) <U^^S             J & a nn >/-       _ ^ a *j 7 ^ * ^ C                       J               _

                       «i^ * f t . C                                  .                                                                           E~&.L£                      4 ^ jja cJ ^ e- ^ ' ____


                       - 1 ^ --              ^        —           & ? s n K       _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ .f/u-_...                                     _._ _ _ _ _ _ _
                                                                  /I ^90? tt/r*t*.~\          <-                                                               /**-**<*•-*TS*.U                      ■ ( £*xzii.J.




                    4   -Z           C --         H       t u o t                         G *£ -             <L         J'o*-v p 6 4 j< & ±                        1600.                                  jL . A        jk * lx > li



                       <^V ^                                                              ^                 C           T u M        - L J Z ^              <*




                                     —           ■— --                                                                  lf«^/                                                              f    a    y                      4»o^<

. . . . . . . . . . . /^/^-* ^ £ 0                                         i(r-^s~)                          C.           'fo^tA**-                                              /£-*-* e £          o «■-««>           cj * ~ 6

                                                                                           ........                                 d&j&                   _<>«>£ pi,                  jc<e^-             /Jt J


                                         ^                    t A C , * c & r                                     £           " 7 ^ W               ^4^.               ^                            a,   / * i ' M




                       rtf'              ft-'         (-M/lJ-ifecA                                     ^                        )   i^-*jaV         C,£ z j l -i    /z^rt i         f & c . M            J0&-+

L ^ ^ i u l            / H - X - £■                                                                                      ^                                                            __        7 7 e * u J J r * <J^

                                             /..-cV-                                               C ........ .                     «-r *j < s^ i _«                                       U g-z A J ^                                  ___
                       —                                                                                                                                              At            U ~ a ^ ^ ><fi/'c4< J ° * ^ < ,/°<0q                      ^tS^/

     - _ _ _ _ -...--  ______________                                                                                                                    3                                         _•_•_ _ _
              /*V~. /- ( ^ - . S c j o U *
                   -                                                                           4     ._                , . - T L w _ c 6L ^ . _                                                             C

________I? .T~.....A~^.                                                                        ^                                                   j&isojiJot
■--■...... —       ~ i ^ \               ^       t—           .       -   ^    T      i    S               (-l&L^                    friV     ^     px-*yi2^ ?            /                a   *Jt/ue£          4rv * p * £ ^ t    Sy   £ ^ & J L

                   _ __ _                                                                                                    t*pc y n ^ i - & —

                            ^                    'f*._                                         I £o&-             C,                                  y^^?’            J > 6 y ^ £ w > . (/^ c                          _

                           J 2 i ^ ~             —        ^"rc t p ^ ,                                                                   ^ ...   _                                    _                         __
- _______/                                                Z X ^ O ^ ^ i ..                     /^A                              j / ^    4  ________                          ________
          - .- y6 V                                       ^           uiiO^L                       u               "                _v
            k^V    CT' ’^ f l ^ o h ~ t j
                           I                     % p j ^                                                                £-^                 fl'-P0**                \ (al              & * r t & u f ^J*> -jz4*vl

 ... .. _. O y . . .. . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _                                                                                                                               /                                           _
                                                                          ^            /^.iT'                          & * & ,           / J 4           f L ' k

      —        -        /^ 5                 __           /-/-**&-            _ _ _ _ /^-'c*t                            ^QCt^JL                     _______                     ___________
                                                          6 -1 /




                                        f< u .n l A,\         j&f'Z*-'              is*. 1 —
                       £
                      r"
                                                                                                              *            «    ( /& ). -------- --------
                     -i c>           /A'-*■—.. L
                                               *rfc>tM_^— C . . --
                                                                L — - ----------
                 '
           ^—
                                    r/                               Sc-i? 6b       4^ J                    f td L ^ J .        (& )                . __ __ ____
                     7 6
     --- -

    ...—
                                                                                                nh~          J /cc~ £      /                  (^C-V ._-------
                     <3 /           f /*rr. ...,.l                              /£, J
                                                                                                    A                                         r<r^>
                                                                                An 2            t

                                                      J                                                      '                                    __ ______ -
                                                                                                        t
                                                                                               iu -W                       w? °4jv»A 4'’
                     <?>            )          /v         - . L .X
                      #/
#
      -1
                                                                                                                  X. n . -r t/t/u * --
                     GO             A "T""- /-)*7 sLtsy*-™                       /^f V
      —              CO
                                                                                                    rU"          tr. /f - /9«diu9*<5i J ^ lA L ------ —
                     q°i


                                                                                                                  /0<2*K c9- /Z,y>tsi£t         f '■+)
          1tr&                      t9 * f t /? f                               A         £     T/i
      --- 11/


                     \o (           A-- A         fh > < £ci                    /i. ^          £. c_              A t^ a       H<r>'>         _Ci’' 0
           ~--
           ---
                                                                                 £ , ■f        I//-               /h ~ / c ^ c c c              o -n
                     lo \           A ^ j h .r - /b /(^ /c * S
                                                                                                                    f\                 —
                     j 4 b
                                    / (>-i           rx.ct**o



                      /o4

                      .? ? _        M - i l i f c i —                    A - J-                         ___ ^ 5 ' - ^
                      j©i>

                     no         -   BteJtec-stk*.


                      IL L
                                                                                /^» 3                                J * * d<    -rA*t
                      IQ .                                                                                               'U        L
                      ti    *                     g ^ / V c ^ _________
                                                                                                                                           £/***-* *\?* J
                      t L H


                                    Ji&U*                     4 ***?.           ----
                                                                                                                                                      C* *)
                      W L .
                                    j                                       ^        **
                                                                                                                                   &

                       P3           (r)'fo' OuC.k'tJttlt fo*1
                      a r                     r   u   i   *
                                    h
                     +./ 3 V        £         C : i » u                    •"
                /             r

                      u


         /f jy ?    y^'          J<ZsC<                                                                                                                C l
                                                                                                         ---------- 7—-------¥---------
         T / jh. Ta. cf^                                                                                       ^0*4 £//(/**£%
            m      /^- Z7<=>—£&■                                                                                               C Co?£<
          1 /vj                                                                                                                                    j\
                 l-r- w/
                 1
                                                                                                                    f»                 1.
          I/*?                                                                                                            J*                >-*-.-- ---9C-V
                                                                                                                                                          7
                        _ C    ^'
         k /<f#                                                                                                  /<s^> (^J^CSwO,
            /V4? A . A . X t- tc                                                                              fu ^         //at4-,'                2.*}
         k I? *  IH -~>~’ <2-Czt 4<                                                            -----          <5-           >-r------ sr-. ,,          fc*S
               /r /                £       C ^<3uk                                                           J              C.^7/4-                 2   r
 •                                                                                                          flf& n J)t_ £ £ 0 **                   > 0
                              1 $"         Ax^O*^*1        ^Lx>^»
            1i   n
                                   h.      /L s j^ . -/y~o<-j                                              CT~c>*i0 &—
                                                                                                                     *■> CkJ^ut
                                   A . A<2x4U                                                                       /£.        /£e**<*K                >v

          U M —                                                                                                            AcL/tftaz*               6-1
                                                    //
            (L±.                    /?•.                        7                                                          <-As*iSZ.                   /v
           \l^                    “T -            «~^<42U J                                                                                            /)
                                                                    ...........-.......... -
           1 IC,1~                /»L      ^                                                                        **              «»             0
           I ilg                  /? A. /9xO «^dC                                                             /Q 2 C&.          /faD*Sx Jj          <K
           r      7                                                                                              M                     U
•              tc%                                                                             /£*-£/•   f1         <^=<3      CL^uf r<f.
          J /.t *             7“. <>i          flo S V                                                      / * /fctM'&Otf                       fc-4^
                              s.           /U    SLA                                                        t^tHC         / e~A*Ctr^             V/
               p l*
           |/5 /                                                                                                                                 sfV
                                                                                                                                                 ** /
                                                                                                          /O 1
                                   /9 - A f k i * *                                                      / ’ 0 c. /ZkumCA^
          |2/ &           I                                                                                W' cA4
                                                                                                                          A<./ftfSL‘r£ .          2 jC




---------- ------------ - — ---—------------------------------ ------ ---------------- --------- .
                                                                                                   ---- --- --
  ^/ef: Hillsbor002

. Alphabetical list of nam^s'of deceased as^trzOth Mav,19£9
  as a result of the di^tf^ter at Hillsbcyptfugh FootbaJJ^Ground
  Sheffield on 15thA£ril 1989.        s'            s'

   * = Names pert yet confirmed^^s correct     informant._____

   Name                               Ref \

  ANDERSON     John Alfred              76
  ASHCROFT     Colin Mark                9
  ASPINALL     James Gary                5

  BALL         Kester Roger Marcus      74
  BARON        Gerard Bernard Patrick   69
  BELL         Simon                    52
  BENNETT      Barry Sidney             88
  BENSON       David John               80
  BIRTLE       David William            47
  BRADY        Paul David               84
  BROOKES      Andrew Mark              50
  BROWN        Carl                     46
  BROWN        David Steven             10
  BURKE        Henry Thomas             31
  BURKETT      Peter Andrew             23

  CARLILE      Paul William             73
  CHAPMAN      Raymond Thomas           67
  CHURCH       Gary Christopher         14
  CLARK        Joseph                   25
  CLARK        Paul                     58
  COLLINS      Gary                     48
  COPOC        Stephen Paul             71
  COX          Tracey Elizabeth         19

  DELANEY      James Philip             33
  DEVONSIDE    Christopher Barry        17

  EDWARDS      Christopher              38

  FITZSIMMONS Vincent Michael           21
  FOX         Thomas Steven             66

  GILHOOLEY    Jon Paul                 83
  GLOVER       Barry                    62
  GLOVER       Ian Thomas               37
  GODWIN       Derrick George           75

  HAMILTON    Roy Harry                 12
  HAMMOND     Philip                    93
  HANKIN      Eric                      29
  HARRISON    Gary                       3
  HARRISON    Peter Andrew              11
  HARRISON    Stephen Francis           91
  HAWLEY      David                      8
  HENNESSY    James Robert               7
  HEWITSON    Paul Anthony              42
  HEWITT      Carl Darren               44
  HEWITT      Nicholas Michael          55
              Sarah Louise          64
              Victoria Jane         89
     N        Gordon Rodney         59
  IbRROCKS    Arthur                92
 HOWARD       Thomas                81
 HOWARD       Thomas Anthony            1
 HUGHES       Eric George           41
 JONES       Christine Anne         35
 JONES       Gary Philip            86
 JONES       Richard                63
 JOHNSTON    Alan                   30
 JOYNES      Nicholas Peter         45
 KELLY       Anthony Peter         54
 KELLY       Michael David         72
 LEWIS       Carl David            85
 MATHER    David William           56
 MATTHEWS Brian Christopher        22
 McALLISTER Francis Joseph         26
 McBRIEN   John                    68
 McCABE    Marian Hazel            20
 Mc Carthy Joseph Daniel           27
 McDONNELL Peter
 McGLONE   Alan                    70
 McGrath   Keith                   32
 MURRAY    Paul Brian              16
 NICOL       Lee                   95
O'NEILL     Stephen Francis        87
OWENS       Jonathon               34

PEMBERTON William Roy              65
RIMMER     Carl William            15
RIMMER     David George             4
ROBERTS    Graham John             79
ROBINSON   Steven Joseph           28
ROGERS     Henry Charles           24
SEFTON   Colin Andrew Hugh William 61
SHAH     Inger                      2
SMITH    Paula Ann                 18
SPEARRITT Adam Edward              94
STEELE   Philip John               82
THOMAS     David Leonard          90
THOMPSON   Patrick John           49
THOMPSON   Peter Reuben           78
THOMPSON   Stuart Paul William    53
TOOTLE     Peter Francis          39
TRAYNOR    Christopher James      60
TRAYNOR    Martin Kevin           57
TYRRELL    Kevin                  36
WAFER      Colin                  13
WHELAN     Ian David               6
WILD       Martin Kenneth         77
WILLIAMS   Kevin Daniel           51
WRIGHT     Graham John            43
THOMAS ANTHONY HOWARD

INGER SHAH

GARY HARRISON

DAVID GEORGE RIMMER

COLIN MARK ASHCROFT

IAN DAVID WHELAN

JAMES ROBERT HENNESSEY

DAVID HAWLEY

JAMES GARY ASPINALL

DAVID STEVEN BROWN

PETER ANDREW HARRISON

ROY HARRY HAMILTON

COLIN WAFER

GARY CHRISTOPHER CHURCH

CARL WILLIAM RIMMER

PAUL BRIAN MURRAY

CHRISTOPHER BARRY DEVONSIDE

PAULA ANNA SMITH

TRACEY ELIZABETH COX

MARIAN HAZEL McCABE

VINCENT MICHAEL FITZSIMMONS

BRIAN CHRISTOPHER MATTHEWS

PETER ANDREW BURKETT

HENRY CHARLES ROGERS

JOSEPH CLARK

FRANCIS JOSEPH McALLISTER

JOSEPH DANIEL    MCCARTHY

 STEVEN JOSEPH ROBINSON

 ERIC HANKIN

 ALAN JOHNSTON

HENRY THOMAS BURKE
        KEITH McGRATH

        JAMES PHILIP DELANEI

        JONATHON OWENS

>5.    CHRISTINE ANNE JONES

36.    KEVIN TYRRELL

37.    IAN THOMAS GLOVER

38.    CHRISTOPHER EDWARDS

39.    PETER FRANCIS TOOTLE

40.    PETER McDONNELL

41.    ERIC GEORGE HUGHES

42.    PAUL ANTHONY HEWITSON

43.    GRAHAM JOHN WRIGHT

44.   ' CARL DARREN HEWITT

45.    NICHOLAS PETER JOYNES

46.    CARL BROWN

47.    DAVID WILLIAM BIRTLE

48.    GARY COLLINS

49.    PATRICK JOHN THOMPSON

50.    ANDREW MARK BROOKES

51.    KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS

52.    SIMON BELL

53.    STUART PAUL WILLIAM THOMPSON

54.    ANTHONY PETER KELLY

55.    NICHOLAS MICHAEL

56.    DAVID WILLIAM MATHER

57.    MARTIN KEVIN TRAYNOR

58.    PAUL CLARK

59.    GORDON RODNEY HORN

60.    CHRISTOPHER JAMES TRAYNOR

61.    COLIN ANDREW HUGH WILLIAM SEFTON

62.    BARRY GLOVER

63.    RICHARD JONES
SARAH LOUISE HICKS

WILLIAM ROY PEMBERTON

THOMAS STEVEN FOX

RAYMOND THOMAS CHAPMAN

JOHN McBRIEN

GERARD BERNARD PATRICK BARON

ALAN McGLONE

STEPHEN PAUL COPOC

MICHAEL DAVID KELLY

PAUL WILLIAM CARLILE

KESTER ROGER MARCUS BALL

DERRICK GEORGE GODWIN

JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON

MARTIN KENNETH WILD

PETER REUBEN THOMPSON

GRAHAM JOHN ROBERTS

DAVID JOHN BENSON

THOMAS HOWARD

PHILIP JOHN STEELE

JON PAUL GILHOOLEY

PAUL DAVID BRADY ..

CARL DAVID LEWIS

GARY PHILIP JONES

STEPHEN FRANCIS Ol-NEILL

BARRY SIDNEY BENNETT

VICTORIA JANE HICKS

DAVID LEONARD THOMAS

STEPHEN FRANCIS HARRISON

ARTHUR HORROCKS

PHILIP HAMMOND

ADAM EDWARD SPEARRITT

LEE NICOL
C <*


                                S U P P O R T E R S




       173   P DUGGAN               1988(9?) ticket checked x 3.
       172   S MULLIN               Out of Pen 3 into Pen 1 - first out?.
       169   T MOORE                Friend of Hewitson?   Handed ticket to someone else.
       163   A OWEN                 Pushing in turnstile area.
       149   R B KING               Sudden influx of fans at turnstiles.
       106   L F CAMPBELL           Got carried along, feet not touching ground outside
             CARL LEWIS             Stand ticket.
       182   d   McAr t h u r       Stand ticket.
       37    R KNOWLES
       157   A M BROWN              Surge not relaxed.
       118   G OYITCH               Surge not relaxed.
       133   W DUCKWORTH           Crowd didn't move back, exit via front.
       185   T PITT                Saw spectator leave terrace with boy.
       186   B DOYLE               Saw spectator leave.
       180   R GREAVES             People pushed back into pen (from pitch side).
       190   R LATHAM              People dropped back into pen (slipped).
                                   Open gate at Watford.
       193   B SKARRATT            Police officer entry into terrace.
, 2<k                                                   r<» s        _-------- /5lz ^ /Chiau^.
                                               nb'J          3                  J        */


                 /^ - /^ .                     /< r?.


                                               if>           J L®«* ~ ^vL>^......
                                                                              v^C**»
                                                                                                                                      1
        —-.j    <£>V< r t *                    in               o       «*        ^
                       —fcAaxd**                     i }*-             « / /c*-4'                     /,               .    _     -
                                                                          »/
                fc. J "*              %AJa-r     /* ° -      * fc*A c*6> *41*                              </<*£*■
                                                             Al *          '    p                "           %        J^^JL
 , #           r C-          A   fa             / * l \       Jjty*^ Jct£r - o * y ~          o**-£.__—       -----------------------
                                                              J
                      J~    i&s&LsC.       /S 6
                                ^7       r
               /v .        <C <Z-CKfi>A~    A ?*                 i
                                                             /                      '' ' _
               *£ ^          C&O)
           ,*


         n i                                              /fa.                                 cJzJL          x2_

         i? o                                                 (A h T f
                                                                           ' //f t         a..             ----<BJ&&vt-- r f fe z <&y*.
                   ... n ■ 1•
                                                         & C *./ *>// /? .? ---> <U k /% /                                   / fz ^ c /   Q -u
      (^ 2 -                                         -    ~      TT
                                                                                                                                                  _




         ? 4 rt.        /       A . //fyr^ie. *■-----    rzi&tJ. o ^ li< ^ . ks>. ?   fac/&.£                           - >4^              if- Avr*-^ ^
                                                     -/ / .......
      M i .  A. - O ^ '^ t           r /DttsoLeJ^ ' ^ 77fl                                       /t/             cx6<ju4 J    9    *     /     <f / r ^.
       ~ “ " •      ................. / .......... ^ -1         '                                                     s\ y
                                                                           ^ /L U         rU                          £ t it / & **? ? . „ /* *
                                                                               ■^ J                C/                               /

                                                                                                       •
    / 4*9.           & A          LCt'*,
                            ........... J   ... .............. . ” .....
    jl 7            P - b.         O ^ c M lfo #                                     ts J s^-urr       <£a j Z&_ „     /sp=t L iJt-e*
                                                                                                                             /
M    /d>4             d*-*vtyO£*-&< •                                 CJLe.£& oJ                                      ------------ E— „----
™                          7                                                                                                   o ix&icA
\ .. ....                                                                                      x J s ^ J& U s^>l -A>cjk <%LXU*S W-z.Aif C,
                                                    (j-Z'L- CL&shc^
                                                                                      J               <f                /
    }oi.                                                 G ^ ,A -

                                <^SW/4
                                                                 Ik




                                                                           k c^ lo Q

■h ' H ->~                   h & z J h f/s je *             t*               <■<

     J               fl> f t " K/^ss>*\l£j r              A      /t5 s fL.-.oC
                                                     ^-T/r^O                     i y * o               -       (                                               J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     h
                                                                                     -d                                                j/zj20sr?.


                                                                                                                                                                             ^ o t t - t ^ S T y c t z .



                    /       ^                    -            /& - A i< S 2 ,                                       C 2 Z £ ^                    a c * ,A j> : c&                            ^                     ---- c ^ t c ^ s j                /                    ---



                    ^                                                £ /'/U &               JL                      fO tr^ C L                   th        ,l ,               -                      - /


                                                                                                                      A          ,/!
                                         ..................................................................... .......... 'JO&Cri
                   1 "i C            .                    0    j~ ~       /£ }-*» 'yC jT               ?
                  ........................................ ............                              ......................../



               /^ r~ *                                r:> f.                                                                       ^        ^                  y^? ^ < 4                 . .-              7 X r       < ^ -r J& yoA                 r               A


              /^ C r                                 /-                                                    jfoCisQ 4 f t t *                                                                                                8 / { « : _ ^                       £7    ^   ..
                        C                                                                                  /                           vj
         / "7^/.                         /       . »0         / / ^ . (7                     f l ZtC jioJ.              •«.                                        cJ                                     ui                    * 4 / cm6&\

  -            O                         /2~. J -                                           £ L U ~ i.                                 ^       /° O                                                                         s*-*?        <2-£‘Zj&/
                                                                                                                                            - ............ .                                                            /                                y
       / ’) ? .                      ^ I/-                                                                                         ^       w                       ,iv d t           ^            7 7 j                          -       * -:± * >               .......

-----/~?-3
      ---------T- d=
                1-hr---
                      0>/7     _=-^p --
                        -------a          J ^ tX i -
                                     & .c>^r^^s.zj --?v                                                                                           /3r'C-4 ,sjS e£ d ^ . cu£& & i                                   0   * V           »tJL
                                                                                                                                                                            f * / ~t2 f <*U'j                   y         /
       /)r-                                  / / o ^ ^                                -                                          o^a..j?               s ? /l                     /* 0                         £ <2-*>>, 4 s g < ^ j l

       n t
       I (^    _ _ _ _ / J I'c & h                                                              j~ i ^ a ( f-e_^                 u>                l /\                                                         ^ ^ ^           J^iZsyA       £&CSX-          --------------

       f & L                    A - - O c J e *n                                                                                                     T/.i           -                            j O U - J S q         ai       &SLr,      ^ < h z / a? ‘/


       ! L p                    c~                                                                                                                 ^>1                 / { ^


      I tf-                                   >be*&<                              faj»pC                                                        /?<£•              C&,


       i$b.                          £*6>&tfa*o,                                                c&                                          ~ r /i             o        ^     k.

                                                                                                                                                  <3- e-3^ — ’^ ■ 1                 'ZJ£~^>


   iPj.                  A~ A                                                                                                                                                      'J    ■o                        ^


                            Q~~-                                                                                                            ?    '/c~>   m .>'j                              A                              7        ^       /g ^ g <1 J

  jtfl-                     f h              h       e-ff&JjZ*,                    £ l * & y JL&s
                                                                                                ^                                               /!&/                C£*f      CAp^;                                £■*)          ifr <r                  £.
   } lj                 /£.              /Q^c& t                                  ~7~/-i                                         sinL £&*.                                   J

   Ilk                  A         'T f H r i* *

  //y                   #             P U *b>                                                                                              & L
                        T
                        »
                                                                                                                          )UsP4&




  !M                                                                                                                          0   /                                                 U'/LJ

   i   °)                O - A ’A i ^ h i l                                            ■d^gg *es                                                                    ^             /fa
                                                                                            a                           .                                          t    j                y

   1^(o                     L-/z             d & h y j oL'/i                            f $ L A f s £\             < l 6 z j u~)            ./S^5?^dz2<V-                                                      _c2^
                                                                                                                                           ,* * O
   j J l      I                 ■>
                            _jJ 0il\^ QvCsi 6~                                        A               d -v/i&jy#                        j~J               ? CJ                               o£ Cj£+
)^( .      A ' h.                                       £.4zj&(j!f4          ^ C,'*
                                                              <i_ y
^         ^ ''T'-    $*<dtesi£iLi           A & il*./           77j   Oze^

S O       /z_jy, U   /Dsz<Jjrv~,                    f 0~~L& /*& /<*{ C*te6, x?Z£-7X**<J
                                    /           <J ^......                 ✓
                                        t "i'fcnZ /V^o/ o / £

      ^        ^     £ f elrs>
                                                                s                r c/     '
                                1W.




                     GATE   3


129   M R COOPER
130   A M TAYLOR
144   J SINGLETON
145   R E SEPHTON
156   J L CASE
172   S W MULLIN
192   D BULLAS
211   J 0 PACKER
215   D L CASE
217   R GREEN
2|4   ■B-R-GOOtmLL
D R LYCETT
M A DICKINSON
S ELLIS
H W SWIFT
L SOSNOWSKI (AKRED)
P HOOSON
E SPEARITT
D ILLINGWORTH
/

                                   O U T S   I D E

        MOUNTED OFFICERS:            55       S FRY
                                     56       F GRUNHILL
                                     57       PS SMITH
                                     58       E J WILSON
                                     60       P HAND-DAVIS
                                     61       S M THOMAS
                                     62       P KERRY
                                     87       C G WATSON

        TURNSTILE OPERATORS:        63        A   RHODES        C
                                    65        N   LUDLUM        A
                                    66        J   R SMITH       B
    «
                                    67        N   LAYCOCK       No.5
                        t
                                    68        S   COPELAND      F
                                    69        C   MILTON        G

        POLICE OFFICERS OUTSIDE:    72        L   PROCTOR       Perimeter gate
                                    73        D   SCHOLEY
                                    74        A   J TAYLOR
                                    76        A   BEST
                                    77        M   FRANCE

        GATEMEN & OTHERS:            75       I MARSH           Gate C
'   \                                81       M BAIN              ll
                                     85 .     R W BEADSLEY        ll
                                     84       S THORPE          Gate C area
                                                                   ll    n
                                     178      T CULLY
                                     80       B RIDGE^          Gate B
                                   1         zr-                  Mll
                                     184      G SEDDON
                                     185      T PITT               ll
                                     79       R W COBB          Gateman 'A'
                                     83       M A HURST         Programme seller 'A'
                                     218      PS HIGGINS        Police officer.

        TURNSTILE AREA INSIDE:      94        D   BUTLER
                                    95        K   SMALLMAN
                                    96        R   B WASHINGTO
                                    102       E   WOOD

                                             C l A
                                   J ' l
                         I




                    IjJ           BnjhePAs)                X f T ________

   ____________________________________                                                       s   A   _   _   _   _   _    _




                                                                                              _
                                                   _   J    Q       ------------

   ____________ : _iS______
        ____________                                       C o ______ :__
         _____________________________ U                            _____________
                                   ____________ b)______________

   _____________________________ -                         P        -------------

    •                                    ;                                         —


             l ~?A%>iy£           B/>Psy, k   - - - - ;—   (3   3   ----------------- —   —



   ______________                                          <sr                     </>J
   ________________________                                i k ______
   _________________ O                                                          y. r~
   _________________ £ 1                                                            r
                                   ________________ £ 9                            <£



        P-  &1/z r fs OlU cJ?                                                                         >z                       tp-e^Uy>^A JS&*£..
             w                                             n h .-P c A tn                             y~2                      /          ts
~------------------ —....... ........                          _ ..... "''
                                                                                                         /
                                                            A- 4 ^ e                                  _>i_
                                                            h.
              y**   *0                                                                                                    -------- ----------------- —
                                                                                                                                                     ——— —
                                                                 ^ h& ni                                                          Cc}
                                                                                                      $/                    r< *
                             **          fr.                    /£r±4-G*>&
                                                                                                      ^ s-                  « c_
                                                                                                      3c>                    * d
                                     w i 1- /^. T M y t                                                                     V (<2,°
                                      / r £                                                       I >*                     <c ^
                                        (J-; / Jb^d& \                                            / u* -                  - . z£._
                                        n ( p .tf*                                                                         /« /d
        ~39.                  A .     c j



        ^3              h .    /}                                      — <■*_

   2 M             A                                              ^


~r/J              ft.   9^-egr            S ’* * ~ ^ r j i b .




       <?   u .                     V -


        1 r                         A -
        -?c                     /?-/.                J

   / Q Q , _____ H                             ^ J o o g C _________
169     T M MOORE            Unsure that it was after kick-off.
168      R J THOMAS         Felt a sudden forward movement. He
                            was against the barrier. Has identified
                            himself on the pitch at 15.04.
174      G GAINS             Cannot remember kick-off but recollects
                             the barrier going.
175.     A J HOLLINRAKE     Recollects that the barrier gave slowly
                            at first and then suddenly went and they
                            went flying forward.
171      P J SMITH           Also describes that it gave slowly and then
                             collapsed totally.
179      N F ABBOTT          Identifies himself at 15.02 in the terrace
                             at which point he was not against the barrier.
                             He then came against the barrier. He thought
                             perhaps within the next minute or so
                             See photo C440 (Day 45, page 74).

We have two witnesses, Mr Abbott who was not against the barrier at about
15.02 and Mr R J Thomas who has identified himself on the pitch at 15.04.
If those identifications are correct then the barrier must have gone
between those times and prior to Beardsley hitting the crossbar.
Interestingly the witnesses described the barrier going in two stages.
                                        SUPPORTERS IN .         PEN 4




                                                                        WITNESS 1^0 _
                                                     F ~   f)
             PLAN NO.     NAME
              2            L   HINTON             C                         29
              3            R   J THOMPSON    ? c                            30                                     X
              4            D   P LOWE        t /t                           31               I*/ r o - f s - * '   .7   t ~-i

              5            A   J BENNETT    T/r                             32               /4 .
              6            A   P JONES       9                              33               /V ■ +-
              9            R   KNOWLES       c                              37           / C - 6 0 +-              X
             11            S   A BERRY       c                          ’   39           /r-

             12            S   K BOARDMAN     c_                            41           / £:         /-
             13            G   HURST            c_                          42           / r~ «>•
             17            P   J GARRETT      T/±                           82           /V r V u
             21         / R    J ANDERSON      c.                           98           /<>•. rg? +•
             22         C. K   M MULLEE       r/i                           99               / V- ^
             23            G   P BRIDSON     r/r                            100              /r:
             24            A   M DODD          c                            101          /V- ^ *
             25            J   GRANT            n_                          103                cr4                  X
             26            A   W LANGLEY         T"/r                       104            7> ?
! If.if< 3
             27            M   T HOLLINSHURST T / r                         105
             28            L   F CAMPBELL        c                          106          /<f      a     l                y
             37            A   D LEIGH           C-                         119          i   <f■ *"5                    r
             38            E   SPEARITT                                     124          /*.
             40            D   PERRY            -rfr                        128                                         y
             47            R   McMAHON             c.                       141
             62            S   M D G^ABT (GRAY) ?                           160          ;v- r*                         y
             64            C   JONES                                        162         /</-JTS
             89            S   P T SWEENEY                                  194          /v;    ?7                      y
             90            P   EDWARDS           T/r                        195         /v.p*                           y


 X/ .        p U y ,            ^ iaX   V)   b   b



    .r~
                              W ITN E S S E S   IN   STANDS

                                                                   PLAN N O .
27.       R WRIGHT                    Pen 7                          1
165       B DEVONSIDE                                                   11
                                      North Stand                       7
131       S HAMILTON
178       T CULLY                     West Stand                    14
198       A ATKIN                     West Stand                    18
192       INSP BULLAS                 West Stand                    17
126/127   MR AND MRS STEELE           West Stand                    5/6
151       S CLARK                     West Stand                    9
                                      (? evidence, how much
                                      could he really see) C408
216       J THOMAS                    Pens 1/2                      69 (C536I
43        T K HILTON                                                2        (C537!
32        C K FLENLEY                                               4
110       T HICKS                                                   3
172       S W MULLIN                                                13
202       S CURRY                     South Stand                   20

155       J MOTSON                    Commentator box
134       E B GILLATT                 Corner South Stand
205       P WELLS                         ll          ll      ll
                                                                    22
204       P EASON                     Corner North Stand            21
                                                 OR.   A .R   u   FORREST




    jf you could remind me in respect of which           body number.       Was
    •it No. 79? - A. 79, yes.
    Don't give the name. - A. Mr. Roberts,        sir.

    It does not matter. - A. I am sorry.

     In fact, you did analyse for this? - A. fes, sir.

     And you found a conventional drug in therapeutic dose? - A.
     Yes, sir, no problem at all.                                      r
                               ■r ii. •. 1, t thi nk it was No. 3, you :
     Again in one other case, I thi        ,         special analysis fi
     wire asked by Prof. Hendy, to undertake a specia                   j
     cholesterol.  Is that right?      - A. Yes, si .

     And the level that you found w® I " * c h o l S s t i f S 1fconlent^tiol
     his age? - A. Yes, sir.  We found a cholester^              ^    ^
     of 7.2 mml/litre in a supernatent      „~iio removed           I have
     it had been centrifuged and the        c e l l ^ ^ cholesterols,
     been involved in some research          OOT~Cnn of that age would t
     and a typical concentration from a person of that ag
     about 5.4mml of cholesterol/lOOml of blood.

     I just wanted you to refer to this   j^quest ^ T h a t was the
     with Prof. Hendy when we come to the Inquest.
     level you found? - A. Yes, sir.
                                in _ a i m h n l levels or anything
Q     It has got no bearing at all on alcohol
      like that? - A. None whatsoever, sir.

Q. Now, it is, of course, notoriously                  pints of beer
   understand it, and you may corr®<?      ’ some help? - A. Well,
   equals X mg/lOOml, but can V°u                   person and to
   it dePerrfs fi^st of all on j£jt“ acfu a u y determlnes the blood

      alcohol concentration that 1».                             the
      particular amount of alcohol 1            n 's weight and how
      body.  That depends on basically the Person s ^ e i g ^ ^ ^    ^
      much fat they have got in their                   have got less water,
      relatively low water content,                    body weight than men

       z z  gft.ln z r z z
            f                                                           - 1   ; r
       S S S % ^ f h f s h S r T l o ^    alcohol concentration

            Typically, a 7 0 kiiogram, a fairly small                        b^r
       to drink something like 2-and a ha    p    EnEiand              to achieve
       a^t>loodSalcohol°concentration of around 80mg of aicohol/lOOml
       of blood over the next hour or so.
       so about 2 -and-a-half pints, subject to M - r qualifications,,
       equals 80mg drunk over an hour or so? - A. in very     .
       terms, yes, sir.
                                         DR.   A.R.W.   FORREST.



And the reason why we pick 80mg is because, and if you don t
know please say so, that is the level above which you are no
allowed to drive? - A. Yes, sir.

As far as you know? - A. Yes, sir.

The question of the level of alcohol for driving is a fixed
standard. - A. Yes, sir.

But the effect that is either perceived by the individual, the
subjective effect, or the objective effect which other people
see, varies from person to person.  Is that right? - A. Yes,
that is correct, sir.

I want you to be careful before you answer this question.   Are
you able to make any comment as to when a level of alcohol
becomes perceptible to any individual? - A. I think that is a
very difficult thing to say.   People do vary enormously m
their response to alcohol.   Objective tests by the Road
Traffic Research Laboratory and also studies on the rate of
accidents after people have particular amounts of alcohol m
their blood, show that people with a blood alcohol
concentration of between 20mg to AOmg of alcohol/lOOml of
blood are perhaps somewhat impaired in their ability to
respond to a novel situation.

     I have seen individuals with blood alcohol concentrations
of the order of 200mg to 300mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood who
on cursory examination would appear to be perfectly sober an
to be able to conduct a normal conversation.  I should say
that those individuals have all been individuals who have had
a problem with chronic excessive ingestion of alcohol.

     On the other hand, I have seen a young man from this part
of the world who with nothing else to show for it was dead
with a blood alcohol concentration of less an 80mg of
alcohol/lOOml of blood.

 So it is terribly individual? - A. Yes, it is, very, very
 individual, indeed.

 I won't press you further about that.

      THE CORONER:   Mr. Fraser?

                Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER:

 Dr. Forrest, just two things.  You kindly explained in very
 scientific terms, and I am grateful for that, the effect of
 perhaps heat and stress on the individual.    Can you express
 in perhaps less technical terms ||nd confirm, my understanding
 if I am correct, and put me ri^hf if I am wrong, I think
 what you said that under extreme tension or pressure or may
 be fear, the blood alcohol level when taken would be
•slightly but not significantly higher than it might have
 been if that sample had been taken from somebody who had not
 been subjected to stress? - A. No, sir, I don't think I said


                              17                                   70
                //      t     -




            jfyC (*sc>                                                      £<.


          *k           <L '(djZn <z&cr ^                                  c z /o c j          j - 5- ^ /
                                                                                                                            r     £ /
                fij*

                                  ^-         ^ & ^ je r 7 - ....... ^f*£-ep0                      & ?2c£^ h 6:                                        <?<?*7


             ^               <*7<^ > C «                         ^        *-3       pZc-r—*! , ^ ' V                   —
                                                                                                                       €'*?<?/>
  .......................................................    /       ..

         J o                  f~ 0oM +                                             '-T C>^         <2.*v>>\            <£~osiA>.
                                                                                                             J .....
     '   IP
          -M r              / 2- ^ s s * ^

          12                L -. jJ z^ d e stsP H                                 /sO^* o / £_C*slS .                                   J         &_Je*^r <^ *£*->4


         & 4?                            <^&-GeL*6z,                              /\/O
                                                                                              /

         1 *>           £         z                                               jST /^ zxJ        o/                                      te6s*4                     *y<zc***i



--
     -2 “2 .      /? £
           -------'               —
                                      T u r r i^ n J v ,
                                          ----- ( / .... - .......
                                                                                /*& t' £-O'?C0{ a*cj£ ---- /CKfi (jn&6 <£><—&
                                                                                                               /           r                                       /
                                                                                                                                                                   yy

                       fTT / ^               ^                                      <^Zcas~is/' ti d tts 7<4>-7                        C sO o ^


     ^Cey               P- /                                rft/. Jc £.            /9L ~ *6> ( t S ^                                                                    -    _



     2^>.            f i* ”       X       /yJjsm U .                             hi^^sJtCy C.C/)'7~) O n / 1
                                                                                             -/          /
                                                   V         "'""
  2 .^7------------------------
----    .      ^ o c c ^ t >r----------/jc  ^ /^ n
                                         c--------------          < ^ -£^ t< r                           —              /h^y^O S
                                                         ...... ......... -                                             '       // /
     7J           z^K <£-, /d e ^ f                                                 /£ ~ *                         ____,__________ _.yC.' 4 —                  '
          J       £ __                                                                                                                             4$k*t+C.




          t-f i              S .




      Jfi)                             fac-C^o^                  ^ftyy£-                      th                    /r~~
                                                                                                                    i            t ?2^,ii   Gyj/je.c£ & - ^


      4 4 v              / Z - O        Ot * c ~ # 7 C i         L ( -      A                     l / i




     (J^             ft"                                   f_ _ _ _ _ _ _   r f C L * ~ o l y (        <Qs*-*-£*    Lsl      <3L£s)   ___________________


                     .£     r ^ ~ Y     _______          /),& S J                                                                           ^


    ry.             f-S. f ^ A                             *_                   t _ L A / ^ r ' *<***£

                     fzLryJ '        (J/<-    J-®*^         f x » ^ . U                   / £ y 7 ^ - / f ' £*g                                           <£<*+? j * € i



j?.^“                                                                                                             ^C<»/


                   / ^ - fl~ ~ J         ~ J < p 6 ______________________________ «>/

    > c            / 9 - ^ 4 & ? 6 ?   _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ ^              / < L ^ r < Z          >&*~s    J z z ?




                    /)    ^ 4          ^ d c ^ j ^ n -                          & > C ~       o/                     o           2^c>^


/'£jL__^                    ^       Q ° 4 J *        __ _ _ _ _ _ _ _           J l
                                                                                  ^   c   j   r    #       +                 >      /t> ° ^ ) _ * H _
/° ^              CT^4-»           & i s& ?                    „_____„_           (T
Ior                A r - fjol&g&r' _____                                                                          ^*£6-7 0<UA <2~&j
J 9)---------------------                                                        ' t _ & t . A J !J $ ____________________

^     V            / > £•       j < c ^ U s )       _ _ __ _                      >f~ ^
