                                                                                                          M I R . 15




          OTHEfWDOCUMENT FORM                                      Date and time raised                                Number
                                                                                                                                  \ Ot,
                   0   =>'                                                         n
          T itiP                                   ^           ^       ~ V 7s                 O K a A -> v j^

*   J § 0 J n c lu d e source an d a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)
       ■ttfip *                                                                           N


     ^%4Req^iver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No ____________________________                                  — .
                                                                                                                                    Receiver




                                                                                                                                       Indexer
          Document registered/indexed as indicated

          No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                                Statement Reader
          Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                                       Indexer
           Indexed as indicated            D \

          No(s) of actions raised

                                                                                                                                0 /M         SIO
           Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                                       Indexer
           Further action No(s)


          When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)



      INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

   VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

              STADIUM DISASTER

          ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



         INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


           PAUL WILLIAM CARLILE




                   Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

           (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                     At

         The Medico-Legal Centre,
              Watery Street,
                Sheffield.

                     On

               3rd May, 1990.




         TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




   From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
        Official Shorthand Writers,
    55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                           TNDEX TO TRANSCRIPT
                                                                                  Pafce N o ,

                        PROF. ALAN USHER Called
                                                                                      2

                    B
                        OFFTCER GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called

                                                                                      b

                        POLICE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                    C        By THIS C O R O N E R ............................       6




                    D




                    E




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
3rd May, .1990.


    INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF PAUL ¥ILLIAM CARLILE

     THE CORONER;    Good morning.   Please sit down.

     MR. FRASER:    Sir, the evidence you are going to
hear now relates to Paul Uilliam CarlilQ.   Sir, P a u l ’s
mum is within the precincts of the building but would
rather not hear the pathological evidence so will come
in, as it were, halfway through the hearing.   P a u l ’s
stepfather and two sisters and aunt are present in
Court, sir.  Sir, the practice that represents them
is a member of my Group and I, therefore, appear in the
usual guise this morning as their agent through the
Steering Committee.

     THE CORONER:    You, sir, are the stepfather, is
that right?

     STEPFATHER:    Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Just so I know who I am looking at.
Which are the two sisters? Right.

     Can I just explain to you, before we begin, so to
speak, the procedure so that you know what is coming.
You have probably already been told, in the circumstances,
but very very briefly I am going to read the evidence
which I took right at the beginning last year in April,
in fact, the 1 9 th, and then, when I have done that, I
am going to tell you what the blood alcohol levels
were and then we will listen to Prof. Usher who will
tell us about the pathology.     I think I will pause then,
Mr. Fraser, so that we can allow P a u l ’s mum to come back
if she wishes.    T/hen we are all settled again, so to speak,
the presenting Officers of the ¥est Midlands Police will
present the evidence which they have summarised for me
and Inspector Layton will deal with the visual side of
the evidence.    He will describe it, first of all.    There
is not, I think, in fact, very much visual evidence,
is there, in this particular instance?

     INSPECTOR LAYTON:     There is, sir.   Some of it is
not confirmed.

     THE CORONER:   Anyway, he will describe it. You may
findthat bit a little bit confusing.  Do not be too
worried about that because, in a moment, after he has
described it, he comes round here and, as far as he is
able, he shows us on these big plans what he has been
talking about and then it falls into place somewhat
better.
                                                                    PROF. A. USHER



                             Tlixs then is a resumed Inquest which was opened on
                        the 19tli April, 1 9 8 9 and, on that occasion, Neil Anthony
                        Parkin, Acting Coroner’s Officer, said:

                                "The body which is the subject of this
                                Inquest has been identified to DC 3155
                                Wallace of the South Yorkshire Police
                                as that of Paul Villiam Carlile by George
                    B           Peake, his uncle.   He was 19 years of age
                                haying been b o m on the 8 th August, 1 9 6 9
                                at Liverpool.   He was a single man and he
                                lived at
                                Liverpool.   He was a plasterer by occupation.
                                He died at Hil3.sborough Football Ground
                                following an incident there on Sa-turday,
                                15th April, 1989.   PC 1212 Goulding caused
                    C           the body to be removed to the Medico Legal
                                Centre and there he identified it to
                                Detective Constable Simon ¥eigold who
                                subsequently identified the same body to
                                Prof. Usher.   It is the family wish that
                                the body should be cremated."

                              I then adjourned the Inquest and what I did was, I
                    D   wrote to you and, in fact, I think you, Mr. Stringer
                        signed the form, James Stringer, which I sent to you on
                        the 2 7 th April, 1 9 8 9 and asked you to check names and
                        addresses and, although the pronounciation of           thesurname
                        was correct, in fact we had mispelt it and it          should be
                        snelt *Carlile *. And wo had also mispplt I        n   [because
                        we had left the          out.  It is spelt           but I
                        have been told that it is pronounced
                    E   am learning.    Apt\rt from that, I think, all the other
                        information was, in fact, correct?

                             MR. J. STRINGER:      Yes.

                             THE CORONER:   Uhen I opened this Inquest Dr.
                        Forrest came along and told us all about the blood
                    F   alcohol  levels for everybody and, in the case of Paul,
                        the level which he measured was 61 mg / 1 0 0 ml.

                             Now we are going to turn to Prof. Usher.

                                          PROF. ALAN USHER Called:

                                             By THE CORONER:
                    G
                        Q. Prof. Usher, you are a Home Office Pathologist and
                           Prof. of Forensic Medicine here in Sheffield, is
                           that right? - A. Yes.

                        Q. Prof. Usher, you are going to tell me about a man by
                           the name of Paul ¥illiam Carlile and what number did
                           we .... - A. 73, sir.
                    H
                        Q. That is right, yes.     Can you tell me then, please? -


J. L. Harpham Ltd

                                                    —2—
                                                                    PROF. A. USHER



                             A. The body I examined was that of a heavily-built,
                             dark-haired 3'-oung, white male, 171 crns in height and
                             weighing 00 kgs.    The typical signs of traumatic
                             asphyxia were present both externally and internally.
                             There was some swelling of the brain which is,
                             not uncommon in tra^lmatic asphyxia, and occasional
                             petechial haemorrhages on the lungs.

                    B

                        Q.                                               - A. In
                             fact, I give his cause of death as traumatic asphyxia.
                             I really believe that he had an average expectation of
                             life for his age.

                        Q.




                        Q.
                    D

                        Q.



                    E   Q.


                                  Mr. Fraser?

                                                By MR. FRAS E R:

                        Q. Prof. Usher, can you offer some reassurance to the
                           family about the timescale for this type of injury
                           in terms of the time that you think it may have taken
                           for Paul to lose consciousness once the crushing that
                           we have heard about actually started to take place? -
                           A. Yes, the reason for Paul's death was that his
                           chest was held so tightly that he could not breathe
                           in or out and, once that had happened, then he would
                           have been unconscious in a matter of seconds, between
                           10-20 seconds.  He would have died within a few
                           minutes but at the time, of course, subsequent to
                           his unconsciousness, he would not have been aware of
                           any pain.

                                  THE CORONER:  Can }rou check that the family got
                             that because it is so important that people shouLd
                H            appreciate it.

                                  MR. FRASER:     Yes, thank you.
J. L. Harpham Ltd

                                                     -3-
                                                                  G. E. EVANS



                                THE CORONER:     Any questions?   (Mo questions from
                           the Jur y)

                        Q. Pro f . .Usher, I am most obliged to you and the same
                           arrangement as before, thank you. - A. Yes, indeed.

                                    THE CORONER:   Prof. Usher is in the building so
                           he goes back to his office.      Now, shall we wait for
                    B      mum to come back?      (MRS. CARLILE CAME INTO COURT)
                           P a u l ’s mum is now with us.

                                Hello, Mrs. Stringer.  ¥e will call the West
                           Midlands Police Officer, I think.

                                 OFFICER GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called:

                    C                          By THE CORONER:

                        Q. When you are ready will you introduce yourself and
                           take me through the summary, please? - A. I am
                           Geraldine Elizabeth Eva n s, an Officer of the West
                           Midlands Police.

                        Q. Yes, tell me what you have summarised in this case,
                    D      please? - A. At about 0930 hours on Saturday, 1 5 th
                           April ...•

                        Q. I am sorry, not what you have summarised, T/hat has
                           been summarised would be more accurate, I tliirk ? -
                           A. At 0930 hours on Saturday, 1 5 th April, I9 S 9 , Mr.
                           Paul William Carlile, together with a Mr. Paul Darren
                    E      Murray and Mr. Ian Joseph Ford, left Liverpool and
                           travelled by train to Sheffield in order to watch
                           the FA Cup Semi Final football match which was due
                           to be held at the IIi3.1sborough Stadium that day.

                           Upon their arrival in Sheffield they boarded a bus
                           which took them to the Leppings Lane end of the
                           Stadium, arriving at about 1230 hours.  They met up
                    F      with other friends and sat on a wall outside the
                           ground whilst they had refreshments.

                           Shortly afterwards Paul went off on his own stating
                           that lie was going to a nearby public house in order
                           to try to swop his terrace ticket for a seat ticket.

                          At about 13^0 hours a Mr. Paul Patrick William Nagle
                    G     was outside the Stadium in Leppings Lane when he
                          saw Paul who was in the company of Mr. Carl David
                          Lewis.  Mr. Nagle arranged to see the other two men
                          later inside the ground.  In fact, this is the last
                          time Mr. Nagle saw either man again,

                        Q. That was at 13^0, was it not, I think you said? -
                           A. Yes.  Shortly after I5 I5 hours and following the
                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                  -   h   -
                                                                     G. E. EVANS



                             severe crushing in the West Stand terracing, DC
                             Goulding and DC Pont entered the Stadium via Gate
                             C and saw a man who they now know to be Paul
                             Carlile being carried from the general direction of
                             the tunnel on the West Stand concourse.   Together
                             with an ambulanceman, who lias not been identified,
                             the officers attempted to revive Paxil but without
                             success.  The persons carrying Paul have not been
                    B        identified.

                             A Michael Thomas Hollinghurst, an off dut}r nurse,
                             was a spectator at the match and was in Pen h at the
                             Leppings Lane end of the ground when he became aware
                             of the increasing pressure being exerted on him Toy
                             the crowd.   After being subjected to this pressure
                             for approximately 15 minutes, Mr. Hollinghurst became
                             aware of. a space being created around him, and on
                             looking down to the floor of the terracing, he saw a
                             man he now knows to be Paul William Carlile.    Mr,
                             Hollinghurst saw that Paul was blue in the face and,
                             on not detecting a pulse, he tried to resuscitate him
                             by heart massage and mouth to mouth resuscitation,
                             Paul failed to respond to the emergency treatment and
                             Mi’, Hollinghurst then moved on to trea.t another
                    D        casualty,

                        Q.   Can. I just stop you? This is very late information,
                             is it not? - A. That is correct.

                        C). And I think, strictly chronologically, this should
                            have come before the paragraph about Detective
                    E       Constables Goulding and Pont because that is still
                            within the terraces? - A. Y e s .

                        Q. That is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

                        Q.   Just so that we get the order right. - A. At 16 3 5
                             hours Dr. David Monaghan examined Paul at the rear
                             of tlio West Stand and pronounced life extinct.

                             Shortly thereafter DC Goulding accompanied the body
                             of Paul to the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary
                             had been set up.

                             Tliis Officer later escorted the body of Paul to the
                             Medico Legal Centre where he confirmed the
                             identification to DC Weigold.

                             At approximately 0800 hours on Sunday, 16th April,
                             I9 O 9 , Mr, George Peake identified the body of his
                             nephew to Detective Constable Wallace at the Medico
                             Legal Centre,

                             On Monday, 1 7 th April, 1 9 8 9 , following an identification
                             by Detective Constable Weigold, Prof, Alan Usher
                H            ca.rried oxit an autopsy and submitted a report giving
                             cause of death.

J. L. Harpham Ltd

                                                     -5-
                                                                        G.      S'VANS
                                                                             LAYTON


                           Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                           blood sample from Paxil where the presence of ethanol
                           was detected.  The witnesses proving the continuity
                           of the blood sample are Nr. Philip Harvey Rich,
                           Detective Sergeants Fletcher and Turner and Dr,
                           Alexander Robert Forrest carried out the analysis.

                           Found in the personal effects of Paul was a full
                           match ticket.   He is shown on visual evidence, sir,
                    B
                           near to the oxiter perimeter gate at      hours*

                                  That concludes the summary, sir,

                                  THE CORONER:       Hr, Fraser, anything you want to
                           ask?

                    C                   FRASER:     Ho questions,

                                  MR. L I M B :   No, thank you, sir,

                                  MR. CATCHPOLE:        No, thanlc you, sir,

                                      POLICE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                    D                               By THE CORONER:

                        Q. Yes, Inspector? - A, Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
                           Inspector, TJest Midlands Police.   Sir, if I can say
                           tliero arc a number of small additions to the evidence
                           that yoxi are to hear so if yoxi coxild bear with me.
                           Sir, a.n examination has been made of vid.eo film and
                           photogi’aphic evidence and Paul has been identified
                    E      alive outside the stadixira.

                          Donna Carlile, P a u l ’s sister, and in fact the same
                          applies to Michelle, his other sister, who is also in
                          Coxirt, have identified Paul on a photograph which has
                          been given the reference number MUL10/33A.      This
                          photograph, sir, is timed at 1 h^h and shows Paul
                    F     alive oxitside the ground near to the oxxter perimeter
                          gate.   In fact yesterday, sir, on a second plxotograjjh,
                          M17L10/3^A, which is timed at 1^55, Paul again has been
                          identified by Donna and Michelle as being near to the
                          oxitcr perimeter gates.

                          Carl Lewis, as you have heard, also one of those who
                          died at Hillsborough, is not on the photograph and
                    G     there is no evidence as such that the}^ were together
                          after being seen at 13^-0 by Mr. Nagle.

                          Sir, on the 2 9 th March, 1990, Donna and Michelle were
                          again seen and perhaps I should point out that, in
                          total, the two girls have viewed visxial evidence for
                          something like 15 hours together with their social
                          worker and, in fact, they made further identifications
                H         of Paul both on photogr apl 1s and video.



J. L. Harpham Ltd                                      — 6—
                                                                 K. LATTOrT



                           The position is, sir, that, whilst the girls to the
                           best of their belief feel that those photographs and
                           videos show Paul, they cannot be 100 per cent certain
                           due to the detail that is shown.

                           Sir, on a photograph ---- there are a number of
                           photograjxhs, in fact, but on a jxhotograph referenced
                           DI3ML/2/19 a person who they believe is Paul is shorn
                           climbing from Enclosure no. 3 into Enclosure no. 4.
                    B      That photograph, sir, is not timed.

                           There are, in fact, then, sir, a number of other
                           photographs and I do not know whether y o u wish me
                           to read all the reference numbers out but I have
                           referred to one of them on the plan which I will
                           indicate la.ter.
                    C
                        Q. Pick that one because they are all, I take it, fairly
                           close together? - A. Yes, they are, sir, and in fact
                           they are in Enclosure 310 . 4 apart from the first one
                           1 have just mentioned.

                          Sir, the photograph T. have referred to on the plan is
                          PR2/2 and if you could just bear with me a second, sir,
                    D     I will confirm the time.   Sir, that photograph is
                          timed at 1505* Again, on a BBC video, referenced
                          MAP 8 and timed at 1503:50:18 and also 1503:52:03,
                          again the person that the girls believe is Paul is
                          shown on that video.   All those identifications
                          actually are in Enclosure no. 4 apart from the first
                          one .
                    E   Q. If I can just stop you there because at this point I
                           seem to remember because every effort had been made
                           but this was still just the start and this was one
                           of the cases where we thought it was Enclosure 4 but
                           we could not really be certain? - A. That is right,
                           sir.  In fact, one of the points I was going to make
                           was that the subsequent evidence you will hear will,
                           in fact, slightly alter the figures which I gave to
                    F      you on the first day and perhaps I will mention it
                           in a moment.

                          Sir, in respect of the last identifications I have
                          prepared a plan which has been given the reference
                          no. MIfJL 128. There is another addendum, sir.   In
                          respect of Mr, Hollinghurst, whose evidence you have
                    G     already heard about, he has viewed photographs and
                          confirms that Paul is one of the persons that he
                          tried to revive and he has signed a plan of the
                          terracing indicating the position at which he treated
                          Paul.   That plan, sir, is referenced MTIl/1. I think,
                          sir, that probably covers the additional visual
                          evidence.

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                 -7-
                                                                  M. LAYTCII



                             In recpoct of the figures I gave you on the first day,
                             sir, I think I said to you at that stage that we
                             believed that seven of the people that died were in
                             Enclosure no# 4 and that possib^r two, at that stage,
                             may have been in Enclosure no. 4. As a result of
                             the evidence of Mr. Hollinghurst, in fact, it is now
                             eight people that we believe were in no. 4 and one
                             that may have been.
                    B
                             Sir, can I refer you then to a plan which has been
                             given the reference no. KIvJL 170 and that relates to
                             the identifications outside the ground, sir.

                        Q. That will be C221. - A. I have already referred to it,
                           sir, but MWJL 128, which is a plan of the terraces ....

                        Q. Tha.t is C222. This is the one where the two young
                           ladies, if I can refer to them, spent so mucli effort? -
                           A. That is right.  Finally, sir, M T H / 1 , which is Mr.
                           Hollinghurst1s plan.

                        Q. That will be C223. - A. Sir, if I can deal, first of
                           all, with the identification outside and that is
                           MTJJL 170« The point at which we believe P a u l    -
                    D      well, we know Paul is shown is at this point h e r e ,
                           the outer perimeter gates near to h e r e . These are
                           the outer perimeter gates and it is in this position
                           here.

                                  THE CORONER:    Ladies and gentlemen of the Jury,
                             can you see that?   Mot Gate C ....
                    E             THE WITNESS:    It is the actual outer gate, sir,

                        q.        THE COROTDOR:     Yes. - A. Sir, in respect of the
                             terrace plan, this is Enclosure no, 3 and this is
                             Enclosure no. 4 and, in respect of the identification
                             where it appears that Paul is, as it were, going from
                             3 to 4 at the dividing fence, the position that I
                             believe that is shown is at this point h e r e . In
                             respect of the photographic and video identifications
                             actually in Enclosure no. 4, as I say, on the plan
                             I have referred to just one, PRT/2, but the position
                             shown is h e r e . I think it is fair to say, sir, on
                             those photographs and the video, I am satisfied that
                             Paul is probably still alive at that stage but I
                             cannot say at what stage of the medical process that
                             you have already heard about Paul has actually reached,

                        Q. Yes, 011 the assumption it is Paul, the person you are
                           looking at? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

                             Then in respect of the photograph      1, Mr.
                             Hollinghurst *s ....

                H       Q. Mot photograph - plan, I think? - A. Yes.   He has
                           indicated a position again in no. 4 Enclosure and in
                           this position h e r e . in Enclosure no. 4.
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                    -8-
                                                                        M. LAYTON



                        C). And, of course, Mr. Hollinghurst *s evidence was quite
                            clear that lie was in Enclosure 4, was it not? - A. That
                            is right, sir, yes.

                                MR. FRA SE R :     1'io questions,   sir, thank you.

                                HR. LIMB:        No, thank you.

                    B           MR. CATCHPOLE:        No, thank you.

                                MR. FRASER:        Sir, just before you conclude, will
                           37-ou let me read a very short note that the family gave
                           to me this morning which contains words of thanks
                           which come better from them than me, sir.

                                THE CORONER:        Yes, thanlc you,

                                MR. FRASER:    The note is from the family in
                           general, sir, and I read it as it stands.   They want
                           to thank Michael Layton and Peter Hogan who, I
                           understand, is an Officer who assisted Inspector
                           Layton, sir, for their help throughout the Inquiry.
                           They want to thank the two Officers, Goulding and
                           Pont, for the assistance which they gave to Paul on
                    D      the day, together with the ambulanceman whose name has
                           not been traced.   Sir, they want to thank Maureen ¥roe
                           and Peter Hyde from Moseley Social Services and they
                           have been, in the family*s words, sir, a "lifeline for
                           us throughout the last year."   Sir, they want to thanlc
                           Michael Hollinghurst for trying to save Paul.   The}'-
                           say, :,¥ords will never express how we feel but knowing
                           that he was with Paul, we are all grateful." Finally,
                    E      sir, they want to thanlc you for being, again their
                           words, "so thorough and a gentleman" as you have
                           been throughout these Inquests and, in particular,
                           the Inquest into their loved one.

                                THE CORONER:        That is very kind of you,       Thanlc
                           you ever so much.       ¥hich is Donna?

                                I think I have told 3rou, ladies and gentlemen,
                           that there are very few families that I have the
                           opportunity of speaking to but I have spoken to you,
                           in fact, and I have probably spoken to Michelle as
                           well but I did not know who you were at thet i m e .
                           So you are one of the few families whom I have had an
                           opportunity to speak to and it is very good of you to
                           say nice things about me.   I appreciate it ver}^ much.
                           I appreciate it even more that you have said nice
                           things about the Officers, in fact, I think they are
                           both in Court, and, of course, all the other people
                           who you have mentioned and who we have heard about.
                           I must say that I was very pleased that we managed
                           to get the evidence from Mr. Hollinghurst because
                           not only does it help with the technical problems as
                H          to where he was, it is the fact that he was a nurse --
                           okay, he did not succeed in reviving Paul but at least
                           you have the comfort that fairly immediately after
                           the incident there was somebody who was actually near
J. L. Harpham Ltd

                                                      -9-
                        Paul doing his best and that is some encouragement and
                        all credit to him and all credit to 3^ou for acknowledging
                        it.  Thank 3rovi very much indeed.

                              I am - in a sense I am just echoing what 3'-ou have
                        said - ver 3^ ver 3r conscious in all Inquests but the
                        only one I am thinking about at the moment is this one,
                        thinking about Paul.      I am very very conscious how
                    B   great 13 ^ loved people are who we hear about and today,
                        at the moment, we have liea.rd about Paul and I would like
                        you to know how much we feel for you and for you, Mrs.
                        Stringer, a very hard time for you and I am sorry that,
                        if you like, we have added upset to you this morning
                        but you are here, you have got your family, and they
                        will support 3^ou, I am quite sure.

                    C        The last point is I am exceedingly sorry that you
                        had the delay because, of course, that would have added
                        to your stress today.    It was not anybody’s fault but
                        there is nothing I can do about, I am very sorry that
                        it happened to you toda}*-. An 3n/ay we waited because we
                        did not want 3'-ou not to be here.   Thank 3'_ou for coming.
                        God bless you.

                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                  -10-
