  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE
    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
              STADIUM DISASTER
           ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                    Before
DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS» MRCGP
            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                      At
                The Town Hall,
                  Sheffield.
                     On
                6th March, 1991




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




DAVID LEON CASE

     By THE CORONER
     Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE
     Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING
     Cross-Examined by MR. KING
     Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN
     Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL
     Further by THE CORONER
     Further Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN
     Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING
     Further by THE CORONER

ROBERT JOHN EDWARD THOMAS

     By THE CORONER
     Cross-Examined    by MR. PAYNE
     Cross-Examined    by MR. MANNING
     Further by THE    CORONER
     Cross-Examined    by MR. KING
     Cross-Examined    by MRS. MCBRIEN
     Further by THE    CORONER

ROY GREEN

     By THE CORONER
     Cross-Examined by MR. KING
     Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN
     Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING
     Further Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN
     Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN
     Further by THE CORONER

EDWARD SHANE HIGGINS

    By THE CORONER
    Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE
    Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS
    Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING
    Cross-Examined by MR. KING
    Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN
    Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL
    Further by THE CORONER
    Further Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN
WILLIAM CAMERON CRAWFORD

     By THE CORONER
     Cross-Examined by MR. MAXWELL
     Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE
     Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS
                           ERRATA



TRANSCRIPT DAY 62

Page        Letter
13            E      phone the Control Box" should read
                     from the Control Box".
17           B       It is an obvious route" should read
                     It is not the obvious route".
29         D-E       - A. Non league matches" should read
                     -A. On league matches".
              SIXTY FOURTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                WEDNESDAY, 6th MARCH 1991

               (in the absence of the Jury)

     THE CORONER: I think, Mr. Catchpole, there is
something you have got to say.
     MR. CATCHPOLE: Yes, sir. They are only minor
matters and I am grateful to you for coming in. There
are three errors, if I can put it in that way, in the
transcript of Mr. Mole's evidence in answer to
questions put by me which I would like to take the
opportunity of correcting.  I think I have shown it to
my learned friends, and in particular one I have shown
to my learned friend, Mr. King, and I think we are all
agreed they are errors as such.

    The first one is on the transcript for Day 62, page
13 at letter E. There was a question put by me and it
is in relation to the viewing of the pens.    It says,
"And actually phone the Control Box?" and it should
read "And actually from the Control Box? - A. Yes."

     THE CORONER:   What did you say?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  I said, "And actually from the
Control Box?" and it has been reported as "And actually
phone".

     THE CORONER:   "Phone" is wrong.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: On page 17there is a more
important mistake and this is the one I have checked
with Mr. King and with others and I think we are all
agreed on it. It is in relation to the question put
just after letter B. This relates to discussing the
evidence Mr. Mole gave in answer to Mr. King that the
tunnel was not the obvious route. That reads:

    "Q. He put to you and you disagreed with him
    that the obvious route on to the terraces was
    through the tunnel?"

The answer:
    "I did disagree with him, sir.      It is an
    obvious route but it is..."

Then there should be a not inserted there:

    "—   not the obvious route —   "

I think everyone is agreed that that should be so. The
final one is on page 29 and this is again relatively
minor.  It is between the letters D and E and it is an
answer to a question about Mr. Creaser being the Police
Officer on duty at League matches and if you go back up
to letter B, sir, there is a question of what Nr. Lock
was doing at League matches and so it is in the context
of League matches.  I put the question:

    "He would have been the senior Police Officer
    at that end of the ground in charge of carrying
    out any instructions from Ground Control to
    fill the pens?"

The answer should be "On league matches" as opposed to
"Non league matches". They have just added an "n" at
the beginning.

     THE CORONER:     "On" rather than "Non"?

     MR. CATCHPOLE: Yes, I think that is clear because
if you look at the questions before you will see that
they are in the context of League matches.

     THE CORONER:  I will ask the shorthand writers.
They have kept both the notes and the tapes and so they
will be able to easily verify it. We have another
alternative recording system.  I agree one or two
things of what you say is almost certainly right, quite
apart from looking at the notes because of the sense.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    Yes.

     THE CORONER: If you would be kind enough to
double check please and type up an errata sheet.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  I am grateful. We have checked
with my learned friends and I think they are agreed.

     THE CORONER:  I understand.  It is impossible for
me to check the transcripts as they come in.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    I would not expect you to, sir.

     THE CORONER:  In the early days there are errors
where "nots" sometimes should have been - so I am not
surprised and I am not complaining because it is a
jolly difficult task.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: There is certainly no criticism
intended of anyone because I know the speed with which
I was going at stages caused the shorthand writers
problems in any event. The only person causing
problems is me.

     THE CORONER:  I just wanted to say that because I
did not want the shorthand writers to think we were not
happy.  I am very happy. My one consolation is however
many errors there may be in the transcript they are
better than any handwritten notes which I will take.
                        (The Jury came into Court)

                          DAVID LEON CASE Sworn
                              Bv THE CORONER
B
    Q. It is David Leon Case, is it not? - A. That is correct,
       yes.

    Q. Of                         Liverpool? - A. Yes, that is
       correct.

    Q. You know, of course, that we have already heard from
       your son? - A. Yes.

    Q. We know you are a busy man so once you have finished we
       will let you go back to whatever you need to be doing.
       I am not going to take you through the whole story as
       to how you got in but I think you can confirm to me
       that you, your son and two of his friends attended the
       football match in 1989 on the 15th April? - A. Yes,
       that is correct.

    Q. I think I am right in saying that you did not attend in
       1988, is that correct? - A. I did not attend in 1988.

    Q. I think you can also confirm to me that you actually
       arrived on the terraces at about ten past two or
       thereabouts? - A. That is correct.

    Q. Is it correct that you, your son and the other lads
       went right up towards the front of what is the right
       hand terrace which we know as pen 3? - A. That is
       correct. I don't know if it is known as pen 3.

    Q.   You came down a tunnel and you turned right? - A.   I
         came down the tunnel, went straight ahead.

    Q. Put the plan up and we will just show it to you to make
       sure we have got the right place.  I will carry on
       while that is being done.  I think the terrace began to
       be full at about 2.50 I think you said? - A. That is
       correct, yes.

    Q. Then over the period of the next ten minutes or so, it
       continued filling even further? - A. Yes, that is
       right.

    Q. It was during that ten minutes period that you were
       jostled and pushed up towards the front? - A. The front
       fence, yes.

    Q.   If you would turn round to the plan and can you point?
         If Mr. Griffiths indicates pen 3 perhaps you can
                                                         D. L. CASE


       confirm we are talking about the right area? - A. That
       is correct, yes. That is right.
B   Q. We will get you to mark a little plan in a moment as to
       exactly where you were.  I think you were very near the
       gate, were you not? - A. It was right by the gate.

    Q. Did you in fact see the players come out? - A. I saw
       the players come out, yes.

    Q. Did you see the match kick-off? I just want to know
       that while we are about it? - A. I saw the kick-off.

    Q. When the players came out, what condition were you
       personally in at that time? - A. It was starting to get
       very, very jostled and crushed.

    Q. Were you at that point seriously concerned about your
       safety? - A. I was very, very uncomfortable.  I have
       been at a lot of football matches before and I had been
       in similar situations where I had been crushed before.
       So I just thought it was another one of those
       situations at that time.




                            /Q. You were there.
                                             D. L. CASE


Now, you were there, your lad was there and his friend?
- A. Yes.

They were standing, I believe, right against the gate
so to speak - you were to one side slightly and they
were against the gate, is that right? - A. There is a
small concrete plinth by the gate, the escape gate; my
son was standing on that piece of concrete and I was to
the left of him.

In your words tell me what then happened? - A. After
kick-off I don't recollect much at all except getting
squashed.  I was pushed up against the fence; it was
getting very bad, and people around me were, of course,
being squashed up as well.  I don't remember much of
the match at that time, although it was going on,
because I was more concerned for the fact that we were
getting crushed.

I want you to tell me in particular about the openings
and shuttings, if any, of the gates at this stage. - A.
At the time we were getting squashed, the smallest gate
burst open. At that time my son got pushed through it
with some other people; a Policeman ran up, pushed them
back in again, and another Policeman joined in and
pushed the gate shut again. At this time now people
were starting to yell and it was just mayhem. My only
recollection after that is that I was pushed against
the mesh of the fence with my face just pushed into it.
My son who was standing up higher, on this piece of
concrete, than me said something to the effect, "Dad I
have got to get out of this, I can't stand any more of
it", and the blood drained from his face.  I put my
hand through the fence, grabbed hold of a Policeman,
and said something to the effect, "You have got to do
something, it's getting very bad in here". He replied
something to the effect that it would sort itself out.
I think he had a radio in his hand as well at the time.
Just then the gate burst open again and everybody just
tried to get through that gate. Because my son and the
two boys I was with were round about it and I was there
we went through and onto the pitch.

Do you recollect whether the first time the gate burst
open and your son got out and then came back in, was
that in the interval between the players coming out and
match kicking off, or was it after kick-off? Can you
recollect? - A. I would say it was after kick-off but I
couldn't actually swear to that because you are not
making a visual record of these things at that time.

No, of course not, and I would not want to hold you to
that. - A. I think it was after kick-off.
                                              D. L. CASE


The Officer whom you touched and whom you had this
conversation with which you have just recounted, had
you seen him earlier at all? Did you recognise him as
somebody? - A. No, I wouldn't recognise him.  It is not
a thing that you do take individual note of Police
Officers as they are wandering up and down. He was
just somebody who was there. For the record, I think
there were about two Police Officers in front of that
gate that I can recollect seeing.

You don't know who it was that you   had the conversation
with? - A. No.

I don't mean by name, obviously you would not know his
name, but you have no .... - A. He was just a Policeman
who was standing directly in front of me, to what would
be the right hand side of that little gate.

You have described the two openings, haven't you, the
first one where it burst open, out, back, and then it
burst open again, and fortunately he, and indeed I
think you got out as well at that point, didn't you? -
A. On the second time, yes.

Prior to those two incidents did you see the gate open
at all? - A. No - prior to the two incidents I have
described?

Yes, that you have just described, with the gates? - A.
No, I didn't see it open at all.  In fact, I am
absolutely certain it did not open.

I may be wrong, but when it opened the second time and
you got out did you stop near the gate or did you move
off? - A. When I got out the second time and the boys
were out, there were other people coming behind me. My
ribs were hurting and a Policewoman came up and said,
"Are you all right?", and I don't remember a great deal
more than being led away down the right hand side of
the pitch.

That means, presumably, that you had to walk past that
pen 3? You were going down towards the south, weren't
you? - A. As I came out of the gate I walked to the
right.

That's right, so that would be down - put the plan up
again, please and we will just make sure. Mr.
Griffiths will point - gate 3, you came out there and
then you turned right? - A. That is correct.

So what I am asking you is this, as you walked past the
terraces did you notice the state within the terrace,
by any chance? You may not have done but I am just
                                                D. L . 'CASE


interested in what you saw. - A. That is pretty hard to
answer really.  I have got a recollection that the main
body of crush, of course, was in the centre.  I was
holding my ribs at the time, but walking past it did
not seem as crowded in the other pens.

Did you realise either immediately before you left the
pen or after you had actually got out what was actually
happening within the pens? - A. No, not at the time. I
was amongst the first people out.  I was glad to get
out. With just a casual glance behind it looked as it
was, a lot of people in a small, congested place, all
evidently trying to get out.  I had got out with the
boys and I was walking along.  I didn't realise at the
time the seriousness of the situation.

I think then a Police lady came along and walked you
down towards .... - A. Where the St. John's Ambulance
man was.

Did you by chance glance back towards the gate? - A. It
only took the time that it took to walk from behind the
goal to the end of the pitch, the corner, where the St.
John's Ambulance people were and then I sat down behind
the St. John's Ambulance people and of course was
looking over from then onwards.  It was just a chaotic
situation that people were climbing over the fence,
they were still coming through the gate, more and more
people were spilling on the pitch.  I did not know what
was happening other than the fact that obviously people
were trying to get out of that enclosure.

Did you see the gate   shut at   all again? - A. No. I am
as certain as I can possibly     be that after it burst
open the second time   I don't   think it closed again. I
am pretty certain it   did not   close again.




         /Q. When you were at
                                 D.L. CASE                i



When you were at the St. John's Ambulance on the corner
there, was the match still in play as far as you
recollect? - A. It was.  It was actually still in
play by the time I walked ....

So there is no doubt that you got out before the match
finished? - A. Yes.
This is a very unfair question and if you can't answer
it please say: "I cannot answer it". Can you estimate
how long it was after the match began before you got out?
- A. It would only be a minute, two minutes, certainly
no longer than that, I would not have thought anyway.

And the other   question I want to ask you, in your
judgement the   time interval between the bursting open
of the gates,   what would you place that at? - A. The
time interval   between the bursting open of the two
gates?
Yes, in other words they burst open, some got out,
back in and it burst open and you .... A. It has got
to be only a matter of a minute or so, something like
that.
Can we get you to show us on a plan where you actually
were. We know where your son was, he has already shown
us, but I want you to put a cross on that plan where
you were, if you walk over to the overhead. (Plan marked)

      MRS. PERKINS?    C518.

      THE CORONER: I will just ask you one more
question. Have I understood it correctly that in effect
when you put your hand through and contacted the Officer
and said what you told him and he responded, in fact
events, the opening of the gate was the event which
overtook the situation and that was it? — A. Yes, that
is right.
Was that a very brief time interval from the moment you
said to him:  "It is getting a bit tight in here"
or something like that and he said: "It will sort itself
out" and the gate bursting open a second time? - A. The
moment that my son said:  "I can't stand it in here
any more" was the moment that I put my hand through
to get hold of the Police Officer.  Simultaneously at
that time the gate burst open.

 I see, so in other words it was almost instantaneous?
 - A. Yes.
                                 D.L. CASE



              Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Just referring to the state of the crush as it was when
the players came out? - A. Yes.

At the other matches you have been to where you have been
in similar situations, I take it that the crush has then
eased off? - A. I have been in similar situations in
matches where there have been crushes. Quite obviously
the crushes have eased off.   If a crush gets so bad
thdt • • • •
This was quite exceptional after the players came out?
- A. Yes, after the players came out.

One more thing. These crushes that you have experienced
at other matches, have they often taken place immediately
before the kick-off? - A. Yes.

      MR. PAYNE:   Right.   Thank you.


             Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Just looking at that again, Mr. Case, and the words that
you used. You thought at that time that it was "just
another of those situations". Those were the words I
have noted.  "I have been to a lot of football matches.
Of situations where you get crushed I just thought that
was another of those situations"? - A. That is correct.

And that was in or around the kick-off time that that
in the last 10 minutes had developed to that situation?
- A. That is right.

And it was after the match had actually kicked off that
the situation had deteriorated further so far as you
were concerned? - A. Yes.

      MR. MANNING:   Yes, I am grateful to you.   Thank
you very much.


               Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Mr. Case, can I just clarify one or two matters. You
obviously went to the ground in 1989, that was the
semi-final. Had you been to Hillsborough before?
- A. - A. No, I did not go in 1989.

You were asked by my learned friend Mr. Payne, the
gentlemen before last who spoke to you, about crushes
easing off. Tell me:    did you know in 1989 before
the disaster that the Leppings Lane terrace was divided
up by radial fences into pens? - A. No, I did not know
anything at all about the Leppings Lane end.
                                                               10

                                      D.L. CASE



Q.    So you were not in a position to know whether or not
     people could move sideways, .across the terrace or not?
     - A. No.

Q. I have a note here and my support may be wrong, that
   at 2.50, that is at about 10-to-3, the terrace began
   to be full is what I am told you said earlier.  Is
   that right? - A. That is right.

Q.   You did not know the state of the side pens from where
     you were positioned obviously? - A. I was positioned
     at the very front, round about 10-to-3 it started
     filling up considerably.

Q. Where you were? - A. Where I was.

Q. You weren't in a position to know what the state of
   the crowd was, emptiness or otherwise, at the side
   wing pens because you weren't in that, were you?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. But what you can tell us is at 10-to-3 the pen you
   were in, the area you were in, you would describe that
   as full?- A. Yes.

           MR. KING:   I have no further questions thank
     you sir.


                 Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN:

Q. Sergeant Griffiths, could you put up C327 please.

           THE CORONER: It is in that volume there, the
     black one. Sergeant Griffiths is coming around to
     assist you.

Q.         MISS ADDLEMAN:   Have you got that, Mr. Case?
     - A. Yes.

Q. I know this photograph is taken from an entirely different
   angle to where you would have been at the time, but
   can you look at the scene on the perimeter track in
   this photograph?   Do you recall any scenes such as
   this when you were on the perimeter track? - A.
   Yes. When I was on the perimeter track or when I was
   down at the end by the St. John's Ambulance people.

Q. So you think you were at the far end of this photograph?
   - A. I can't even see the goal on this photo.

Q. It is very bad. - A. I had walked to the far end which
   is the corner piece here in the photograph.  I was
   sitting behind, on a bench where the St. John Ambulance
people were and scenes like that I could see. I
remember seeing - as you will obviously appreciate it
was a confusing thing - but I think I saw a Fireman
appear. This might have been a bit later on. Somebody
brought an ambulance or a St. John ambulance or some­
thing along and it was chaotic. There was a lot of
people. Obviously they are not on the pitch at this
time but I was sitting down the end when this type
of thing went on.
                                               D. L. CASE


Can you remember what you were wearing on the day in
question? - A. No.

Can I just ask you to look at   another photograph?  It is
in the black bundle before you and it is C.326 A.    It is
a clearer photograph taken at an earlier time of the same
scene, obviously a little less busy on the perimeter
track. - A. Yes.

Do you remember anything like   this? - A. At the time?

Yes. - A. At the time it was    getting very, very
congested and crushed in there.   Presumably this was the
time that the pen was filling up.    I was in the middle
of that.   I don't know really if I can recollect a scene
like that.   There were obviously people behind the goal.
Is this what you are asking me?

Well, can I assist a little here?   Could it have
possibly been that you would have been sitting at the far
end with the St. John's Ambulance people at a time when a
scene like this was taking place on the perimeter track?
- A. This says a scene at 2.59?

Yes. - A. The match kicked off at three o'clock.

Slightly earlier than that. - A. Did it kick-off slightly
earlier?

Yes. - A. Well, if it kicked off...   I was under the
impression it kicked off at three o'clock.   This is all
I have got to go on.   If it kicked off before three
o'clock I could possibly have still been in that pen at
that time.

     THE CORONER:    Kick-off was 2.59 and 24 seconds.

            Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL?

Mr. Case, can I just check one thing?   Mr. King was
seeking to clarify a matter which I don't think he was in
court for and was reading his solicitor's note.   He was
asking you about how full it was at ten minutes to three.
In answer to his seeking that clarification, did I take
this correct note of your answer, "Roundabout ten to
three it started filling up considerably"? - A. That was
the impression I got.   If I can just say that I was at
the very front by the fence and not looking behind me.
The impressions I got were that roundabout ten to three
it started to fill up, as I would imagine any other
football match because it is the usual thing when people
come in late.
                                                     D. L. CASE


                   Further by THE CORONER:

Just one final question.   You mentioned you felt
jostling.   Did you feel any surges? - A. Yes.

Can you just describe those to me?   How many did you
feel? - A. Again, you are going back on something two
years ago and to try and define...   Yes, I certainly did
feel surges because we all got pushed forward, in
particular I ended up with my face in the mesh of the
fence, so that was quite obviously a surge from behind
because you don't do it voluntarily.

I am obviously only interested in these last minutes, not
what happened earlier.   Did these surges go backwards
and forwards or did they all stay forward, or was there
one which stayed forward, or what happened? - A. The
impression I got was that roundabout kick-off time...
It was getting crowded but suddenly one main surge took
place.

     THE CORONER:   Does anybody else want to ask
anything arising out of that?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Sir, I am sorry.   Before Mr. Case
goes can I just trouble him with a photograph?   It may
well be that he is in the photograph and it may assist.

     THE CORONER:   I was hoping that my photographic
team down there would sort it out!

          Further Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN:

It is from the bundle PR.l and it is frame 2A.

        THE CORONER:     Have we got that one or not?

        MISS ADDLEMAN:    We haven't.     We have got a spare
copy.

        MRS. PERKINS:    That is C.519.

     THE CORONER:   Before we give it a number let's see
if he can see himself.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:    Can you see the gentleman with the
red cap?    We thought that may be you, Mr. Case. - A.
Yes, I can see.    Can I have a magnifying glass.   Yes,
that is me.

It is you? - A. Yes.

        MISS ADDLEMAN:    Perhaps, sir, that can be exhibited
now.
                                                   D. L. CASE


       THE CORONER:     Shall we make an acetate of it.

     MISS. ADDLEMAN: I can tell you, Mr. Case, that the
timing on the right hand side of that photograph is 15.01
and we know that means three o'clock because the timing
is a minute out on the camera so by three o'clock you are
sitting outside pen 1.

     THE CORONER:    Were you on the outside?      I haven't
seen the photograph.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:       Would you like to look at the
photograph?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, perhaps I could have a look at
it.   These timings, we fuss a great deal about them, but
it is very, very difficult to do.

     MR. RUSSELL:   While the photograph is on its way
can I ask one supplementary question?   He is seen in
that photograph talking to a young lad who is wearing a
Liverpool shirt.   Is that by any chance his son?

       THE WITNESS:     Yes.

     THE CORONER:   We have a facility for making copies
and then being able to put them up on the screen:

In fact what that photograph shows, just so we can get it
down for the record, is a picture where you have
identified yourself sitting near the St. John's Ambulance
people near to gate 1, or a gate which has got a 1 on it?
- A. If I could have a look at it again?

Yes.

     MR. KING:   Might I ask some questions arising out
of this information?

       THE CORONER:     Yes, of course.

     MR. KING:   My learned friends can confirm that this
photograph is three o'clock?

       MISS ADDLEMAN:     Three o'clock.
         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Mr. Case, assume we are right that it is three o'clock,
and assume that kick-off was at twenty-six seconds to
three o'clock, those are two facts which are known, that
kick-off was twenty-six seconds to three and at three
o'clock you have already got out of the pen you were
originally in where you were in difficulty and got
yourself seated not far from the gate to pen 1.    All
right? - A. Right.




       Q. I want to try
                                                                     ■   16

                                                               D. L. CASE


    Q. I want to try, therefore, in the light of that
       information to find out the principal events which must
       have been taking place before three o'clock because it
B      is before you get to this point. All right? - A.
       Right.

    Q. I am not putting timings on it now.  I am just putting
       sequence of events because we now know that this
       sequence of events must have been before three o 'clock.
       The sequence of events is that after the players came
       out you started to get very, very jostled and crushed
       and very, very uncomfortable. Right? - A. Yes, that is
       correct.

    Q. That is the first event. You remember the event of the
       gate bursting open? - A. Yes.

    Q. The Policeman running up and pushing it back in
       again? - A. Yes.

    Q. That again must have been before three o'clock
       obviously if this photograph is right? - A. Yes.

              MR. PAYNE: If Mr. King is doing this it might be
         helpful to have 277 open.

              MR. KING:   It might be helpful but it may not
         necessarily---

              THE CORONER:     It is quite all right, carry on.

    Q.        MR. KING:  It is all my fault, Mr. Case, because I
         did not arrive on time and I want to clarify matters
         you see. It must be, therefore, that you were pushed
         up against the mesh of the fence with your face into it
         again before three o'clock. That must be right? - A.
         If that timing is what you say, yes.

    Q. At the time when you were concerned about the blood
       draining from your son's face and you were grabbing the
       Police Officer in the way you described and he was
       saying that it would sort itself out, that again has to
       be a sufficient time before three o'clock for you to
       get out of the gate and get yourself into the position
       we see you in on this photograph? - A. I would have
       thought that, yes.

              MR. KING:   Thank you very much.

                             Further bv THE CORONER

    Q. Mr. Case, would you be kind enough to walk up to the
       acetate and just find yourself on there so that we can



H
all see where you are? Which is your lad, Mr. Case?
(indicating) Would you be kind enough on the acetate
itself to put a cross immediately above your head. Mr.
Case, I am exceedingly grateful to you for coming.
Thank you very much indeed. I am also happy for you
that you, your boy and the other lads safely survived
this incident. Thank you.
             ROBERT JOHN EDWARD THOMAS Sworn
                     Bv THE CORONER
You are John Edward Thomas? - A. No, it is Robert John
Edward Thomas.
Is it               ? - A. I have recently changed
addresses.
It was                                Liverpool? - A. Yes.

What is your address now? - A. My address now is
                        Liverpool.

I do not know what you are now but in those days you
were a deckhand, is that right? - A. Yes.

I just want to be sure we have got the right person? -
A. I am not any more. I have changed jobs.

What are you doing now? - A. I work as an electrician's
mate.

On land I take it or at sea? - A. Both.

I think Mr. Thomas you had a terrace ticket for the
1989 match here for the Semi Final on the 15th April,
is that right? - A. Yes.

You were driving to the match in your car but there was
a whole group of friends who were going in a mini
coach, is that right? - A. That is right, yes.

There were about 25 of you or something like that? - A.
Altogether.

Included in that group - you do not have to tell me of
all the 25 - was a friend of yours called Nicholas
Joynes and another friend of yours, your brother-in-
law, Francis McAllister, is that right? - A. He met us
later on. He lived in Sheffield, you see.

He did not travel with you? - A. No.
Nicholas did not go in your car. He was in the mini
coach, was he? - A. That is right.

You did not travel together because I think the mini
coach was just going round picking people up and you
just drove to Sheffield in your car. That is right, is
it not? - A. That is right.

You had made a rendezvous to meet at a pub? - A. The
Sportsman.

Where they were all coming and Mr. McAllister was going
to be joining you as well? - A. That is right, yes.

I think you got there and the mini coach arrived and it
was about quarter to two or thereabouts. Would that be
right? - A. That would be right, yes.

1.45. Everybody had some drinks apart from I think Mr.
McAllister who did not drink, is that right? - A. That
is right, yes.

It is not terribly important but approximately how many
pints would you say? - A. About three at the very most.

You all left this pub at about quarter past two, would
that be right? - A. That is right.

You sorted yourselves into your mini coaches and what
have you and all set off towards the ground, is that
right? - A. Yes.

You went to Far Lane and you parked near to the Beehive
public house? - A. That is right.

That is just a location. You did not go in there. You
just met for parking? - A. A parking facility.

Did the others also park in that sort of area? - A.
Within that vicinity, yes.

When you all met up again I take it that you all set
off down towards the ground. Would that be right? - A.
Yes.

Which way did you approach the ground? Just remind me
of that, would you? - A. From the Leppings Lane area,
coming into the Leppings Lane area.

Was there a big roundabout when you entered Leppings
Lane? - A. It is not a big roundabout as such but there
is a roundabout there.
Was there a petrol station there, can you remember? -
A. No.

You cannot remember it or there was not one? - A. How
we approached that, I understand what you are saying,
there is a garage that does tyre repairs to the left.
We passed that into Leppings Lane.

I just want to be quite sure which way you entered the
ground. Did you turn right into the turnstile area or
left? - A. Right.

Did you come over a little bridge? - A. Yes.

I have it right now.  I just wanted to be sure which
direction you were coming in. I think you arrived at
the ground at about what time? - A. About twenty to
three, quarter to three.

I think you found quite a substantial build up of
people at the turnstile area? - A. Yes.

The group at that point split up because some were
going off to the North Stand, others were going to the
West Stand and there was about seven of you who were
going to the terracing, is that right? - A. That is
right, yes.

Again we do not need to worry about all of them but
there was yourself, Francis and Nicholas? - A. Yes.

Then four others? - A. Yes.

You all had tickets? - A. Yes.

I do not need to go through all the detail of what it
was like because we have heard from a lot of people
about what it was like? - A. Yes.

Just tell me this; when you were going through the
turnstile area were you yourself crushed in any way in
that area? - A. Yes. I had been at the game the year
before at the other Semi Final and we were not
expecting anything because you couldn't get near the
ground the year before unless you had a ticket, you
see, all Leppings Lane was cornered off and so as you
approached it there was just masses of people.  There
was nobody about, you know. Normally you would have
stewards saying, "Go here, go there" or whatever.   This
year there was none. When we come there was just a
mass of people. As I approached the turnstiles it just
started even getting more congested and out of hand.
You were aiming for turnstiles A to G with the letter B
above it, is that right? - A. Yes.

If Sergeant Griffiths just points to them can we just
make sure that we have got the right turnstiles? Can
you see the model behind you? - A. Yes.

Were those the turnstiles you were aiming for which
Sergeant Griffiths is pointing to? - A. Yes.

I am interested in this one thing because in fact you
never went through the turnstiles, did you? - A. No.

Just tell me what happened? - A. Things were getting a
bit hectic at the time because we had been in the queue
for about ten minutes. This time it is about five to
three. So we are all queuing as best as possible at
the time and the next thing a gate opened or was opened
and at that time I just remember getting pulled by a
Police Officer under a metal bar.  I had to duck to get
under it. So consequently we didn't have to give our
tickets in or nothing and the rest of the group I was
with followed me into the ground.

Can you point to what we call the funnel bar, Sergeant
Griffiths? Is that the bar you were pulled under? - A.
That is right, yes.

Which gate did you enter? Can you point to it? - A.
The gates at the side of the bars.

That would be gate C? - A. Yes.

There are several gates and I was not quite sure which
one you had actually got into? - A. Yes.

So when you went through that gate was it wide open or
was it just slightly open? - A. It was fully open,
fully ajar.

You and your friends went through? - A. Walked through,
yes.

In fact you say a Policeman actually pulled you under
that metal bar? - A. Yes.

To get you towards the... - A. To gate C, yes.
                                                          21

                                             R. J. E. THOMAS


Q. Now this is the reason why I was a little bit puzzled,
   because when you got through this gate what did you see
   in front of you? - A. Just the tunnel entrance and onto
   the pitch.

Q. The reason I asked you is because in your statement -
   this is not a criticism of you, I am just trying to
   establish it - what you said was, "I looked round and
   saw that all the lads I entered with were in line
   behind me". - A. Yes.

Q. Which you have told me, "... and we made our way
   towards the stand.  I could see a wall in front of me
   with a large gap in, and through the gap I could see a
   tunnel in front of us, through which I could see the
   pitch". Now, what I am interested in is do you
   recbllect this bit about seeing a wall with a gap in
   it? - A. When you say a wall with a gap in it, it was
   below the stands, a tunnel, and above the people's
   heads you could see the pitch, not all of the pitch, as
   much as possible through that.

Q. The reason why I ask you is, if you walk up to the
   model it will be easier, and as I say I am only trying
   to find out which way you actually got in, can you see
   the wall which divides the concourse area, and can you
   see the gap in that wall?   What I am interested in, was
   that the gap in the wall which you are describing or
   are you describing the tunnel mouth? - A. I am
   describing the tunnel mouth.

Q. Did you go through that gap in the wall at all? - A.
   No.

Q. You didn't, okay, thank you.  So you got in and all
   five of you were more or less together at that point,
   you could see the tunnel ahead of you, is that right? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Apart from the Officer who had pulled you through and
   directed you, you did not see many Officers or stewards
   in that concourse area, did you? - A. Not in the
   concourse area, no.

Q.    Were you one ofthe first through, do you think?   Can
     you remember? - A. Yes.   I think there weren't a great
     many going through at the time that I went through.

Q. You with your friends headed towards the tunnel, right?
   - A. Yes.

Q.   Tell me what you then did? - A. Whilst we were
     approaching the tunnel I was in the front, and
     consequently there was people coming behind us, and as
                                        R. J. E. THOMAS


it got nearer the front you couldn't actually see the
fence that parts the two sides of the terraces.

You could see that, did you say? - A. No you couldn't,
because there was people standing in front of it. We
got as far as to them and then we looked and, you know,
we wouldn't be able to get in there in time, so we
started coming out. What we did, we stuck to the sides
of the tunnel as we were coming out, and because we
were in a line the two at the back, Francis and Nicky,
there was a crowd then coming and we had to stop, stand
still and let people come in. As we came out of the
tunnel I shouted a message to Francis and Nicky that we
would be on the right hand side of the goal so they
said they would try and meet us there, try and come
out. Consequently we came out and went into the other
sidfe of the terraces.

That is what I am trying to find out, you could see the
tunnel, you could see the pitch? - A. Yes.

You have mentioned that already. Could you see what
was happening on the pitch when you were looking
through, over the heads of the people? - A. At the time
I didn't take that much attention but it looked to me
as though they were just knocking the ball about,
warming up.

But there were players already on the pitch when you
were in that tunnel? - A. Yes.

If I have understood you correctly, what you are saying
is you went down into the tunnel, down to the end? - A.
Yes.

You saw that there were a lot of people - were the
people spilling up into the tunnel or were they still
on the terrace? - A. They were just still on the
terrace.

So you managed to get to the back of these people? - A.
Yes.

You looked around and decided it was not the place for
you? - A. Yes.

In effect, and turned round and made your way against
the people coming in, near the wall, is that right? -
A. That is right, yes.

When you were doing that what was the traffic, if I can
use that word, in the opposite direction towards the
terrace? You were going out now, right? - A. Yes.
                                        R. J. E. THOMAS


What was the traffic like coming in? - A. There were
quite a few people trying to come through that space.

That is what I am trying to ascertain. Was it empty,
was it full, how were they moving? Tell me in your
words, I don't want to put words in your mouth, what
the traffic was like? - A. You mean in the tunnel or
outside the tunnel?

In the tunnel. - A. In the tunnel as we were
approaching out it wasn't as if it was people crushing
or pushing or whatever way you want to describe it, it
was just ordinary, just people walking, getting into
the match, but when we actually got out of the tunnel
there was masses coming through the gate.

So have I understood it correctly, that you did not
have too great difficulty working your way out of the
tunnel? - A. No, not that great a difficulty.

You walked along the wall, I think you said? - A. We
kept to the side of the wall, yes.

Do you remember whether any people at that point were
wee-ing in the tunnel? Forgive me for asking such a
rude question. - A. No, definitely not.

Nicky and Francis were at the tail end of your
crocodile, that is right, isn't it? - A. That is right.

You have told me you shouted to them what you were
doing? - A. Yes.

And you said, "We'll meet you round the side"? - A.
Yes.

Have a look at what you said in your statement on that
point. Again, we are not catching you out or anything.
The reason why we have got you here is so that the
families can hear what happened. Just have a look and
see whether that is correct. - A. Where do you want me
to read from?

Just the top five lines - read it to yourself. - A.
Yes. Where it says, "said they would carry on", they
didn t say, "We're going to carry on", they said,
"We’ll try and get out".

What I am trying to ascertain, we know that they must
have gone onto the terracing because unfortunately they
lost their lives, but what I am trying to ascertain
from you is whether you understood them as saying that
they were intending to go onto the central terracing or
whether they were hoping to come back? - A. No, they
                                        R. J. E. THOMAS


were definitely hoping to come back. They said they
would meet me on the other side, as soon as they could
get out of this.

Why didn't they turn round and just follow you, that is
what I can't understand? -A. Because they were walking
in the middle, and with the people who were going into
the Ground, it was having a kind of concertina effect,
that they were just getting carried along.   It is not
as if you can just stop, and a hundred people come, you
can t stop a hundred people. You have to make your way
to the side and then come out.

So you are saying because you were a little bit ahead
of them it was somewhat easier for you to make that
turn? - A. Yes, we had the chance to go, have a look
and turn, and once you were on the side of the wall it
is pretty ....

Yes. You then came out and you say it was then that
you noticed there were such a lot of people in the
concourse area, is that right? - A. Yes.

Making towards the tunnel or where were they making
for? - A. I think they were making towards the
designated --- a majority of the crowd were making
towards the tunnel. You see, I know I keep going back,
I went the year before and the year before we never had
this.   I was in the stands above and those doors were
shut.

I will come to the year before.  Don't worry about the
year before, I will get you to tell us because we are
quite interested in the year before. Just stick to
this year for now.  It is fair to say, isn't it, that
in fact that was the last time you saw Nicky and
Francis alive, when you saw them in the tunnel, is that
right? - A. Well, I thought that I had seen them
afterwards and I thought that they were okay, but it
must not have been them.

Are you saying that the chances are that you mistook
them, that you did not recognise them when you were
looking into the pens? - A. No, what I am saying is
that after all the incident, and the crowds of people
were coming out, I actually thought that I saw them
coming out.

I see, but of course it turned out to be a mistake? -
A. Yes.

You went into pen 2, I think, is that right? - A. I am
not sure of the numbers.  I can point to the pen.
                                        R. J. E. THOMAS


If you turn round and look at the plan, the Sergeant
will point to pen 2. Is it'that area you were in? - A.
Yes.                        ----

We will get you to mark where you were in a moment. Am
I right in saying when you actually got there the match
had just kicked off? - A. No.

What had happened then? - A. When we got there the
match had kicked off, sorry, and people were starting
to come out onto the pitch.

So I was right that by the time you got into that
enclosure ...? - A. The game had kicked off, yes.

You could see people climbing over at that point? - A.
Yes:

Were you able to see the little gates in the front at
all? - A. No.

You couldn't? - A. I could see the top of them.     I
could see when they opened.

Did you notice whether they were opened and shut at
all? - A. I only ever saw them open once and that is
when people were being filed out, well I would say
spewing out onto the track.

Was it the gate in your enclosure you are talking
about, or the gates in other enclosures? - A. It was
the gate in pen 3, that is the only one I could see.

The Sergeant will point to the gate - you saw that
gate? - A. Yes.                               "

Did you see it open and close at all or did you merely
see it open? - A. No, I only ever saw it opened.

Only opened. Could you see how it was opened, because
you have just said you only saw the top of it? - A. No,
I couldn't see how it was opened.

So when you said in your statement that you saw it
opened by a Policeman that isn't right, is it? - A. No.
I said I saw it opened. They asked me who was by it
and I said there was a Policeman by it.

In fact, because of your location you could only see
the top of it? - A. That is right.

You may not remember this, and don't guess, when you
got into that enclosure do you recollect whether the
gate appeared open to you at that point already, or did
                                          R. J. E. THOMAS

you not notice it at that stage? - A. When I actually
took my position up, as I was approaching my position,
I saw the gate open, and people were on the track then.
That is when ....

Can you go and put a mark on the plan where you were in
that pen? I want you to put a cross.   (The Witness
marked his position on Exhibit C520) I will just ask
you one more question about 1989. That location which
you have marked, you were reasonably comfortable in
that position, weren't you? - A. Yes.

There was no problem there? - A. No, none   at all.




                 /Q. Let's turn back to
                                                            27


                                     R.J.E. THOMAS



Q. Let's turn back to 1988 for a moment or two. We are
   talking about the 1988 semi-final? - A. That is right
   sir, yes.

Q. Was Nicky with you that year as well or not? - A. No,
   I went with a different company of people then.

Q. Do you recollect what time you got to the match that
   year? - A. Yes.

Q. What time? - A. I would say about 20, 25-to-3, around
   the same time.

Q. About the same time. Did you approach it from the
   same direction? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you said you were checked or there were some
   checks in the road. Just describe what happened?
   - A. Leppings Lane itself was cordoned off and there
   was Police and for you to get past the Police you had
   to show your ticket and that is how you got past them.

Q. When you say Leppings Lane was "cordoned off", are you
   saying the whole road including the carriageway was
   cordoned off or simply the pavement area? - A. The
   pavement area, yes.

Q. Did you have a ticket that year just as a matter of
   interest? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you actually see anybody who did not have a ticket
   at that, I will use the word checkpoint? - A. I saw
   a couple of people, four or five of them like. They
   were rendezvousing at Leppings Lane and they were
   having a discussion but that is all I saw.

Q. Did you notice what happened   to them? - A. They were
   turned away.

Q. What did they do? - A. No idea.

Q. I see, you didn't notice what happened to them? - A.
   No.

Q. Then I think you went down and entered the ground and
   that year there wasn't any problems getting through,
   was there? - A. All it wasit was all queued up like.
   You were in in at the most five minutes.

Q. Which of the pens did you go   into in 1988? - A. I
   went in the Stands above the   terraces.

Q. Oh you were in the Stands, I beg your pardon. So tell
   me, you said it was not the same in 1988 as it was in
   1989? - A. Yes.
                                                              28

                                   R.J.E. THOMAS



Q. What do you mean by that, within the concourse area
   I am talking about? - A. There wasn't many people there.
   Those that were there I was not sure - it was my first
   visit to Hillsborough like - I was not sure where to go.
   There was people there to guide you and just say: "Up there"
   and wherever.

Q. What about the tunnel? - A. The tunnel was closed off.

Q. Tell me. Describe it? - A. It is closed by doors and
   the two doors were closed and there is two
   Officers and may be a Steward standing in front of it.

Q. On the concourse side? - A. On the concourse side of it,
   yes.
Q. You are sure about that, are you? - A. Yes, I am certain.

Q. I am not talking about the doors, I am talking about
   the positioning of the Stewards and the Police Officers.
   You are quite certain there were some standing outside
   the gates on the concourse side? - A. Yes.

Q. What time approximately would you say that was? - A.
   Between 10 and 5-to-3.

Q. Then you went up into the Stands? - A. Yes.

Q. And after that, of course, it was all different? - A.
   Yes.


                 Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q. If you open the black bundle in front of you, could
   you see if you could find C282? You have described
   the cordoning off. Is that the sort of thing that you
   are describing? - A. Yes, that is the kind of thing.

Q. That is the sort of thing that was happening in 1988?
   - A. Yes.

Q. That photograph actually is 1989 so I take it that in
   1989 you did not see what we can see in the photograph?
   - A. There was certainly none of that in 1989, not
   at the time I approached the ground.

         THE CORONER: Listen Mr. Thomas, we are going to
   have a coffee break. You are allowed to have coffee
   but what I don't want you to do, please, because you
   are still strictly speaking in the witness box, you
   can talk about anything you like to anybody you like
   apart from matters of evidence, 1988 or 1989, so you
   can talk about anything else, but strictly speaking
   you are ....
                                                                29


                                      R.J.E. THOMAS



          THE WITNESS:    Still on oath.

           THE CORONER: That is right, but we don't want to
     stop you having coffee.

                         (Short adjournment)


                 Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Q. Mr. Thomas, can I take it to the time that you were in
   the tunnel in 1989? - A. Yes.

Q. There were people who were ahead of you going down the .
   tunnel were there? - A. Yes.

Q. And there were people who were behind you in the tunnel?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Would there be the same sort of density between those
   two sets of people, in other words were there as many
   people coming up behind you as there were people in front
   of you? - A. No, no, not at all.

Q.   Tell me how it was then? - A. When we were going in there
     may have been may be 30 people, 40, and on our way out
     when, we actually got out as we were coming out through
     the tunnel.

Q. I know that when you got out of the tunnel you could
   see lots more people coming? - A. Yes.

Q.   You reached the end of the tunnel itself? - A. That   is
     right.

Q. And you could see that there were some lines of people
   in front of you at the back of the terrace? - A. Yes.

Q. You could not see through them down on to the terrace
   itself to know what was happening on the terrace or
   indeed whether there were spaces further down the terrace?
   - A. I could see above them because as you come through
   the tunnel it slopes, so I could see above them and
   through them and there did not look to be much space.

Q. There did not look to be much space, so you then made
   the decision that the only way in which you would get
   on to the terrace if you were going to try, was going
   to be if you like dip your shoulder and push your
   way through those people standing there and hope to
   find a space, if you were going to try? - A. Well yes,
   if you were going to try.
                                                           30


                                    R.J.E. THOMAS



Q. But you made the other decision and thought:   "There is
   no point in trying to push through all those people.
   I will go back down the tunnel and find another spot"?
   - A. That is right.

Q. As you were going back down the tunnel again you saw
   your two friends coming in the opposite direction
   down towards the terrace? - A. That is right.

Q. Did you call out to them and tell them not only that
   you were going, you would see them to the right, but
   did you start off by saying:  "It's full there"? - A. No,
   no. I said that.   "We are going to try to the left" and
   they said:  "We will follow you".

Q. So do you think that in saying that   that you were
   indicating that you had been down,    there was no point
   in going on. Is that what you were    trying to indicate?
   - A. Hopefully that was the message   I got across.

Q. And you had been able, having got to the end of the
   tunnel, to gain then the side of the tunnel to make
   your way back up the side and against the flow of people
   coming down it again? - A. I was already on the side of
   the tunnel when I exchanged that message to Nicholas
   and Francis.

Q. What you are saying is that they were in the middle of
   the tunnel when you saw them? - A. That is right.

Q. You don't know then what happened, whether they tried
   to get to the side, what happened behind your back
   effectively? - A. That is right.

         MR. MANNING:   Thank you very much.

         THE CORONER: Mr. King, before you start I think,
   I was not going to do it but I think it is necessary
   for me to get this sorted out.


                    Further Bv THE CORONER:

Q. I want you to have another read of these first five
   lines and if you agree that they are correct just read
   them out to us because I think .... A. You want me
   to read them out to you?

Q. If you are satisfied that they are correct? - A. No, I
   explained before that they did not say they would carry
   on. They said they would try and follow me out.

Q. So that is not quite right as it stands then is what
   you are saying? - A. No.
                                                             31


                                   R.J.E. THOMAS



        THE CORONER:   Okay, that is all I wanted to know,
  fair enough.

        Right then, Mr. King, it is your turn.


                 Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. Mr. Thomas, dealing with 1989 for a moment. You described
   how you understood or felt that you were one of the
   first to go through that big concertina gate, that is
   Gate C? - A. Yes.

Q. And you describe "walking through".   That was your
   expression? - A. Yes.

Q. Do I understand your evidence to be this: had you
   arrived at the tunnel and found the tunnel blocked off
   in some way, you personally would not have objected to
   that? - A. You would have just gone to another route,
   you would have gone to somewhere else.

Q. It doesn't look as if you were, you weren't in the frame
   of mind of saying:  "I am going to go down that tunnel
   at all costs"? - A. Not at all, no.

Q. Indeed it was you who was pointing the contrast with
   what you had seen in 1988 when the tunnel had been blocked
   off? - A. Yes.

Q. When you entered the tunnel you at that stage did not
   know what the state of the terrace was going to be when
   you got to the other end, did you? - A. No.

Q. You would agree with me, wouldn't you, that there is
   quite a steep gradient - we have all been to the ground
   so we have all experienced it - a steep downhill slope
   just as you are entering on to the terrace? - A. Inside
   the tunnel as you emerge on to the terraces there is
   a drop.

Q. You were in a position when you arrived at the end of
   the tunnel, one of the first to get there, to decide you
   wanted to turn round and come back again? - A. That is
   right, yes.

Q. You were coming back against the flow of people coming
   in? - A. That is right.

Q. And the impression I gain is that more and more people
   were coming in as you were going out? - A. As I became
   further and further near the exit there was more and
   more people coming in.
                                                               32

                                     R.J.E. THOMAS



Q. And more and more people in terms of density? - A. Yes.

Q. All making their way down the tunnel towards that gradient
   which you have described? - A. Yes.

Q. You have been to football matches before, I assume? -
   A. Yes.

Q. You have a fair amount of experience? - A. Yes.

Q. You yourself were the sort of person when you looked at
   the terrace you decided you were going to turn round and
   get out? - A. Yes.

Q. We have heard a lot of evidence from people who say this:
   "Although a terrace is blocked at the very back" I, a
   fan, says to myself: "Well that does not matter. I will
   get my way on to the terrace and move sideways across
   the terrace". Do you understand that sort of frame of
   mind? - A. I understand what you are saying, yes.
Q. When you were at the end of the tunnel near the exit
   on to the terrace you were able to see the terrace
   immediately in front of you, obviously? - A. Yes.
Q. You yourself had been there in 1988? - A.    Yes.
Q. You obviously had an idea in your mind that to get to
   a side pen you would go out of the tunnel and go to the
   wing, you obviously knew that? - A. That is right sir.

Q. It is right, isn't it, that when you get your vision
   at the end of the tunnel when you are looking on to
   the terraces it is just one mass, that is all you can
   see? - A. That is all you can see.

Q.    You don't know what the position is to the sides, all
     you can see is one mass? - A. That is right.
Q. Can I go back to 1988 for one moment.  I just want to
   have another look at this photograph which you have been
   shown, C282? - A. Yes.

Q.    I don't quite understand how the cordoning worked in
     1988 in relation to that picture.   If the picture does
     not help say so but if you can use the picture please
     do. Could you tell us how you as a spectator met the
     cordon; how you had to go through it; how you got
     yourself into a position where it was in front of you
     so you had to go through it? - A. This particular
     picture it is from the Leppings Lane end* but it is
     not the entry into Leppings Lane end where I come in
     where they were actually cordoned off and checking the
     tickets. This is actually the way in.
                                                             33

                                   R.J.E. THOMAS



Q. Does the model help you in any way to describe where
   it was? - A. Well if I could get up and show you?

Q. I am sure you will be able to? - A. The picture is of
   this area here.

Q. You were pointing with your stick to the area alongside
   the housing on Leppings Lane leading to the Leppings
   Lane entrance? - A. Yes.




                              Q. You were describing
                                              R. J. E. THOMAS


You were describing where the cordon was. - A. At the top
of this there is the road that goes across Leppings Lane.

You are describing an area... - A. That is not on the
map.

Not on the model, beyond the bridge? - A. Just at the top
of the bridge, yes.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     That is C.284, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Find the stadium for Mr. Thomas and
find Leppings Lane.

     MR. KING:   Perhaps point out the bridge,
Mr. Griffiths.

     THE CORONER:     OK:

Now you will be able to help us. - A. We approached from
this area.

     MR. KING:   You are talking about along Middlewood
Road? - A. Yes.   At the corner of this area.   That is
where it was cordoned off and they were checKing our
tickets there.

     MR. KING:   I wonder if Mr. Griffiths could tell us
the area he was pointing to?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   He is pointing to the junction of
Leppings Lane and Catchbar Lane, Middlewood Road.

     MR. KING:   Mr. Thomas, tell us again at that
junction what it was that met you as your approached? -
A. There was a line of Police Officers.   On this side
there is a walkway, but on this side there isn't.    There
was a row of Police Officers and you had to get your
ticket out to show before you could pass.

Were they in such a position you had to go through them
in order to make progress to the ground? - A. Yes.

I say that because if you look at 282 again, the
photograph you were shown, you see the Officers there are
alongside the flow of people coming towards the ground
and those people to make progress, on the photograph, are
not having to go through the Police, merely past them? -
A. Yes, that's right.

That does not really represent what you have tried to
describe to us? - A. No.
                                           R. J. E. THOMAS


Coming back to when you were, emerging out of the tunnel,
having decided to go back, in 1989, and you saw the large
numbers of people still coming towards the tunnel? - A.
Yes.

I take it you saw nobody trying to direct them anywhere?
- A. No.

You saw no obstacle in there to prevent their progressing
to the tunnel? - A. No.

Patently the tunnel gates were open? - A. Yes.    The
first thing you see is the tunnel gate.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN:

Mr. Thomas, did anyone collect your ticket or take a part
of it in   1989? -A. No.

Have you  ever been to a match before where that has
happened? - A. No.

Have you ever entered into a large football stadium
through an exit gate? - A. Never.

Did it look like a free for all that day to you? - A.
Yes.

Now when you were making your way out of the tunnel and
you saw Nicholas and Francis going in, were they in the
middle of the crowd that was going in and you at the
edge? - A. Yes, they were in the middle of the crowd,
going into the middle of the tunnel.   They were not near
the sides.

You managed to keep to the wall? - A. Keep to the side.

Was this quite a large crowd that they were in the middle
of? - A. As I progressed further towards the exit the
crowd was building up behind them - not who they were
going in   with, but behind them. It was getting...

Were the people walking at a fairly fast pace?    I am not
saying they were running.    I am not saying they were
misbehaving, but when people are going somewhere they
usually move fairly fast.    Shuffling? - A. No.    They
were walking, not shuffling.

So it was mainly just a large crowd? - A. Just a large
crowd addressing one area.
                                                R. J. E. THOMAS


                    Further by THE CORONER:

A few questions from the jury and then one from me.  The
first question is, and we are talking about 1988. OK? -
A. Yes.

Do you recollect which turnstiles you entered when you
entered in 1988?   You were going to the stands that
year, do you remember? - A. Yes.

Which turnstiles did you come through? - A. What do they
go up to?

Well, show us on the model.    It is 1988 we are talking
about. - A. Right.   I came through to the right here and
came through here  and I went up these stairs.

That was the nextquestion.          You can see thereare two
staircases there? - A. Yes.

Which one did you come through then? - A. Y and Z.

Can you point to them? - A. Those.

Is that the year you came through the gap in the wall? -
A. Yes.

OK.     Those are   turnstiles 1   to 16.    Now you   may not
knowthe answer      to this, but   in 1988 you said    there were
some   Police and   stewards who   were in front of    the tunnel
gates.    Do you    remember you   told usthat? - A.   Yes.

Did they say anything as far as you know to the fans as
to why they could   not get in that way? - A. No, they
didn't say anything.    They just pointed.

That was my next question.   How did they know where to
go, these fans, what was happening? - A. Well, there were
two Police Officers there and they were pointing to the
sides and saying, "That side," or "This side," and people
just made their way.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Can I just remind you.   His
evidence was there were two Police Officers and maybe a
steward.   His recollection seemed firm as to the Police
Officers and no so firm as to the steward.

     THE CORONER:       That's right, is it? - A. That's
right.

Just one more question about 1989 and it is to do with
the checking of the tickets.   You have already told me
that did not happen away from the ground in 1989.   You
were, however, in a big crowd trying to get in.   Did you
                                           R. J. E. THOMAS


have the impression that in that crowd there were a lot
of people who did not have tickets? - A. Everyone just
seemed to be heading for the gates.   I understand what
you are saying but it is hard to say whether a person has
tickets or hasn't a ticket.

That is what I am trying to find out.   There were a lot
of people there but are you able to say whether there
were a number who appeared to you, either because they
said it, or because you heard it or because you saw it,
who didn't have tickets? - A. I couldn't honestly say
because.••

     THE CORONER:    Very well.    I am most grateful to
you for being here Mr. Thomas.    Thank you very much
indeed.   Thank you for your help.    Before you go may I
just say this.    I am very sorry that you lost your
brother-in-law and, of course, a friend.

     Sergeant Green please.

                   ROY GREEN Sworn

                   By THE CORONER:

Roy Green, is that right? - A. That is right.

Police Sergeant 993? - A. That is right.

You were in fact in Serial 9.  In fact you may have been
in charge of Serial 9, is that right? - A. That is
correct.

The job of that Serial was escorting Nottingham fans
towards the stadium from the station? - A. That is
correct, from the Midland Station.

Without going into great detail, this is what you did for
most of the day until about twenty to three or
thereabouts? - A. That is correct, sir.

Again, without going into any details, some of these fans
were not of impeccable behaviour, would that be right? -
A. That's right, sir.

I only say this to show that Nottingham fans, some of
them may also possibly not be perfect, that is right? -
A. That is correct, sir.

We are not interested in that because I am interested in
your evidence in respect of something else.   You
finished this duty presumably when you were told and you
went to the gymnasium? - A. That is correct, sir.
                                                                 38

                                                           R. GREEN


     Q. What time did you get to the gymnasium, can you remember?
        - A. It would be probably half past two, twenty to three
        time, sir.

B|   Q. The intention was that you should have something to eat
        at that point? - A. That is correct, sir.

     Q. Before you started on your phase 2 activities? - A. Yes,
        we were told to stand by.

     Q. Then phase 3 would have been taking everybody back to the
        Midland Station? - A. We were to be deployed if we were
        needed at the ground from the gymnasium.
c
        Whilst you were in the gymnasium you were with your
        Serial, I suppose?   They may have gone off and got cups
        of tea and so on, but they were all   there? - A. Part of
        the Serial was there, sir.

        You had, I think, more or less completed your meal when
        you were summoned to the reception desk? - A. That is
        correct.

     Q. You were told you were to take part of your Serial into
        the ground? - A. That is correct, sir.

     Q. Can you tell me where you were told   to go? - A. Yes.   We
        were told to go to A Gate at Leppings Lane.

     Q. Do you recollect what time that would have been that you
        were told to do that? - A. Well, when we went out on the
        playing area the players were warming up on the pitch.

        Does that mean that having got the instruction did you go
        straight away or did you go back to finish off? - A. No,
        we went straight from the room.

     Q. Were you by any chance told why you were to go to A Gate?
        - A. No, sir.

FI Q.   You were just told to go to A Gate? - A. That is correct.
        They obviously thought there was some spectator trouble
        there.

        I think you enquired which way you were to go and I think
        you were told to go across the front? - A. Yes.   I asked
        if we were needed on the outside or the inside.   They
        told me to go up the inside of the track.   It would be
        quicker.

     Q. That means you came out of the gymnasium, and which stand
        did you walk past? - A. We walked past the North Stand.
                                                 R. GREEN


So on the pathway past the North Stand? - A. That is
correct, sir.

Were you intending to come past the North Stand, to cross
Leppings Lane and then out below the Police Control Box?
- A. That is correct.

Then up towards A Gate across the concourse? - A. That is
correct.

As you came out and were walking past the North Stand,
players were already on the pitch warming up pre-match? -
A. The players were on the pitch as we came on to the
playing area.




      Q. Players come out
                                                                    40

                                                            R. GRKKrJ


q   . players   come out for various reasons and I just want to
      be sure   that this was pre-match warm up. Do you know    .
      whether   it was or was not? - A. I think they were
      warming   up, sir.

Q. You walked along the North Stand and there was nothing
   that attracted your attention at that point, is that
   right? - A. Two of my serial got involved with a drunk
   I think. They were behind me and I was in front.

Q. So they dealt with that and you just carried on? - A.
   That is right, sir.

Q. You got to the corner and turned towards the South, is
   that right? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. What happened from there? Had the match started at
   that point yet? - A. I couldn't say, sir. I wasn't
   watching the playing area.

Q. Carry on then and tell me what happened? - A. As I
   turned on to the front of the West Stand I noticed that
   the right hand pen was pretty empty. You could see the
   concrete steps. As I got to the centre pen it was
   absolutely crammed full. People were obviously in
   danger.  I radioed.  I immediately got on my radio to
   ask for assistance and I could not get through on the
   radio. As I walked passed the goal I saw the gate to
   the left hand side of the goal as you look from the
   playing area, the gate was closed, and I realised I had
   got to release pressure the pen and so I opened the
   gate and spectators came tumbling through.

Q. Do you know whether the match was in progress at that
   point? - A. I can't say, sir.

Q. When you were coming along had you noticed any other
   serials either ahead or behind you? - A. There was
   Sergeant Tattersall and another one of his serial
   behind me because me and Sergeant Tattersall went up
   together.

Q. Did you see Sergeant Swift? Do you know Sergeant
   Swift? - A. I know a Sergeant Swift.

Q. Describe him? - A. A stocky chap.       Is he No. 442?

Q. I cannot remember.       Is there anything peculiar about
   his head? - A. No.

Q. In that case I do not think it is the same one because
   this gentleman is totally bald? - A. No, I didn't see
   him at all.
A
                                                                        '41
                                                                p, rsreEq



    Q.   You never saw that Sergeant? -A. No, sir.
B   Q.    You have mentioned Sergeant Tattersall and somebody
         else.   These are people who were not of your serials?     -
         A. No, they were in one of the serials doing the same
         duty as me, sir.

    Q. Were they tagging on behind you? - A. Yes, that is
       correct.

    Q . Apart from those and the people you had brought out
C       with you, did you see any Officers on the perimeter
        track? - A. I think I saw PC Illingworth.

    Q.   Where was he when you saw him? - A. He   was walking
         towards me as I was walking up towards   the goals.

    Q. In relation to the pens, Mr. Griffiths, could you put
       up the plan? We     will just give you the numbers so that
       we know we are talking the same language. You
D      mentioned a pen which was fairly empty. Could you
       point to pen 6? Is that the one you meant? - A. That
       is the one, sir.

    Q. You mentioned as you walked further along there was one
       where people appeared to you to be in danger.  Is that
       the one you are pointing at? - A. That is the one, sir.

    Q. You walked a little bit further and you opened a gate.
E      Which one of those two gates did you go along to
       open? - A. The lower one of the two.

    Q. Can you point to it?    That is gate 3? - A. That is
       correct.

    Q. I want to go back to PC Illingworth. You said he was
       walking towards you on that plan. Where was he? - A.
       Probably directly behind the goals, sir.
F
    Q. Did you exchange any words with him? -A. No,      sir.

    Q. Did you notice whether or not gate 4 was open as you
       went passed it? - A. I didn't see that gate at all,
       sir.

    Q. You did       not notice the gate? - A. No.
G   Q. Did you notice gate 5 at all? - A. No,     I didn't notice
       that gate.

    Q. The first gate you really noticed was gate 3? - A. That
       is correct.



H
                                                                    42
                                                             W_ f3?TCRI^




    Q. That was closed when you were there? - A. Yes, it was.
B   Q. Do you know PC Smith? - A. No, sir.

    Q. You did not see any other Officers around that gate
       when you approached it? - A. No, sir.

    Q. When you opened it, and you have already said you do
       not know what was happening on the pitch at that point
       in time? - A. No, sir.

    Q. Did you remain by it or did you leave it? - A. I led
       quite a few through. They were then building up on the
       playing area and then I led them along the perimeter
       track and put them into one of the pens on the left
       hand side.

    Q. Which was further down? - A. Further down, yes.

    Q. When you were leading them along, did you shut the gate
D      again as far as I remember? - A. I don't think so, sir,
       no.

    Q. You cannot remember what you did? - A. No, I wouldn't
       shut the gate, sir, no.

    Q. You would not? - A. No.

    Q. We have heard evidence from quite a lot of people near
       that gate who said that it burst open and that several
       people were put back and then it burst open again, not
       opened by a Police Officer. Did you see any of that at
       all? - A. No, sir. When I got there the gate was
       closed.

    Q. When you were leading these people towards pens 1 and 2
       as we know them, are you able to say what was happening
       on the pitch at that point? - A. Probably they were
       playing I think.

    Q. Do you know? - A. I can't say for definite,   I would
       say they would probably be playing, sir.

    Q. Did you see it? - A. No, I never looked towards the
       pitch, sir. I was occupied with the terraces.

    Q. You mentioned that you tried to radio and this was at
       what point? Where were you when you were doing that?
       A. As I was walking along the front of the West Stand
       was trying to radio through. That is probably why I
       missed the two gates that I didn't see.
                                                                         43
                                                                 R. KRRBM


    Q.    You did not get a response and by the time that you had
         got to gate 3 you decided you had to take action? - A.
         That is correct, sir, yes.
B
    Q.    Did you come back to the gate at all? -   A. I think   I
         went towards the direction of it.

    Q. Were other people there? - A. Yes, there were other PCs
       there by that time.

    Q.   You do not know who they were, do you? Do     you know who
         they were? - A. No, I can't remember, sir.

    Q. The people who came out when you opened the gate, did
       they come out under their own steam, did they have to
       pulled out or did they have to be carried out? In what
       condition were they? - A. They came out under their own
       steam, sir.

    Q. What actually attracted your attention and made you
       realise that action had to be taken? - A. Because they
       were crushed up against the fence, sir.

    Q.   Did you hear voices at all? - A. Well, the noisewas
         deafening.

    Q. I realise that. What I meant was, did you hear
       specific pleas for help? - A. I may have done, sir.           I
       think I did, yes.

    Q. Did you see any other Officers with radios around that
       area? - A. At what time was that, sir?

    Q.    When you   were walking, as you were coming down   the
         terraces on your way towards the gate and just before
         you opened the gate? - A. No, I can't remember, sir.
         The only thing I can remember there, sir, if that will
         help, is that the TV cameraman was still there with the
         mobile camera.

    Q. When was that? - A. In front of the West Stand the
       television cameraman was still there filming away.

    Q. Yes, but at what point? You say that he was still
       there? - A. When I arrived there.

    Q.   You mean he was there when you arrived is what you      are
         saying? - A. Yes, that is correct.

    Q. You do not mean the South Yorkshire photographer,         You
       mean the TV cameraman? - A. The TV cameraman.
                                                                  44

                                                             R. GRRRH


    Q. I think you assisted with quite a lot of the rescue
       effort? - A. That is correct, sir. That was later.
B   Q. I just want to go back to PC Illingworth. Where did
       you say he was? - A. I think he was directly behind the
       goal walking towards me swiftly.

    Q. Did you exchange any words with him at all? - A. Not at
       all, sir.

    Q. Did you notice whether he was escorting anybody? - A.
       No, I think he was on his own.

                      rrnss-Rxamined bv MR. KING

    Q. Sergeant, were you leading your serial? - A. Yes, I was
       in front of them.

    Q. As you approached the front of the West Stand, that is
       the front of the terraces, you would be coming from the
       right hand corner as I am looking from the pitch at the
       terraces? - A. That is correct.

    Q . When you got to that corner you would be able to see
        the state of the perimeter track ahead of you, would
        you not? - A. Yes.

    Q. Were there any other Police Officers you could see
       ahead of you on the track apart from Mr. Illingworth
       who you have described coming towards you? - A. I can't
       recall that at all, sir.

    Q. Clearly there were not a large number of Police
       Officers? - A. No, sir.

    Q. Mr. Illingworth, we know, was an Officer who had a duty
       to be on the track as part of his match duty and so he
       was a track Officer, all right? - A. I do not know what
       his duties were.

    Q. You did not know that but you saw him. As you were
       walking from that corner and before you got to the gate
       you opened, which is gate 3, you had already formed the
       view that assistance was required? - A. That is
       correct, sir.

    Q. You mention two matters which I want to investigate.
       First of all, you clearly noticed that the right hand
       pen was pretty empty as you put it? - A. That is
       correct, sir.
                                                                  45

                                                          R . GRfaiHJj


    Q. That would be very unusual, would it not, for a Semi
       Final game either at or just before kick-off, for a
       full capacity game? - A. I don't know, sir.
B
    Q. But you certainly observed it. I am not being rude but
       it went into your consciousness as something of note,
       did it not? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. I say that because to actually notice it and register
       it, it was obviously something that caught your eye,
       the relative emptiness of that wing pen? - A. Yes, that
       is correct.

    Q. The centre pens, clearly because you did this before
       you even got to gate 3, you did not hesitate. As soon
       as you saw those centre pens you could tell you needed
       assistance? - A. That is correct, sir.




                                     /Q. Tell us again.
                                                R. GREEN


Tell us again what it was you could see? You said you
could see people crushed up against the fence? - A.
That is right.

Clearly, on that evidence, in considerable difficulties
and distress, they must have been? - A. That is right,
sir.

When you got to the gate 3 and decided you had to open
it, did you look round to see where the gate Officer
was who would be on the perimeter track, the man whose
duty it was to be there? - A. No, sir, I just opened
the gate to get them out.

You may have been asked this and it is my fault if you
have been, do you know a P.C. Smith? - A. No, sir.

Do you know any of these Officers:   a Police Constable
Packer? - A. No, sir.

Police Constable Taylor or Police Constable Cooper, any
of those names mean anything to you? - A. No, sir.

I say this because I want you to comment if you can,
because it is a puzzle to me in the light of your
evidence, which is important evidence, but we have
heard from P.C. Packer that he was instrumental in
opening, with other Officers, the gate 3 which you
refer to, but you can't help on that? - A. No, sir.
When I got there that gate was closed and I opened it.

One thing is certain, that at whatever time it was you
were there, the difficulties you saw were clearly in
relation to both centre pens because you started your
radio message before you got to pen 3, that is right,
isn t it? - A. That is correct.

     MR. KING:   I have no further questions, sir.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Sergeant Green, what time was it when you arrived on
the track in front of pen 3, please? - A. Idon't know
the time correctly at that time. It would be very near
to kick-off time, I would imagine.

Was it before kick-off? - A. I can't say the correct
time.

The players on the pitch though? - A. As I said
earlier, the players were warming up on the pitch as I
came out on the playing area. How long they had been
on I don t know, and I don't know what time it was when
I got to the front of the West Stand.
                                               R. GREEN


But you saw P.C. Illingworth behind the goal at that
time? - A. Yes.

And where he was, was that past gate 3? - A. Yes, it
would be. I think he was directly behind the goal.

He was making his way towards gate 4, is that right,
going in that direction? - A. That is correct.

You said gate 3 was closed at that time, didn't you? -
A. Yes, it was.

So you opened it? - A. That is correct.

And allowed a number of fans out and took them along
the track to pen 2, I believe? - A. That is correct.

When you took them out of that area and P.C.
Illingworth was going away past gate 4, were there any
other Police Officers there at that time? - A. I can't
say where P.C. Illingworth went when he walked past me,
when I went up to pen 2. I didn't see him any more
after that.

Did you see any other Police Officers at gate 3, the
one that you had opened? - A. I can't recall that.

You don't think there were any? - A. I don't think so.

But you left the gate open, I believe, and walked away
from it? - A. I left the gate open and escorted the
fans into pen 2, opened the gate to pen 2 and put them
in there from off the playing area.

So that could mean that a stream of people could come
out of the gate and follow you along the track, if that
is what happened? - A. Yes, they were still coming out
when I left the gate and they were building up on the
playing area. That is why I had got to get them off
the track.

Is that what you usually do if you open a perimeter
gate in a perimeter fence, that you just open it ....

     THE CORONER:   Just a minute, let's just find out:

How many times in your life have you opened a perimeter
gate, at a football match? - A. That was the first
time.

     THE CORONER:   So he can't really answer what he
would usually do.
                                                  R. GREEN


     MRS. McBRIEN:   So you just used your initiative
to do that? You felt you did not need to ask a senior
Officer, some Superintendent who may have been in that
area, before you took those steps? - A. No, I acted on
my own initiative.  People were in danger.

Yes, but you just thought that you could just leave a
gate open in the perimeter fence and walk away from it?
- A . As I said, there were people coming through. Some
were very distressed, I spoke to some of them and as
the others were coming through they were building up on
the playing area. For the match to continue you have
got to get spectators off the playing area and that is
when I escorted them along into pen 2.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am sorry, I have been reminded
of something I should have asked.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, go ahead.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

It was about the radio message, Sergeant.     You say you
tried to radio? - A. That is correct.

Could you tell us what it was you did to try to radio?
- A. I was trying to get a message through to stop
people coming into the centre pens, and also for
medical teams to get there.

That is the message you wanted to put over? - A. That
is correct.

What did you actually do in order to try and put that
message over? - A. I called my serial call and asked
for Control.  I got no reply.

Were you speaking into the radio your message? - A. Of
course.

You weren|t simply just asking for Control, you were
speaking into it? - A. I was speaking into my radio,
trying to get hold of Control to pass a message to
them.

Did you actually mouth the words of the message into
the radio? - A. As I said earlier, I called my serial
call and asked Control for a message.  I got no reply.

I know you got no reply but then did you give the
message? - A. You don't give the message until you get
a reply from Control.

All right.   Did you use your emergency code? - A. No.
                                               R. GREEN


It really arises out of something Mrs. McBrien asked,
if I may, with leave, develop it. You had not been
able to get through on your radio; the message you
wanted to get through was to prevent more people coming
into the centre pens, you have just told us that? - A.
That is correct.

You had opened a gate, gate 3, which of course was
going to help the people at the front but it was not
going to stop people coming into the centre pens, was
it? - A. No, you misunderstand me. The message I was
getting through was to try to prevent further
supporters coming into the centre pens because it was
already full.

Yes, I understand that.  I am not criticising you for
opehing gate 3. That was very commendable because that
helped the people who were crushed at the front of the
pen, but that of itself, that very sensible step, that
would not solve the other problem of stopping people
getting into the pen, would it? - A. I don't know what
the position was at the back.

No, but you obviously had formed the view that you
wanted to stop people getting into the pen, that was
the purpose of your message? - A. That is correct.

After you had taken people to the side pen, to develop
what Mrs. McBrien said, why was it that you felt it was
safe and proper just to go away from the scene without
trying to make further contact with somebody to do
something about stopping people getting into the pen? -
A. I did make further contact with someone.

You did? - A. Yes.

Who did you make contact with? - A. There was an
Inspector walking down the front and I ran to him and
asked him to get medical teams there.

Who was that Inspector? - A. I don't know his name.

What did you say to that Inspector? - A. I said to him,
 We want medical teams here", and he replied, "It's in
hand".

Where did you go then? - A. I went up onto the wall, I
stood on the wall, and I was beckoning the supporters
to come away from the radial fencing.

I see, you stayed at the scene? - A. Yes.

     MR. KING:   I can't take it any further, sir.
                                                R. GREEN


     MRS. McBRIEN:   Could I come back again, now that
Mr. King has brought something else up?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, Mrs. McBrien.

       Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

When you allowed the fans out of gate 3 what kind of
condition were these people in? - A. They weren't badly
injured.  I remember one girl who was very distressed
but the others were walking under their own steam.
This particular girl was very distressed, she stated
she had got a friend in the terrace, and I told her to
sit on the wall while she recovered and her friend came
out.

But you then said to an Inspector that you needed
medical teams? - A. That is right.

If they were not badly injured, apart from being
distressed, would you make a call for that? - A. The
people who were coming out of the pens weren't badly
injured, it was the people in the pens who were getting
injured, who were being crushed up against the fencing.

You walked away from that area so you did not actually
see those people? - A. Yes, I could see them crushed as
I got to the pens the first time.

So you have no idea what time it was but obviously from
what I am gathering it must have been quite a bit later
than kick-off? - A. No, it was round about kick-off
time.

          Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN

Constable Green, you have mentioned seeing Constable
Illingworth on the perimeter track, but no other Police
2 H * cers* Do 1 take   that y°u mean that other Police
Officers could have been there, it may well have been
you simply did not see them? — A. Yes, that is correct.
P.C. Illingworth was the only one I recognised.

Do you have a clear recollection or is it only hazy as
to exactly what was happening on the perimeter track as
you were walking past? - A. It is very hazy, what I can
remember. My attention was drawn to the pens and I was
looking towards the back to see what the problem was at
the back.

So it would appear that perhaps a number of things
could have been occurring on the perimeter track but
you really are not able to assist us? - A. That is
correct.
                                               R. GREEN

In fact, you had not even noticed gate 4, which you
must have passed? - A. That is correct.

You did not speak to Constable Illingworth? - A. No.

By that time I think you said you had noticed that
something was wrong in pen 4? - A. Yes, they were
crushed up against the front.

You think there may have been some reason perhaps why
you did not say something to Constable Illingworth
about that? - A. The reason I did not speak to
Constable Illingworth was because he rushed past me.

He rushed past you? - A. Yes.

Did you glean from that movement of his, rushing past
you, that there was a sense of urgency in him? - A.
Yes, definitely.

Do you think it could have been that there were other
figures on the perimeter track behind and in front of
you, at that stage, but you were concentrating on the
fence? - A. Yes, possibly.

               Further by THE CORONER

Just one small question: you don't carry a stick do
you, by chance, when you are walking around? - A. No,
sir.

Sergeant Green I am very grateful to you for being
here. Thank you very much for your help, it is much
appreciated.




             EDWARD SHANE HIGGINS Sworn ..
                                                         52


                                   E.S. HIGGINS



                  EDWARD SHANE HIGGINS Sworn

                       By THE CORONER:

Q. I have not got your full names. Can you give them to
   me please? - A. It is Edward Shane Higgins sir.

Q. It is Police Sergeant 1066? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. On the 15th April 1989 you were I think in Serial 20.
   Is that right? - A. That is right.

Q. The task of that was a standby Serial, was it? - A.
   Standby in the gymnasium.

Q. So you were within the curtilage, as I like to call it,
   of the ground? - A. That is correct.

Q. But you had no specific duties until called upon to
   do something. That is right, isn't it? - A. That is
   right.

Q. I expect they found various things for you to do from
   time to time but you were still in the gymnasium at
   between 20-to-3 and 10-to-3.  Is that right? - A.
   That is right, till about 20-to.

Q. Had you been out of the gymnasium at all and walked
   round and looked at the site, so to speak? - A. Just
   once with the Inspector.

Q. What time would that have been about? - A. I think that
   would be about 20-past-2.

Q. Did you notice anything at that time of significance
   or discuss anything with the Inspector? This is
   20-past-2 we are talking about? - A. About 20-past-2.
   Just the fact that most of the Forest fans seemed to
   be in the ground and the North Stand/West Stand was
   about half full.

Q. Did you pass a comment on that or did you just notice
   it? - A. Just noticed it.

Q. You did not discuss it with the Inspector, that is what
   I am trying to find out? - A. No.

Q. It was something that you noticed but it is a thought
   that went through your mind? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. You then returned to the gymnasium? - A. Yes.
                                                          53


                                  E.S. HIGGINS



Q. And that is where you were. Then I think a radio
   message came? - A. A message came about, I think it
   would be about 20-to-3.

Q. What was that? - A. That they wanted some assistance at
   the turnstiles, A gate.

Q. I want to check the time. I am qoing to show you a
   page from Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry. Have a look
   at this page. This is page 91 but I am afraid I
   don't know what day it is. Have a look at letter C
   and just read that through? - A. Is that the answer
   to question C?

Q. Yes, I want you to read the question and the answer
   because you are dealing with the time.  Is that the
   correct record of what was said between you and the
   questioner at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry? - A. That
   is right sir. There is a time in there. It says:
   "You have in your statement put at 2.20" which I
   corrected and said the correct time was 2.40.

Q. What is the time. That is what I want you to tell me
   now. Is it 2.20 or 2.40 when you received the radio
   message? - A. 2.40 sir.

Q. And you were still in the gymnasium at that point?
   - A. Correct.

Q. The next question is what in fact was the message
   precisely? - A. To give some assistance at the turnstiles
   in the Leppings Lane end.

Q. Was there any specificity as to which turnstiles you
   were to give assistance? - A. No.

Q. Was there anything specific as to which turnstiles
   you were to attend? - A. No.

Q. Was it a message to go to the turnstiles, the concourse,
   or the gates, or what? - A. It was to attend the Leppings
   Lane end sir.

Q. You I think enquired how many of you were to go and
   you were told to take the full Serial? - A. Yes, I asked
   if they wanted the full unit and the reply came back:
   "Yes, the full unit".

Q. Then I think you went towards the Leppings Lane end
   round the back of the North Stand. Is that right?
   - A. That is right sir.

Q. As you went along what happened? - A. On the way to the
   Leppings Lane end it just became apparent that there
                                                              54


                                     E.S. HIGGINS



     were quite a few people urinating all the way along
     the back of the cantilever Stand and in fact outside
     on the approach, little lane to where Gate A was.

           I realised if we did anything positive about
     that then the unit would be depleted, so I instructed
     my unit not to arrest any of the people urinating, just
     to keep the unit together.

Q. In other words you walked past them? - A. That is
   correct, yes.

Q.   Iam not blaming you for that because you did   that as
     a policy decision. - A. That is right.

Q. When you say the "little lane" if you turn round and
   look at the model .... How well do you know the ground,
   by the way, I should have asked you that? - A. Quite
   well.

Q. Is the little lane that passageway you are talking
   about? - A. It is just when you come out of the actual
   covered area at the rear of the cantilever into the
   open air.

Q.    Isee, it is at the top then. Do youwant to    show us
     where it is? - A. It is when you come out of the
     cantilever Stand and it is leading all the way down
     towards Gate A.

Q. But you are pointing to the outside of the ground at
   the moment? - A. The cantilever Stand there. There
   was some urinating in the actual aisle and down this
   area.

Q. That is what I thought you were saying. So you were
   approaching then the rear of that part of the turnstile
   area which is bounded by Gate A and Turnstiles 1-8?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. As you were approaching it you have already told me
   what you saw at the back there and you had taken some
   decision, what was apparent as you got nearer to it?
   - A. There was obviously some problem outside with the
   actions of the people that were coming in saying:
   "You will have to get something sorted out" and they
   were quite vociferous about that, so I knew there was
   a problem outside Gate A.

Q. That is because people were actually commenting, they
   were telling you, had not seen anything yet, it was
   just the reception of people. They were walking in
   the opposite direction to you presumably? - A. That
   is right, yes.
                                                       55


                                     E.S. HIGGINS



Q. You then approached this area.  Did you see any other
   Police Officers in that vicinity at that point? -
   A. No, there was none other than myself and my unit.

Q. Did you see the gatemen? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you know the gate people at all? - A. No I didn't,
   no.

Q. You would not be able to   name who you saw? - A. No.

Q. Did he - I assume it is a he - was it a man. Let's
   just make sure that the gateman was a man? - A. I think
   there were a couple of gatemen, males.

Q. Did they say anything to   you?- A. Not at that time, no.

Q. So what did you do? - A. From landing at Gate A I
   realised there was a problem outside. The Inspector
   and several of the unit went to my left and I never
   saw them again.

Q. Which Inspector is this? - A. Inspector Delaney.

Q. Oh, he came with you? - A. Yes.

Q. Yes, carry on. He went to the left? - A. And I remained
   there with the remainder of the Serial. Again from
   people that were just shouting and remonstrating with
   us there was obviously a large problem outside at the
   turnstiles.

Q.    So what happened after that? - A. After several minutes
     I could see that the gatemen were having difficulty
     with the bolts on the main gate. Every so often they
     had to push the top bolt back up and the bottom one.
     The gate was being rattled from the outside causing
     vibration which then caused the bolts to drop and
     loosen from the fastenings.

Q.    Did you     hear any shouts coming infrom the outside
     at all? - A. There was quite a lot of noise from the
     outside.

Q. But nothing you distinguished as such? - A. Nothing
   really specific.

Q. Then you were standing there; no other Police Officers
   that you could see; two gatemen, noise and the rattling
   gate? - A. That is right.

Q. Did you feel that any further action needed to be taken?
   - A. Yes, the gatemen again had to put the bolts back
   up and it was as though the gate was being forced,
   the actual gate was moving quite considerably. At
                                                              56


                                           E.S. HIGGINS



        that time I thought the actual gates were going to
        be forced open and the side wall was moving which the
        gates attached to. That is when I realised that there
  ■     was a probability of the gate being forced open and
Bf      causing some serious injuries.

      Q. So what   action did you decide to take? - A. I then
         went on    the radio, explained the position saying it was
         a "life   and limb" situation and requested that I be
         allowed    to open Gate A.

      Q. So when you went on the radio I take it you tried to
         radio through to Control.  Is that right? - A. That is
         correct.
      Q. It-was on talk-through wasn't it? - A. That is right.

      Q. But your line of communication would have been\to
          Control? - A. It would have been to Control.   \

      Q. Having got on to the radio did you in fact get the
          response? - A. Yes, I got a response.

      Q. What was that response? - A. That was from Mr. Marshall
         stating if that was the case then to open A gate.

      Q. You say it is Mr. Marshall. What makes you say it was
         Mr. Marshall? - A. Just from recognising his voice.

      Q. You know him do you? - A. Yes.

      Q. Did you know where Mr. Marshall was positioned or at
         least what his job was on that day? - A. He was outside
         in the Leppings Lane area.

      Q. Were you surprised that you got a response from him
         as opposed to a response through Control? - A. No, I
         never really give it a thought sir.

      Q. What I don't understand, and perhaps you can just help
         me because this may be a lack of knowledge, in fact
         it is a lack of knowledge of radio communication, how
         is it that you could get a response from Mr. Marshall
         direct? - A. It could probably be that he was in a
         position on the talk-through with us being in close
         proximity that he could hear me quite clearly.

      Q. I see so it is on talk-through possible for people to
         bypass Control and talk to each other? - A. That is
         correct sir, yes.

      Q. That is what I am trying to find out? - A. Yes sir,
         that is correct.
                                                           57

                                   E.S. HIGGINS


Q. That is not an impossibility in other words? - A. No,
   that does happen.

Q. So if you and I had a radio and one of these gentlemen
   was in Control, we don't necessarily have to talk through
   Control, we can talk direct if it is on talk-through?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. So you got the message from Mr. Marshall:   "Open the
   gate" in those circumstances? - A. Yes.

Q. I take it having requested it that is what you set
   about doing? - A. That is right.




                        Q.   Describe to me
                                            E. S. HIGGINS


Describe to me how you set about it.   Who opened it,
what other steps, if any, did you take? - A. Once I had
the authority from Mr. Marshall to open the gates I first
of all decided that with our opening the gate there would
be a rush of fans coming in, so I lined my section up on
the wall side and just gave them instructions to really
shout at people that there was room in the ground and not
to rush, just to try and stop a panic.   Whilst I was
doing that another Sergeant came, Sergeant Dowson from
Attercliffe Division.   I told him to do the same, but on
the opposite side to where I was, just to spread out and
again tell people not to rush and to stop a panic.

If we look at that model, if you look at the perimeter
wall, behind Gate A, the long wall, you were lined up
along.that wall, not necessarily as far as that? -A. That
is correct.

The other Sergeant was lined up against what looks like
an internal fence?   So you were forming a sort of chain?
- A. From the gate down, as a funnel.

I do not know whether you noticed at the time but in that
area there was a programme seller with a portacabin.   Do
you remember him at all? - A. No.

There is also a little gap in that internal fencing.      Do
you remember that? - A. Yes.

Did you, having got your line, so to speak, divert the
people into through that gap into the concourse area? -
A. No, sir.   The line of Orficers the opposite side to
me went past that entrance into the concourse.

Where did the people go who entered through Gate A? - A.
Straight down the main gangway towards the cantilever
stand, the North Stand.

You are absolutely certain about that? - A. Positive.

The reason why I ask this is because Mr. Hurst, his
evidence was that the fanswho came through the gate, not
the ones who came through the turnstile but the fans who
came through the gate, were diverted by a Serial of
Officers or, if you like, prevented from going towards
the cantilever stand and diverted into the concourse area
near his portacabin.   Have you any knowledge or
recollection of that whatsoever? - A. No, sir.   That was
the reason the filter was made so they could go down in
safety down to the cantilever stand.

I take it that initially at least no attempt was made to
check the tickets of these people who were coming
through? - A. No, sir.
                                                            59

                                                  E. S. HIGGINS


Q. So you didn't know whether they were seated spectators? -
   A. Not at all, sir.   My main concern was for the safety
   of them rather than tickets or non-tickets.

Q. Before the gate was opened.••   You obviously had to get
   the steward to do it? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. Did he in fact comply with your request? - A. Herefused
   first of all and then I told him that if he didn't open
   it then I would.   I had to be quite strong with him, the
   fact that we had had permission to open the gate, it was
   for the safety of the fans and eventually he did open the
   gate.

Q. What sort of delay would you say there was, in very round
   terms» between your telling him and his eventually
   agreeing? -A. I am not quite sure, sir.   It would be
   something like a minute, or something after that, of my
   telling him.

Q. Did you stay with him or did you go off and speak to
   somebody else and come back to him and say, "Definitely
   got authority, go ahead and do it"? - A. No.    I just
   told him that that was what I was going to do.    He
   showed the fans outside the key through a little spyhole,
   indicating he was going to open the gate.    Then he moved
   off to the left out of the way.

Q. I see.   When the gates were opened so that people could
   get through? - A. Right.

Q. Did you look out through the spyhole? - A. No.

Q. So you do not know what the people were like immediately
   outside the gate?   You could only judge it from... - A.
   From just behind the gate, sir.

Q. And from people who had actually come through? - A.
   That's right.

Q.   The    gate was opened. People came through? - A. Correct.

Q.   Can you estimate how many people came through that gate?
     - A. I have no idea, sir.    I went nearest to the gate by
     the wall and when itwas opened the main thing was to try
     and stop them running in and falling down and causing
     some injury, so I have no idea how many came in.    I
     could not even hazard a guess, sir.

Q. Did you at some point bring the gate together again? - A.
   Yes.   After the initial rush through, that is, the
   people who were nearest to the gate, after they had
   initially gone past we steadily started to shut both
                                                                  60

                                                       E. S. HIGGINS


          sides of the gate so we could have an even trickle
          through.

          Do you recollect whether once that had been established,
 B        tickets were looked at? - A. Not by me they weren't, sir,
          no. After the initial rush and we had shut the gates I
          went out and saw Inspector Sykes who was outside.   He
          then - there were probably 70 or 80 people in that little
          area left.   The gates were then closed.

     Q. You actually went outside,     You don't know what happened
        inside? - A. No.

 C| Q.    As to whether anybody else was looking at tickets? - A.
          No, sir.

     Q.   Apart from Inspector Sykes...   Did you see Mr. Marshall,
          as a matter of interest? - A. I cannot remember if I saw
          him outside or not.

          When you say there were only about 70 or 80 people left
          in that little area, can you show me which little area
          you are talking about? -A. It was just this area by
          Gate A.

          You are pointing to a small area immediately outside
          Gate A?   That's right, isn't it? - A. Just in the ground
          complex.

          What about the rest of that area outside turnstiles 1 to
          16?   Was that empty or did it have people in it? - A.
          That area would have between about 70 and 80 in it.

          Do you mean the whole of the area? - A. Just in this
          area, yes.

     Q« So it was virtually empty? - A. Yes.

     Q« Does that mean that nobody was coming through the
        turnstiles either any more, apart from these 70 to 80? -
        A. There would be just a small trickle of people at the
        turnstiles.

          You many not have noticed, but did you notice whether
          there were any people outside the perimeter gates? - A.
          Looking towards the bridge, which is probably about 50
          yards away, there would be, I estimate, about 200 to 300
          people just standing about.

          Nobody immediately outside the perimeter gates either?
          When I say "nobody” , I don't mean not a single, solitary
          soul. - A. There wasn't a throng.




HI
                                               E. S. HIGGINS


There wasn't? - A. No, not just   atthe gates.     Just
about 200 or 300 by the bridge.

Did you have any idea what time this might have been? -
A. Not at that stage.   I remember somebody asking me if
they had kicked-off and I had not got any idea.

Didn't somebody perhaps say to you that it was after
three and the kick-off must have taken place? - A. That's
right.   I think that might have been Inspector Sykes.

It wasn't a fan? - A. I think it may well have been
Inspector Sykes.

You don't really remember? - A. No.

Did the people who came in through the gate appear to be
relieved, cross or angry when the gate was opened? - A. A
couple did say that it should have been done earlier and
were grateful that the gate had in fact been opened.

I want to be absolutely   sure I have understood your
evidence correctly with   regard to the number of people in
the area bounded by the   perimeter gate, the turnstiles 1
to 16 and Gate A.   You   know the section I mean? -A. Yes.

Mr. Griffiths, just stand up and outline that section so
we know exactly what we are talking about.   Gate A, all
the way along to 16, along that wall and then along the
perimeter gate and along the side of the house there, so
that area there? - A. That is the area with about 70 or
80 people left in.

Would I be right in saying that what happened was that as
you came along you got to Gate A, perceived the need and
just stopped as that was behind the turnstile area? - A.
That is correct.

Part of your Serial with Inspector    Delaney moved off
towards the left as you said? - A.    Yes, that is right.

You have no idea what happened to them or where they
went? -A. No.

Was the decision to form this funnel which you have
described with yourself and the other Serial, your
decision or somebody else's decision? - A. No, sir, I
made that decision.

You weren't instructed to do that? - A. No, sir.

You are certain about it? - A. I am certain about that,
                                            E. S. HIGGINS


Then I know subsequently there was a request for people
to go on to the pitch and no doubt you went and did what
was necessary? - A. Did what we could, sir.

I don't think we need to trouble you on that because we
have heard from a lot of people about that. It is one
o'clock so we will not trouble you with any cross-
examination either.   We will have lunch.   Two o'clock
we start again.   Please remember you are on oath so
don't discuss the evidence with anybody. - A. No, sir, I
won't.

                (Luncheon adjournment)
              Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE

What did you mean please when you said over the radio
that it was a life and limb situation? - A. Just the
fact that the gate was being shaken that violently and
moving the side wall that I had visions of the gate
being forced and then collapsing on somebody.

             Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS

Sergeant Higgins, you received authority to open the
gate and you lined up your serial on either side of the
gate as I understand it? - A. No, sir. As you are
coming in from the outside of the ground my serial was
on the left hand side as you entered the ground.

But then another serial was lined up on the other side?
- A. That is correct, yes.

You wanted that serial to tell people not to rush? - A.
That is correct.

Do I understand this to be the reason behind your
lining up the serials in that way and giving that
information or that advice that you were concerned that
those coming in may be a danger to themselves in the
way that they came in? - A. That is correct, that they
might run too fast and somebody might trip up.

Gate A and those adjacent to gate A would in normal
circumstances be people who had tickets for the North
Stand? - A. That is correct.

So by letting them in by that gate and allowing them to
go in the way you have mentioned, in other words, not
diverting them through any side gate as mentioned by
the Coroner but letting them go up and round, that
would take them to where they should have been going? -
A. That is correct.

On the assumption, of course, that those people outside
gate A were in the right place? - A. That is correct,
yes.

             Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING

Sergeant, you said you had not looked through the key
hole or the spy glass through the gate. What can you
tell us about things around the gate or things that
were happening outside the gate which resulted in you
seeing things happening, people doing things, or things
being said. You have told us about the gates
themselves being visibly shaken but can you help us
further as to that? - A. Just at the side of the gates
are the turnstiles and you could see people being
crushed at the turnstiles and from what the people said
who gained entry through the turnstiles. They were in
fact remonstrating with myself and the other Officers,
that they were getting crushed and something ought to
be done outside.

So you had a firm basis from that view for the words
that you then used, saying that it was a matter of life
and limb? - A. That is correct, yes.

That was a view that you yourself had formed as a
result of the sort of things you had been telling us
about? - A. That is correct.

You had not in forming that view just relied upon what
people had been saying to you after they had got in? -
A. No, what I saw as well.

So would you agree with me that it was a question of
the safety of the people you saw being crushed that
made you make that most unusual request? - A. That is
correct, sir, yes.

You knew, did you, that Mr. Marshall was the Commander
of the Police deployment outside of the ground? - A.
Yes, I did.

You recognised his voice when you made your radio
message? - A. Yes, I believe it was Superintendent
Marshall who came through.

In hearing that, is it right that you felt that here
was a senior Officer, or one of the most senior
Officers present, that he was a man who himself was in
charge of the outside of the ground and who clearly,
therefore, would have known what was going on there and
that in his response to you to open that gate he was an
Officer who was well able to make that sort of
decision? - A. I am not sure where Mr. Marshall would
have been outside but a request from me, if I am
mentioning something to do with life and limb, that
there would possibly be deaths, then that authorisation
would be given.

It is right, is it not, that in so far as the talk over
mode of the radio is concerned that when one person has
the air time, if one may put it that way, in other
words they are talking, that in itself precludes
anybody else from having the same ability for that
length of the conversation? - A. Of course, unless it
is interrupted and the message then would be
incomprehensible.

That is if you momentarily stop to breathe or something
like that, somebody manages to break into it before you
have managed to pass on the message? - A. That is
correct, sir, yes.

So the conversation that took place, or your initial
message on talk over, would be heard by people who
could hear? - A. Yes, that is right.

We know there was an awful lot of noise about and it
was not easy on occasions to hear the radio anyway.   Is
that an experience that you can confirm? - A. Yes, that
is quite correct, if you are in with the large crowd.

But it was heard by Superintendent Marshall who
responded to your request? - A. That is correct, sir,
yes.

               Cross-Examined bv MR. KING

Sergeant Higgins, can I deal first with the questions
that were put to you by my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs,
as to the direction in which the people who were coming
through gate A were being in effect directed or
marshalled if I can put it that way? Your evidence is
that they were going, and steps were being taken to
ensure that they went, towards the North Stand? - A.
That is correct, sir.

If in fact they were directed away from the North Stand
into the concourse area outside the West Stand that, of
course, would be an area leading to the Leppings Lane
terraces, would it not? - A. That is correct, yes.

If they were directed that way the inevitable way they
would end up would be on the terraces. That would be
the natural conclusion to come to, would it not? - A.
Or the stand.

Or the stand, yes, but if you put a mass of people into
the concourse area outside the West Stand away from the
North Stand there must be a very great chance that they
will end up on the terrace, is there not? - A. There is
a possibility of that, yes.

Can I just put to you because it is important, the
evidence we heard from Mr. Hurst, because I have looked
it up in the lunchtime adjournment? Mr. Hurst, to help
you, Sergeant, was a programme seller and he witnessed
the opening of gate A at a time when I assume you would
                                               E. S. HIGGINS


be there. This is page 63 of the transcript on the
evidence on the 18th December 1990 (Day 22)—   - A. If
it will help, sir, when Mr. Hurst was giving evidence
some time back I was due to be called on and so in fact
I was in Court when he was giving evidence.

That is very helpful.  I am reminding you then of
something which you have actually heard. This is what
the Coroner said (page 63-F) and this is to the
witness, M r . Hurst:

    "You are saying that a number of Police
    Officers appeared from behind you? - A. Yes.

    Q. They formed a line from Gate A? - A. They
    formed two queues enabling a passageway of
    people to get between them."

If I pause there, in a sense that is the same as your
evidence up to a point because you did have two lines
of Policemen, one on each side? - A. That is correct.
It goes on:

    "Q. The gate was opened, people came through? -
    A. Yes, that is right.

    Q. What I am interested in is did these people
    who came through then go towards the North
    Stand, or are you saying that they were
    channelled? - A. They were channelled through a
    side gate which was adjacent to where we were
    selling programmes and, so far as I am aware,
    everyone who came through that gate went in
    through the side gate.  I didn't see anybody
    break rank, as it were, and go that way."

Then at page 64-C:

    "Q. That would have led into the concourse area
    which would have led either into the West Stand
    or into the north-west terracing? - A. Yes.

    Q. Or into Leppings Lane terracing if they came
    through the gate in a brick wall? - A. Yes."

At letter F at the bottom of page 64:

    Q. Okay. As far as you know anyway, all of
    these people, however many there may have been
    and you thought there could have been anything
    up to 700-odd, were channelled into this area
    and away from the North Stand? - A. Yes, sir."
 A
                                                                  ' 67

                                                       E. S. HIGGINS



       That was his evidence and you probably remember it? -
       A. I do remember it, sir, yes.
 B
     Q. It is an obvious point but his evidence cannot live
        with your evidence, can it, Sergeant? They are
        diametrically opposed? - A. No, I am afraid he is wrong
        totally on his evidence.

     Q. I understand that is your position and at some stage
        the Jury will have to decide which is right or wrong
        but what is clear, and you would agree with this, that
        if spectators were directed, as Mr. Hurst said they
        were, into the concourse area that was the area which
        could lead quite easily to the terracing? - A. If they
        had gone that way, sir, yes.

     Q. I will not take that any further, thank you. Can I
        deal with the matter of timings and the communication
        you sent by radio? First of all, what was the time gap
        between your communicating your request for gate A to
        be opened and gate A being opened? What was the time
        gap? - A. If I just take you from the gymnasium, that
        was at twenty to.




                                                    /Q, No, I am.




HI
                                           E. S. HIGGINS

No, I am not asking now the time on the clock, I am
asking the amount of time which elapsed. You told us
that you put through a radio message, didn't you? - A
Yes.

Asking for the gate to be opened and you got a reply
which you say came from Mr. Marshall. What I want to
know is how much time elapsed between your putting
through your radio message and your getting the gate
opened? - A. It would be very little time indeed.

Are you talking about half a minute, seconds? - A. It
would be something like probably 10, 15 seconds,
something like that.

Do you know what time gate A was opened, actually by
the1clock now? - A. No, not at all.

I will be stopped if I am saying anything I should not
be saying. There is a video of gate A and I think from
the video timings it is 2.58.

     THE CORONER:   I don't remember.    I don't think
there is a video of gate A opening.   It has always been
one  of the problems with gate A.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    It certainly does not appear on
thevideo time schedule, but the time of 2.58 certainly
rings very strong bells with me.

     THE CORONER:   If it is anywhere in the evidence
here it will be in Inspector Layton's.

     MR. KING:   I remember distinctly, sir, that when
I was cross-examining Mr. Marshall you came back very
properly to me, having done some research in a break.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.  I am not saying that you are
wrong, all I am saying is I can't remember it at the
moment.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I won't delay time now because
clearly this Witness cannot deal with it.

     THE CORONER:   Press on and if we find it we can
always come back to it.

     MR. KING:   I might be able to help with this
Witness if he could ....

     MR. PAYNE:   I have got it. I have got a note
TB2/14.58, gate A opened, likewise RJH1/14.58, gate A
opened.
                                             E. S. HIGGINS


        THE CORONER:   It looks as if you were right, Mr.
King.

     MR. KING:   I wonder, it may help you and jog your
memory, Mr. Higgins, that you had some knowledge of
this from somewhere. Just have a look at page 93 of
the transcript of what you told Lord Justice Taylor, at
letter "E", the questions and answers given by you to
Lord Justice Taylor? Do you see that? - A. Yes, I do.

Do you accept those were the questions which were put
and the answers you gave? - A. That is right, yes, sir.

Do you accept, therefore, that you told Lord Justice
Taylor that the gate was opened at .58 or thereabouts?
- A. Yes.

That obviously fits in with what we have gained from
other sources but what was your source of knowledge
that the gate was opened at .58, which I assume means
2.58? - A. I think probably the time that I would have
been there, and then after going outside the gates
would be opened just for a couple of minutes, and
somebody I think had said that they would have kicked
off, so that would be then 3 o'clock time.

Let us assume that it was 2.58 at the moment, and fit
that in if I may to other evidence we had as to other
timings, and here can I take the help of my learned
friend who reminded me this morning, C277 I think it
is, the timetable.  Sergeant Higgins, you won't be
aware of all these timings but these are timings which
have been extracted from various sources, primarily
from video evidence and photographs.  If you look down
the left hand column you see External Timings”? - A. I
do, yes.

Just to help you, if you find 14.48.04, you see a
reference to gate C opening? - A. I see that, sir, yes.

And at 14.48.31, gate C closing - that is a reference
to another concertina gate which you have no knowledge
of? - A. That is right.

Then we look down, we come to 14.52 in the left hand
column, where we see "Gate C open, large number of
supporters enters”? - A. Yes, sir.

Then keep going down and you come to 14.57, some five
minutes later or so, "Gate C closed” , and then at 14.59
there is a reference to "Gate C open, supporters
entering” . It looks, if you are right, Sergeant
Higgins, as to 2.58 as when gate A opened, and if you
are also right that it was only a matter of seconds
                                          E. S. HIGGINS

when you put through your request, that your request
went through after, and it would seem quite a goodly
time after, a request to open gate C had gone through,
because we know gate C was opened for a long time, from
14.52 onwards, you understand? - A. Yes, sir.




     /Q. So it looks as if
                                                             71

                                   E.S. HIGGINS



o. So it looks as if your request as regards Gate A is
   not connected in time with the request and the openings
   of Gate C. Do you see what I mean? - A. I do sir, yes.

Q. That would follow from your evidence if you are right
   about 2.50? - A. If I am right about the time, yes sir.
Q. Because of course when you asked, on this evidence,
   for Gate A to be opened, Gate C had already been opened
   for some five minutes by the sound of it? - A. Yes.

Q. Can I just in those circumstances press you a little
   about the source of the order being Mr. Marshall.
   You are quite certain today, as I understand it, that
   it was Mr. Marshall? - A. Yes, I believe it was
   Mr. Marshall on the radio.

Q. Can I just take you to page 3 of a statement you made
   I think it was probably for the purposes of the Taylor
   Inquiry before you even gave evidence.  I am not sure
   of the date of it. It is his ordinary statement, sir.
   I wonder if the Officer could be shown his statement.
         THE CORONER:  Is it where it says:   "I went over
   the air" is that the passage:

         MR. KING:   Yes indeed sir.

Q. Sergeant Higgins, I am sure you can be shown the full
   document if you wish, but this is a statement apparently
   signed by you dated the 29th April 1989, some 14 days
   after the disaster. You probably accept that? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you see on the page you have been given that you
   were describing making the request for Gate A to be
   opened? - A. That is right sir, yes.

Q. You said you went over the air and requested that Gate A
   be opened to save life and limb, stating if not someone
   would be killed? - A. That is correct sir.

 Q. Could you just read out what in your statement you have
    put as regards the reply? - A. "A reply came back over     ^
    the air to open Gate A (not sure Superintendent Marshall?)
 Q. Why when you made your statement on the 29th April 1989
    did you feel that you ought to put in brackets
    " (not sure Superintendent Marshall?)" - A. The statement
    I made was the following day and at that time I was
    not sure if it was Mr. Marshall or not.

 Q. Well what has happened since then to make you sure?
    A. No, I said I believed it was Superintendent Marshall.
                                                            72


                                     E.S. HIGGINS



Q. I am sorry, let me take it in stages. You made notes
   not long after the incident, the next day? - A. That
   is the next day, yes.

Q. And at that stage you weren't sure that it was
   Superintendent Marshall, you clearly had doubt in your
   mind? - A. I was not sure, yes.

Q. Why weren't you sure? - A. Probably I thought it was
   him. That is what I have said earlier.

Q. You have said that today but in your statement and
   at the time of your notes you were not sure and you
   actually felt it was important to put that in brackets
   "(not sure Superintendent Marshall?)" It really looks
   as if you weren't sure at all? - A. I thought it was
   Mr. Marshall but I was not sure, that is how I read that.

Q. Is your position today that you are not sure? - A. Not
   100% sure, no sir.

         MR. KING:   I can't take that any further.

         THE CORONER: Mr. King, I have found the transcript
   of the reference to Gate A. It is, as I thought,
   Inspector   Layton and what he says, can I read it.
   It does not make much difference but just so that we
   have got it absolutely right. This is page 71 of
   Day 1, 19th November 1990. He says:

         "In respect of Gate A on a video tape
         referenced TB2 it is apparently open at
         14:58:09 hours with supporters entering
         via it. At a time estimated at 14:58
         the same scene is shown on the video tape
         referenced RJH1.   On video tape referenced
         TB2 at 14:58:23 a line of Police were
         shown supervising the supporters through
         Gate A."

         MR. KING:   I am obliged.

Q. Sergeant Higgins, can I just ask you a question about
   the use of radio. You apparently had no difficulty
   putting through your request in terms of communication?
   - A. No, other than just having to wait for other traffic
   to clear.

Q. Tell me: is there something called an emergency code
   which you can use if you have difficulty to break in
   as a matter of emergency. Do you know anything about
   that? - A. I am not sure sir, no.

Q. You have no knowledge of that? - A. No sir.
                                                                73


                                        E.S. HIGGINS



Q. Let me ask you something different again just to gather
   together some matters.

           Do you know a Police Inspector Bennett, now a
     Chief Inspector Bennett? - A. I do sir, yes.

Q. He gave evidence to this Inquest indeed at a time when
   I was not there and I am using as my source his evidence
   in transcript to this Inquest and sir it is on the
   17th December 1990 starting at page 60. He apparently
   told the Inquest that he arrived at Gate A at about
   20-to-3 and in the light of what he found there, and
   this is at page 63 sir, letter F, he used his personal
   radio to ask Control to send further Officers to Gate A
   or to the turnstiles and Gate A, and his evidence was
   that it was acknowledged very quickly and one Serial
   turned up. He further said he briefed that Serial
   who had arrived at Gate A.

           Now taking that in stages your evidence to us
     was that you weren't actually directed to Gate A itself?
     - A. As I recall it was just directed to the Leppings
     Lane end.

Q. Because we had the little discussion about the word
   specificity. Could it be though on reflection that
   you actually heard an instructions  "Go to Gate A"? - A.
   I might have done from the Control.

Q. Might you have been briefed by Mr. Bennett? - A. No
   sir. The first time I saw Mr. Bennett was when he was
   on top of the terraces stood up overlooking into the
   outside of the ground.

Q.    So you can't explain the Serial he briefed, it is
     nothing to do with you, you would say? - A. It is not
     my unit sir, no.

Q.    Did you see another Serial at the gate when you arrived
     at Gate A? - A. No, there was nobody there.

              MR. KING:   I can't take that any further.

              THE CORONER:   He did say he saw another Serial
     later.

           MR. KING: Oh yes later, but this on this
     evidence sir would be before.

              THE CORONER:   Would be earlier, I agree.

           MR. KING: I don't think I can raise any more
     further puzzles sir.
                                                            74


                                      E.S. HIGGINS



           MR. PAYNE: Sir, just in the interest of accuracy
     I have just been looking up, my friend was asking
     questions about Gate A and every now and again Gate C
     came into the questioning.  I have just been looking
     up the evidence of Mr. Marshall.

           It was quite clear his request, after discussing
     the situation with Inspector Purdy, was that the gates
     should be opened and there was no particular request
     by Mr. Marshall that any particular gate should be opened.

           THE CORONER:   I don't think this Officer can deal
     with that.

           MR. PAYNE: Oh no, quite, I am just getting it in
     the interests of accuracy.

           THE CORONER:   Yes, Mrs. McBrien.


                 Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Sergeant Higgins, when you first arrived on the concourse
   side of Gate A you realised the gateman was quite concerned
   about the situation outside.   Is that right? Did you
   realise that he was concerned? - A. No, not at all. I
   did not speak to the gateman at all.

Q.    Oh, but under normal circumstances if things would have
     been all right outside his job would be relatively simple
     at that part of the ground, wouldn't it? - A. Normally
     speaking, yes.

Q.   And    his job would be    to ensure that no fans would enter
     the ground through that gate where he was? - A. That is
     right.

Q. But it would be his job to open the gate about 10 minutes
   before the end of the match to allow for egress only.
   That would be his main job, wouldn't it? - A. That is
   correct, yes.




                                Q. You did see the
                                              E. S. HIGGINS


You did see the gatemen obviously, you spoke to them.
You did not think he was fearing for his life? - A. No,
not at all.

But he may have been?   If the gate was being rattled -
the gate he was holding was being rattled quite a bit.
That surely would have caused him some alarm? - A. I have
no idea.   I cannot answer that.

His job would be that he would stand firmly at that gate,
as the rules laid down in the Green Guide? - A. I have no
idea on that.

The   club would instruct him to do that job, I believe.

     MR. CATCHPOLEs    I wonder if we are taking time over
this. I think it is quite clear from the evidence of the
gatemen themselves as to what their role is.    I am not
sure that this Officer has any knowledge...

     THE CORONER:   I agree.   I am just trying to see
where Mrs. McBrien is getting to.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:  Sergeant Higgins, you are not aware
of what the gatemen are supposed to do at that gate, is
that right?    You have no knowledge what they are
standing there to do? - A. Other than just to - like you
have mentioned - open up near the end of the game.

You don't think it is connected with the Green Guide in
any way?

     THE CORONER:   He has already told you he doesn't
know anything about the Green Guide.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   So you wouldn't realise he would
need assistance to hold his position there? - A. No.

Because you didn't know what he was there for.

      THE CORONER:   He did not say that.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   When fans enter via the turnstiles,
as normal, is there a fear then of people running in and
falling over so that Officers have to say, "Be careful,
you are going to trip over”?   Does that usually happen
on a normal day? - A. No.

So by going in through a gate, as Gate A, there was some
risk of people injuring themselves just by the mere act
of doing it that way? - A. Well, you cannot say that just
by opening a gate, but that is why I was there to provide
provision just to cover that eventuality.
                                               E. S. HIGGINS


You saw an obvious risk, as I understood when I made my
notes, that you were having to...   I am lost for words
at the moment.   You were assisting them by ensuring that
they did not fall over because of the way they were
entering? - A. That is right, just in case when we opened
the gates that there would be an on-rush.   That is why
Officers were on both sides just to tell them to slow
down.

So that in itself creates a risk, doesn't it?

     THE CORONER:   No, it does not create a risk.   It
prevents one.   This is what the Officer has said.   He
could foresee that if people rushed in there was a risk
of tripping and he therefore placed himself in order to
advise them.

     THE WITNESS:   That's right.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Yes, I know you are saying you were
preventing them from falling because they were coming in
in that way, but if they did not come in that way to
start with, that risk would not be there at all and you
would not have to give them that advice.   That is what I
am trying to say.

     THE CORONER:   Let me put the question:

Mrs. McBrien is saying to you that if the gate had not
been opened - if it had not been opened - there would
have been no risk of anybody falling over by coming
through the gate.   Do you agree with that? - A. That's
right.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   I am not sure if we established it
or not, but when I made notes this morning you said that
Mr. Marshall gave the authority to open Gate A?   That is
what you told us this morning? - A. Yes, I believe it was
Mr. Marshall.

I made these notes on what you said this morning.   I
know I have heard other things this afternoon, but I had
already made my questions...

     THE CORONER:   Only ask questions which are
relevant, Mrs. McBrien, because we can't waste time in
asking questions which have been dealt with.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   It has caused a little confusion now
with the questions I had:

I was just wondering if Mr. Marshall referred to Gate A
specifically? - A. That is how I got the message back
                                            E. S. HIGGINS


that I thought.   It came back to open Gate A.    I am
sure I have mentioned that in the transcript.

The reason I am asking that is that I asked Mr. Marshall
questions when he gave his evidence and he said he did
not know the lettering of any of those gates.    He did
not know which was A, B or C.   That is why I made a note
of this this morning.   Now are you aware that the
authority to open the gates came from Mr. Duckenfield? -
A. No.

You are not aware of that?   However, an order such as
that would have to be recorded and, indeed, has been
recorded?

     THE CORONER:   He cannot possibly answer that.   If
he did not even know who gave the order how can he tell
whether it is recorded?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   So you would not know if it was in
documentation or whether it was given out at all? - A.
No.

You said your main concern was for safety, by opening
Gate A? - A. That's right, yes.

Do you think there is a safety risk if people come into a
ground in that way at all?

     THE CORONER:   Don't answer that question.   It is
not a proper question and it is an opinion which I would
not put any credence on.   No reflection on you.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   I was wondering if I could ask a
question in relation to a gate, with the experience you
have as a Police Officer.   I am not talking about the
exit gate being opened now.   I am going to use as an
example a gate, whether it was a perimeter gate -
wherever - as an example.   If you could give me some
idea of your feelings on this sort of thing.

     THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, I don't know what I
have to do to try and make it clear to you.    I don't
want this Officer's feelings on that matter and nor do I
want his opinion on it.   I want his evidence as to what
he did with regard to Gate A.   That is all I want and
that is all we are going to get him to tell us.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Could I use a hypothetical case?

     THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, I am not going to go
over it all again.    I have done it dozens of times.
This Officer is not the right person to ask this
question.   Besides, we have explored it with sufficient
                                               E. S. HIGGINS


people and we have a rough idea of what people think on
this subject and we don't need his opinion to add to it.

      MRS. MCBRIEN: Sergeant Higgins, you said the man
at   Gate A refused to   open the exit gate? - A. That is
correct.

Because he didn't want to allow fans into the ground that
way, did he? - A. That is probably the reason he wouldn't
open the gate, yes.

I may be wrong about this, but I believe the man at that
gate was an elderly man who was over 65 years of age? -
A. I have no idea.

But he refused to do what the Police suggested?      He was
going against a suggestion made by the Police.      He was,
as I believe, an elderly man saying...

     THE CORONER:      What is the question, Mrs. McBrien?

     MRS.   MCBRIEN:   This is just a general thing:

Would you   agree that     the older people get the wiserthey
get?

     THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien.      You don't have to
answer that question either.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   When he refused to open the gates I
believe you had to be strong with him? - A. I had to
speak to him to tell him I would open the gate if he did
not.

So you had to use some sort of force to get this to be
done? - A. No force necessary at all.

Sharp words? - A. I just told him in fairly strong terms
that the gate would be opened.




      Q. So he gave
                                                   E. S. HIGGINS


So he gave in? - A. That is right.

Reluctantly no doubt? - A. Probably.

You said initially there was a rush through the gate
but you did say the steward stood to the side? - A.
Yes, he moved away to the left.

     THE CORONER:    He did not say the steward.   He said
the gateman.

     MRS. McBRIEN: Yes, the gateman.     He stood to the
side, did he? - A. That is right.

Was he told by the   Police or by yourself to stand aside
when this rush, as   you called it, this initial rush,
came through? - A.   I think I may have told him to get
out of the way but   I am not sure on that point.

When people come through a turnstile normally, are
people asked to get out of the way of these people
coming into a ground? Do they have to do that or is
everything reasonably calm and orderly? - A. Who are we
asking to get out of  the way, I am sorry?

The gateman was asked to move out of the way, move       to
the side, because of   the way people were coming in that
day, wasn't he? - A.   No, he was told to get out of the
way so that my Officers could then follow the
instructions which I had given them. He would be then
in the way.

It was not for his own safety then, was it? - A. That
as well, yes.

He could be knocked to the ground and very badly
injured if he hadn't moved quickly enough, couldn't he?

     THE CORONER: I am sorry, Mrs. McBrien. Unless
you can bring it to a close I am going to have to ask
you to stop because we are not making any progress and
I cannot let it go on. I am sorry. Have you got a
different topic which you want to ask this man a
question on?

     MRS. McBRIEN: Sir, I have a little bit more
really that I would like to ask if I may.

     THE CORONER:    Well then, ask it if it is
different.

      MRS. McBRIEN: You said the gate was closed later?
-A.   That is correct, yes.
                                                  E. S. HIGGINS



Do you know how much later it was closed? - A. I would
think it would be a couple of minutes that the gate was
opened and then it would be closed.

Do you know if it was the Special Crime and Vandal
Squad that closed the gate? - A. That is my unit.

Pardon? - A. That is the unit I was in charge of.

So you opened and closed the gate? - A. That is
correct.

From other evidence I believed that the Crime and
Vandal Squad just stepped in to close the gate? - A.
No, that is wrong.

But you say you opened it as well but it was opened, we
have established at 2.58. That is the evidence, isn't
it? - A. Correct, yes.

That is a later opening for a gate, isn't it? That is
quite late. It is very close to kick-off, two minutes
before kick-off? - A. Could you rephrase the question?
Why is it late?

If fans arrive at a ground at 2.58 I thought that was
regarded as being late. I have understood all the
evidence we have heard that if people did not get there
by 2 o'clock or 2.30__

     THE CORONER: What is the question, Mrs. McBrien?
What are you trying to ask him    about that?I  can guess
but I want to hear it from you.

     MRS. McBRIEN: The fans who were waiting outside
gate A at that time, would you regard them as arriving
late at the ground or not? - A. Again that is an
opinion. They could have been waiting outside for half
an hour.

Oh it is possible, yes, but it is also possible that
they may not have been. We could look at it either
way, couldn't we?

     THE CORONER:   I do not think you need answer that
question either.

     MRS. McBRIEN: So I cannot say to you it is
possible that they could be ones who had stayed in the
pub a little later?

     THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien, you cannot.
     MRS. McBRIEN: You are aware that people who
arrive at the ground early are quite thoroughly checked
for tickets and the possession of alcohol, aren't
you? - A. I cannot say because I was on a reserve
serial.

Would you know that Police Officers, according to the
Operational Order, that is one of their main tasks,
isn't it?

     THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I am going to ask you
to sit down. I am going to ask you to sit down and I
am going to look at the other people and that gives you
a chance to sort out any important questions but I am
afraid you have not taken any notice of anything I have
said this afternoon.  I am sorry to have to put it
quite so bluntly. This Officer has come to give
evidence as to what he did. We are not interested in
his opinion as to what other Officers were doing or not
doing at any other point of time or in any other
location. You might as well ask him whether there are
officers policing the London Underground at the moment.
It is just as irrelevant. Would you sit down? Sort
your questions out whilst Mr. Russell is asking
questions.

             Cross-Examined bv MR. RUSSELL
Officer, you were the Sergeant in charge of Serial
20? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

That was one of the two reserve serials, Serial 21,
being the other one? - A. That is right.

Do I understand your   evidence to be this; that the
message you received   at about 2.40 which took you down
to the Leppings Lane   end was a message received from or
by Ground Control? -   A. That is correct, yes.

We are sure about this; it did not come from
Superintendent Greenwood? - A. No, it came from the
Force Control.

     THE CORONER:   Do you mean Force Control or Ground
Control? - A. I am sorry, sir. Ground Control.

     MR. RUSSELL: You have had evidence from a
transcript of a programme seller, Mr. Hurst, put to you
by my learned friend, Mr. King, because it differed in
one material respect from your evidence because the
recollection of Mr. Hurst was that the two lines of
Police Officers fed the people who came in through gate
                                                    E. S. HIGGINS


A through the gap in the wall into an area behind the
north west terrace, do you follow? - A. Yes, sir, I
follow.

I think you were in Court when Mr. Hurst gave his
evidence? - A. I was, sir, yes.

Were you also in Court when a Mr. Cobb gave his
evidence? - A. No, sir.

Who was the gateman with whom you have reported a
conversation? - A. No.

For the sake of completeness I might read you four
questions and answers which were dealt with by Mr. Cobb
on this very subject for your comment or, as I say, for
completeness.  It is the transcript from Day 21, page
78. It was during the Coroner's examination-in-chief.

     THE CORONER: Can I just ask you this;        we have
got that evidence?

     MR. RUSSELL: We have got the evidence, sir. The
one person that differed from this Officer was quoted
by my learned friend, Mr. King, and he said at the end
of it that it was then going to be a matter for the
Jury. For the sake of completeness I would give the
alternative version and then the Jury will then both
versions in the front of their mind.  I am just saying
that if one has been put then the other one should
perhaps be.

     THE CORONER: I have not got Mr. Cobb's evidence
in front of me but does it actually describe the
channelling of the fans?

     MR. RUSSELL:   Yes,   sir, it does.

     THE CORONER:   Very well then, put it.

     MR. RUSSELL: In my submission, it describes the
channelling of the fans and the clear inference is that
the channelling was done behind the North Stand as
opposed t o ---

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Mr. Cobb in answer to a question
said this:

    "—   a Police Sergeant came up to me —    "

- presumably yourself:
                                               E. S. HIGGINS



   "   and said, 'Well, we are going to open A
   Gate', and I said, 'Well, I don't think it is
   advisable.

   Q. What did you say, I am sorry? - A. I said I
   didn't think it was advisable with the crowd
   that was outside, and he had a policewoman with
   him, so he said, 'Well, we want it opening too
   get rid of them', so I said, 'Could you get it
   from higher authority for me to open it?' you
   see. So he said, 'Well, I'll go', and during
   that time I thought, 'Well, there's nowhere
   they can go through A Gate' because you can't
   see the match.

    Q. Is that because A Gate leads to the back of
    the North Stand? - A. To the back, straight
    through to 0 Gate on Penistone Road, so it
    didn't make no difference there, but what I was
    — not frightened, but what I didn't want to
    happen was for a rush and somebody to fall over
    coming through that gate. So I did ask. When
    he came back he said, 'I have authority', but I
    did ask for more police.

    Q. You did? - A. I did, which he definitely
    fetched, and then they had two lines of
    policemen up and Jack gave them the keys to the
    gate and I picked out the tallest copper and
    thought, 'I'm standing behind you', which I
    did. They opened the gates and that was it -
    whoosh - gone."

That was the extract of the evidence of the gateman and
I presume the Sergeant he is having his conversation
with there is you.  I do not want to draw any further
questions from that. As my learned friend, Mr. King,
said it is a matter for the Jury.

                Further bv THE CORONER

I will ask a further question though. Does that
account tie in with your recollection of what happened
in your conversations with the gateman? - A. Not
really, sir. The only time I spoke to the gateman was
telling me to open the gate. He refused and then I
told him a bit more strongly.

Because he says that whoever told him went away and
came back. You do not say you did that? - A. It is
slightly wrong, sir, because there was no Policewoman
there with us.
There was no Policewoman there either? - A. No.
        Further Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN
Sergeant Higgins, so the fans who had been rattling
gate A and who were let in for their own safety through
that gate, they were not checked for tickets or
alcohol, were they? - A. No.
I believe you said you do not know where these fans
went once they had been let in through that gate? - A.
They went down the entrance to the rear of the
cantilever stand.
     THE CORONER:   Is that the North Stand? - A. Yes,
that is the North Stand, sorry.
     MRS. McBRIEN: Soon after these fans had been let
in there was a request for all Officers to go to the
pitch I believe, wasn't there? - A. That is right, a
short time later.
    MRS. McBRIEN: Thank you.
     THE CORONER: Sergeant Higgins, thank you very
much indeed. We will rise for a few minutes and then
we call Inspector Crawford.
                  (Short Adjournment)
                                            W. C. CRAWFORD


           WILLIAM CAMERON CRAWFORD Sworn

Good afternoon. - A. Good afternoon, sir.

It is William Cameron Crawford, is that right? - A.
That is correct, sir.

You are now an Inspector, is that right? - A. That is
correct.

At the time, in 1989, 15th April, you were Police
Sergeant 1341, is that right? - A. I was, sir.

Congratulations on your promotion. - A. Thank you.

I think you were in charge of serial 14? - A. That is
correct, sir.

Serial 14 was located at the rear of turnstiles A-G, is
that right? - A. That is correct.

Had you done this particular duty before, at the rear
of turnstiles A-G? - A. I had, sir.

Did you do it in 1988? - A. No, I worked in the
concourse in 1988 and also in the West Stand.

When you say the concourse, which concourse do you
mean? - A. 1-16.

The other half? - A. Yes, the other half, sir, and also
in the West Stand.

Let's just deal with past history then for a moment,
and the thing that I am interested in is this: when
was the previous time, prior to 1989, that you were
actually behind Leppings Lane, if you can remember -
behind turnstiles A-G, sorry. - A. Probably several
years before that.

What I am interested in is this, is 1989 your first
semi-final that you did in that area? - A. It isn't,
sir. I have worked a number of semi-finals but at
different parts of the Ground.

In that area? - A. In that area I have worked several
semi-finals, several years prior to that ....

You have misunderstood my question.  I will start
again. Am I right in thinking that 1989 was the first
time that you were behind turnstiles A-G in a semi­
final? - A. Yes, that is correct.
                                          W. C. CRAWFORD


So the other matches which you dealt with would have
been league matches? - A. League matches, sir, yes.

As opposed to cup semi-finals anyway. Do you know
whether or not the gates on the tunnel leading into the
terraces were closed at any of the matches where you
were working, in that area? - A. Yes.   I can recollect
the gate to the tunnel in 1988, that was closed, just
the one gate - it is a double gate.   I think it was the
left gate.

Remind me, tell me a little bit how do you happen to
know that? - A. One of the Officers in my serial, P.C.
Laing, he was the Officer who was on that gate.
Initially he was at the bottom of the stairs, I think
it was XYZ stairs, and he was deputed to stand by that
gatfe, and one of the gates was closed on that
particular semi-final.

In other words, you know it because he has told you, or
because you saw him? - A. Yes, he was on my serial.  I
was in charge of him.

In 1988? - A. In 1988.

Which is the XYZ staircase, just turn round and show
me? - A. It   is the staircase with gate C, but on that
scale there   it does not appear right, because the
actual stairs are nearer the tunnel.

I am not too worried about that. What I want to know
is if you were actually operating on the other side of
the wall is   it that he worked for you because it was
part of the stand? - A. He was part of the stand
serial, the West Stand, yes.

Was it Sergeant Higgins who was in charge of the
concourse area behind A-G in 1988? - A. I have no idea
on that.  I was in charge of the concourse, that is all
I know, the upstairs and the two stairways.

So how does it come about that in 1988 that gate was
shut, never mind whether it was all the gate or half
the gate. Did you give the order or did somebody else
give the order? - A. I don't really know but I
recollect an order was passed, I don't know if it was
verbally by a senior Officer or whether it was over the
radio, but the gate was closed, yes.

Do you know about what time that would have been? - A.
I think it would be about ten minutes, fifteen minutes
before kick-off time.
                                         W. C. CRAWFORD


We have heard from several people about these blue
gates.  Some have said that they were both shut, both
leaves, with nobody standing outside them on the
concourse side. We have heard today from somebody who
said they were both shut with two Police Officers
standing on the concourse side, plus or minus a
steward. We have heard various other accounts. You
say it was only one leaf which was shut? - A. It was
not one leaf, it was a temporary closure and it was
P.C. Laing who was actually there, and his partner,
P.C. Tyler, remained on the stairs with the stewards.

You think that was about quarter-to-3 or thereabouts? -
A. It was because I did, as part of my supervisory
duties, go round to see if it had been done.




                /Q. Do you know why
                                W.C. CRAWFORD



Do you know why it was done? - A. I presume that the
pens were full.

But you don't actually know? - A. I don't actually know.

In any event there was some diversion you say from that
tunnel in 1988? - A. Yes, yes.

Had you ever seen temporary barriers put across? - A.
Not in 1988 or 1989.

In other years? - A. I have seen them, I think perhaps
you know, early '80s, whether it be a league match,
semi, I don't recollect.

In any event in 1989, just so that we can get this
crystal clear, as far as you are concerned the gates
of the tunnel weren't shut. That is right, is it?
- A. That is correct.

Nor were temporary barriers put across it? Is that
correct, as far as you knew? - A. Yes, that is right.

Nor as far as you are aware was anybody stationed at
the mouth of the tunnel to direct people left or right?
- A. No.

I am just trying to establish the facts as far as you
know them, that is all.

      You had your Serial. Your task was to search
fans as they came through the turnstiles, right?
- A. That is correct.

What else did you have to do? - A. That was all apart
from we were to ensure public order in the pens, if
necessary.

So that would have meant that you would have been
summonsed to do that? - A. Yes, had the Control Room
sent me there if there was a situation which arose
then I could have been sent into the pens to deal
with that situation.

This is of course Phase 1 we are talking about? - A. Yes.

Phase 2 , am I right in thinking your Serials would
have been stationed within the tunnel, your Serial
would have been stationed within the tunnel? - A. In
the central tunnel.

This very tunnel we are talking about, isn't it? -
A. Yes.
                                W.C. CRAWFORD



And then Phase 3 you were going to do something else
but we are not too concerned about that.

      I think I am also right in saying that it was
your understanding as part of the instructions, that
if the emergency evacuation procedure had been
implemented, if it had been implemented, then some
of your Serials had a task to do in relation to the
radial gates and the tunnel mouth at the terrace end?
- A. That is correct.

Tell me what that was? I am saying if, assuming that
it had been implemented? - A. I had three Officers
deputed to do something in the actual pens.
P.C. McManus was deputed on the left side, I believe,
P.C. Branston on the right-hand radial fence and
P.C. Washington was deputed for the central tunnel.

I know it was not activated so in fact they did not
go down there, but assuming for a minute that it had
been activated they would have been sent or, did they
know they know they had to go there, had you already
told them that? - A. I had briefed them shortly after
the briefing by Inspector White. He briefed us at
II o'clock and then we went through the emergency
procedure.

Assuming that they had gone to those locations what
was their job at that location, simply to stand there
or did they have any specific assignments? - A. Well
the job was to open the radial gates to start off
with and usher the fans through and also the Officer
on the central tunnel was to usher the fans through
the central tunnel as well as the rest of the Serial
to take them out through Gate C.

Are you saying that as far as you were aware the radial
gates were shut or were you aware that they were open?
- A. They were open.

They were, so when you said their job was to "open the
gates" what do you mean by that? - A. Well they were
just closed to. Theyclose to at the top of the terracing,
I understand. They weren't locked or anything like that,
they are just pushed to.

I don't understand you? - A* The actual gates open
inwards as far as I can remember. The gates were open
at that particular time. The Officers were to keep
them open.

I must make sure we are talking about the right gates.
Sergeant Griffiths, while we are carrying on find
me one of the acetates with the radial gates on please.
                                    W.C. CRAWFORD



      THE CORONER:     Is that the tunnel you have got
on there?

      MR. GRIFFITHS:    Yes, 265 sir.

      THE CORONER: Turn to 265 in there please. Now
then, if you look at that picture you can see two gates
at this end. Do you see those, two big blue gates?
- A. The blue gates?

Yes? - A. Yes.

Those were the ones which were not closed off in 1989.
Right? - A. That is correct.

At the bottom of that tunnel, with a little bit of
imagination, I don't know if you can see it on that
picture, but there are some more gates at the bottom
of the tunnel. Have we get a better one of those gates?

      MR. GRIFFITHS:     266 sir.

      THE CORONER: Can you see those gates? That is
at the opposite end of the tunnel, right? - A. Yes.

Are you saying that those were the gates where these
Officers, McManus, Washington and what is the third one's
name, I have forgotten, were supposed to be located?
- A. No sir, it was actually on the terracing, the
actual railings, they are never closed.

      MR. GRIFFITHS:    C267 sir.

      THE CORONER: Now then if you look.at.this
picture are those the gates that you are talking
about? - A. Yes sir.

Now are you saying - all the evidence we have heard
up to now is those gates were open and locked open -
are you saying that in fact they were not, that in
fact they were shut? - A. No, the gates were open.
Those gates in the top of the terracing.

Point again, to the radial gates? - A. Yes.

Those were open? - A. Yes, they were.

That is what I thought.  So if you had sent your two
chaps down there or they had gone, what need was there
for them to open ....

      MR. KING: Sir, I am sorry to interrupt but
there could be a confusion between open in the sense
                                W.C. CRAWFORD



of a space and open in the sense of unlocked because
my note was that this witness said earlier that they
were "pushed to" but not locked in that sense.

      THE CORONER: Okay, may be where, though I am
doubtful on that as well.

      What I am trying to find out is what function
were these Officers going to perform at that location
if the emergency procedure had been activated? - A. To
usher them through those small gates at the top and the
remainder of the Serial to usher them through the actual
tunnel around through Gate C.

That I can understand, no problems about that. What
I am somewhat confused about was this question of
them opening or locking back or in some way actually
handling the metalwork of these gates. Tell me what
you actually meant to tell me? - A. Well they are kept
open but not locked, they are pushed to occasionally
at football matches.

In other words you say they are just pushed against
the wall but they can close on their own, they are
not bolted back? - A. They are not bolted back, no.

Or padlocked back? - A. That is right.

That was your understanding? - A. That is my understanding

I thought that was an easy point.  It has taken rather
a long time.  In the event of course that didn't happen?
- A. It didn't happen, no.

1 now want to turn back to the concourse area where
you were.

      Mr. Griffiths, can you find us a nice acetate
of that area please?

      You have told me what the function of your
staff were.  I think I am right in saying at least till
2 there was not any problem at all. Would that be
right? - A. There was not any problems.

When did things begin to change as far as you were
concerned? - A. Well it started picking up just
shortly after 2 o'clock and then between I would say
quarter-past-2/half-past-2 there was an increase, a
noticeable increase in people coming through the
turnstiles, jumping through them, etc.

At some point people started coming through and being
somewhat upset with yourself, may be with some members
of your Serial.  Is that right? - A. That was a lot
nearer kick-off time.
                                W.C. CRAWFORD



Tell me, what time was that? - A. I would say after
half-past-2.

What happened then? - A. After half-past-2?

Yes? - A. Obviously there was a lot of crowd noise at
that particular time. We were the only Serial on the
turnstiles. I had about eight PCs. There is ten in
a Serial obviously.  I had eight PCs manning the
turnstiles, A-G. There was virtually one P.C. per
turnstile.  I deputed another two P.C.s to look after
the programme sellers. That would be P.C. Burton who
is a woman Police Officer and also P.C. Wild to look
after the refreshments area because of the number of
fans there.

      At this time a lot of people were coming in
jumping over the top of the turnstiles; through the
turnstiles; under the turnstiles, anyway they could.

Did you see Inspector Bennett? - A. I saw Inspector
Bennett probably five or ten minutes before the
kick-off time.

Was he up on the turnstile roof when you saw him or
was he on ground level? - A. When I eventually saw
him, obviously my concentration was on the turnstiles,
and when I did look up I did see him standing on the
turnstiles.

Did you see Gate C open? - A. It opened twice.     I saw
it open both times.

Tell me about the first opening briefly? - A. Well the
first time it opened obviously our attention was
concentrated on the turnstiles. When it opened I
think it was an ejection, I don't know who it was,
putting someone out. A number of fans, quite a number,
I think I said about 50, it could have been more,
rushed in and at that time obviously I caught out of
the corner of my eye and I just turned and ran towards
the gate with one of the P.C.s in my Serial and we
were fortunate because there was a mounted Officer
there and he put his horse across the actual entrance
and we managed to close the gate.

Did you by chance on that occasion see Inspector Purdy?
Do you know Inspector Purdy, you may not know him?
- A. There is two Inspector Purdys. There is an
Inspector Purdy and a Chief Inspector Purdy.

I am talking about Inspector Purdy? - A. No, no.
                                                              93


                                     W.C. CRAWFORD



Q. That was a relatively brief opening. That is right,
   isn't it? - A. Only a matter of seconds.

Q. Tell me about the second opening? - A. Again we
   reverted back to our original planners, searching the
   turnstiles. We had all on in trying to stop the
   ticketless fans coming in the turnstiles and over the
   top and without any warning Gate C opened and there was
   a rush then at that particular time. By the time I
   had looked round they were halfway up between the
   concourse and the actual entrance to the tunnel.

Q. I think you said "without warning". Does that mean
   that you did not know that it wasgoing to be opened?
   - A. I had no warning at all.

Q. Did you have a radio? - A. I had a radio.

Q. Was it on talk-through your particular radio? - A. I
   have no idea. I think talk-through is done by the
   Incident Room.
Q.    So you don't know what mode your radio was in on that
     day? - A. I don't sir, no.

Q. How would you have communicated with somebody if you
   had wanted to use your radio? - A. I would have gone
   through via the Ground Control.

Q.    You press a button and speak or what happens? - A.
     Yes, that is the case. It is the Burndept radio, just
     press the button and just spoke into it.

Q. Do you recollect hearing any conversations on your
   radio that afternoon, say from 2.30 onward? - A. No,
   apart from a lot of interference on the radio. That
   is all I can recollect. There was no messages whatsoever
   passed on the radio.  If there was then I did not
   hear them with the crowd noise.




                                Q. Did you see who
                                           W. C. CRAWFORD


Did you see who opened the gate the second time? - A. No,
I did not.

You can't help me who it was who did it? - A. I don't
know if it was a Police Officer or if it was one of the
stewards.

I can tell you because we have heard it from many people,
that in fact the gate was opened, certainly the second
time, by authority.   In other words, permission had been
given for it to be opened.   Did you hear or receive any
message to that effect? - A. None whatsoever.

Apart from yourself who else in your Serial had a radio?
-A. I was the only one, sir.   Inspector White who was in
charge of us.

Inspector White, of course, covered the whole of the
concourse area? - A. Yes.

I think it is right to say that you yourself didn't see
Inspector White for some considerable time? - A. Yes,
that is correct, sir.

That doesn't mean to say he wasn't there but you didn't
see him? - A. I didn't see him.

You said nobody else in your Serial would have had radio
communication with Ground Control, or, indeed, anybody
else, other than him and you? - A. That is correct, sir.

Apart from your Serial was there any other Serial that
was located in that general area behind turnstiles A to
G? - A. No, I was the only one.

What about the people who were manning the stairwell
going up into the stands?   Were those your people or
were they somebody else's Serial? - A. They weren't my
people.   I don't recollect seeing any Police Officers
apart from...   There were only stewards there as far as
I can remember.

So you are not aware of anybody else with a radio in that
area?    That is what I am trying to find out. - A. That
is correct, sir.

In the time around these gates were being opened, the
first opening and the second opening a few minutes
before, did you have any conversation with any fans about
what was happening outside? - A. Well, a number of irate
fans approached me and used a few obscenities towards me,
fairly threatening obviously with their attitude.
                                           W. C. CRAWFORD


I am not interested in the obscenities but what I am
interested in is what was the content of what they were
trying to say? - A. To get someone out there.   Obviously
outside the turnstiles to get something done.

When Gate C opened a second time, that is the one I am
interested in, I think you said there was a rush in? - A.
There was a rush in.   As they came in a number of people
stumbled, fell over, and the lads in my Serial ran to
them and dragged them out of the way.

You yourself said by the time you saw them the crowd had
got half way across the concourse area, is that right? -
A. Yes, they were behind us and half way up towards the
actual tunnel.

This rush which you have mentioned, that was an initial
rush? - A. An initial rush and then obviously when they
were through it eased off.   It slowed up a bit.

Did you notice which direction on the whole the crowd
went? - A. Towards the tunnel.

The answer is obvious because you have already told me
but I want to put it specifically.   Did you receive any
direction to divert fans from that tunnel that afternoon?
- A. No.

You yourself did not initiate it because you have already
told me that.   Was there any reason for that? - A. That
I didn't initiate it?

Yes. - A. Well, it was something that happened.   They
were half way there before I had a chance to do it.    If
I had had a prior warning then I could have attempted to
do something, either deviate them or divert them with the
number of Officers I had at my disposal.

Subsequently you, together with loads of other Officers,
were summoned to the field? - A. That is correct.

Was that a verbal or radio message?   Can you remember? -
A. It was one of the PCs in my Serial who told me.
Obviously, being subjected to the crowd noise at that
time, it is like a temporary deafness you get.   I didn't
hear anything over the radio or over the tannoy and an
Officer in my Serial said we had been instructed to go on
the field.

Yes, I am not going to take you through that part of your
activity because we have heard from lots of other people.
What I am interested in is what was happening in the
concourse area as far as you are concerned.
                                             W. C. CRAWFORD


            Cross-Examined by MR. MAXWELL:

In 1988, an order was given in relation to the tunnel and
the gate or gates across the mouth of the tunnel?   That
is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, sir.

Now I don't want to lead you.   I want you to say what
that order was that was given to you first of all, wasn't
it? - A. It wasn't given to me.   The order was given, as
far as I can remember, to someone in that vicinity.

How did you find out about it? - A. I think I may have
picked it up on the radio or walking round.

How did PC Lang know what to do? -A. Well, obviously in
1988 there were a number of Officers in the concourse
area, all in possession of radios.   I presume it could
have come from one of those.   I don't know.   I still
don't know.

You didn't tell PC Lang what to do? - A. I didn't, no.

Your recollection, please, without your being led by
anyone, as to what that order was in relation to the
tunnel?   What do you recall about it? - A. It is fairly
vague.   I think it is something that is done as a matter
of course in football matches.    All I can recollect is
that an order was given. Again I don't know where it
originated from or who initiated it and I went round
there to see if it had been done.

I ask you again: what is it you recall of the order and
its terms?   I don't want to lead you.   I want you to
say what it is that you understood to be an order in
relation to the tunnel. - A. I cannot be one hundred
percent on that.

What was it you went to check to see that PC Lang had
done?   What were you checking on? -   A. I went to check
to see if the actual gate was closed.

Does it follow from that that the order was in relation
to a gate or gates? - A. It would not be practicable to
close both gates.

When you went to check on PC Lang, was he carrying out
his duty properly? - A. I would say so, yes.

Where was he positioned in relation to these gates, of
which one was shut? - A. Just in front of them.

Just in front of them? - A. There was one gate closed and
he was standing in front of that one gate, or to the side
of it.
                                            W. C. CRAWFORD


Was he standing in front of the open half of the tunnel?
- A. Yes.

What was he doing there? - A. He was just standing there.

What was he supposed to be doing there if any fan came
into view? - A. To prevent any more fans going down the
tunnel.

             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Mr. Maxwell has had a go to try and find out about the
order.   I am sorry to have to tell you that I am going
to have a go as well.   Is it your evidence in fact that
you yourself did not actually receive an order in
relation to closing the tunnel? - A. Not directly.

It seems a simple question: did you receive an order? -
A. Yes, I did, but I just don't recollect what the actual
order was, either whether it was verbal or whether it was
by radio.

Or who gave it? - A. Or who gave it.   Had it been a
senior Officer who said, "Go and check and see if the
gate is closed", I could have done it.   Alternatively,
had it been a radio message to close the gate then I
would have gone to see if it had actually been closed.

Is this the position, that you actually can't remember
having received an order at all, but you are assuming you
must have received one? - A. I probably picked it up from
somewhere, either by a senior Officer who was in charge
of me on that particular day or alternatively I picked it
up over the radio and to make sure it had been done -
nobody passed it directly to me - I have gone to make
sure it had been done.

By giving these alternatives in your answer just now does
that mean in fact you can't remember having received the
order?   That is why you are giving alternatives? - A. I
think that is what I said initially.

Did PC Lang himself have a radio in 1988? - A. He hadn't,
no.

Was he under your command? - A. He was part of my Serial.

Part of your Serial.   You did not give him an order in
relation to the gates, is that correct? - A. No, I didn't
give him an order, no.

You have told the court you found him there with one of
the gates closed? - A. Yes.
                                             W. C. CRAWFORD


You said it would not be practicable to close both gates?
- A. Well, not at that time.   I mean, it would be a bit
silly to close both gates if an emergency arose.

That is what I want you to explain.   What do you mean,
not practicable? - A. Well, if both gates were closed we
could have a worse situation where fans in an emergency
ran out of the tunnel and were trapped at the top of the
actual tunnel with the gates closed.

The time you have given for seeing the single leaf closed
was about quarter to three, is that right? - A. Yes. It
was a good bit before kick-of time.   The majority of
fans were already in position at that time.

For what period was it closed?   During what period? - A.
It was only closed temporarily and I would be guessing.
As a matter of minutes - ten minutes or so - but again I
am guessing at that time.

Did you see yourself that it was in fact re-opened at
some stage? - A. That would be probably ten minutes -
five to three - and then I took the rest of my Officers
upstairs to the West Stand.

Did it then remain open? - A. It did, sir.

Do you know that of your own knowledge? - A. Well, when
we went back...   I took PC Lang with me and I think I
recollect him opening the actual tunnel gate, just
pushing it to, because there was no need for it half
closed at that time.   There were no fans at all in the
concourse.

When you and PC Lang left the scene of the gate, he had
opened that single leaf and you left both tunnel doors
open? - A. Yes.   Well, there was only one but it was
pushed back to the wall.

What is this, just before kick-off? - A. Yes, it was
before kick-off, I believe.




        Q. As a Sergeant
                                                                  99
                                                       W. C. CRAWFORD


Q. As a Sergeant at the end of the event, did you have any
   responsibility to complete any debriefing report? - A.
   Yes, we fill in, it is like a serial sheet, the number
   of Officers working etc., arrests made, if staff was
   used etc., if that Officer was on duty-time, overtime
   or whatever.  I fill that in. If an Officer had a
   prisoner, arrested someone, in my serial during the
   match then I must obtain the details, fill them in, and
   so it is handed in to Control afterwards.

Q. Your debriefing report did not contain any reference to
   this closing of a single door of the tunnel? - A. No,
   it didn't, no. It was not relevant, that type of
   action.

Q. There are just two other topics. The Jury have heard
   your evidence and I am not going to refer to what the
   other evidence is about the same subject. There are
   two other topics that I would like you just to spend a
   moment on. Can you look at the black bundle in front
   of you and find C.360.

        MR. RUSSELL:  If my learned friend, sir, is going
   to point to the gates I have had an acetate prepared
   which I think shows the position even more clearly.

        THE CORONER:     Is that what you are after?

        MR. PAYNE:     Can I leave that to our resident
   expert?

        THE CORONER: Yes, very well.      I think Mr. Russell
   was just being helpful.

        MR. PAYNE:     Thank you very much.

Q. All I want you to do, Inspector, is just look at the
   photograph and you can see the gate open at the back of
   the radial fence between pen 2 and pen 3, can you
   not? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Is that what you were referring to earlier in your
   evidence when you said that the gate was left open
   during the match? - A. Yes, there was that gate left
   open and the one the other side.

Q. The corresponding gate between pens 4 and 5? - A. Yes.

Q. The last topic is this; you said that if you had
   received a radio message before gate C was opened, you
   would have been able to do something with the serial at
   your disposal or words to that effect. You could have
   attempted to deviate the crowd which rushed in with the
number of Officers at your disposal? - A. I could have
attempted and I use that term loosely.

I appreciate that. Just amply that, would you, please?
When you refer to the number of Officers at your
disposal what have you got in mind about the situation?
- A. Eight Officers obviously could not have controlled
that number.  I presume there were in excess of 2,000
fans rushing in.

Yes. - A. The actual mood they were in was an
aggressive mood. They were hell bent on getting into
the actual ground and so I doubt if we could have
stopped them. We would probably have been pushed out
of the way.

               Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS
Inspector Crawford, in 1989 you are in the concourse
area with your serial of men? - A. That is correct,
sir.

What is your brief, that is you as a Sergeant? - A. My
brief was to supervise the men, searching the fans
coming in through the turnstiles, and if something
arose, a public order situation arose in the pen, then
I would have been directed to deal with that situation.

You had a radio, that is right, is it not? - A. That is
correct, sir.

I assume that in order to hear messages that might be
relevant to your duty that you would keep the radio
turned on? - A. Yes, sir.
The Inspector who had control over you and no doubt
other serials was I think Inspector White so far as the
concourse area was concerned? - A. That is correct.

Part   of his role was not only to be in the concourse
area   but also prior to kick-off from time to time go
down   the tunnel and have a look at the terraces? - A.
Yes,   sir.

He too would have a radio? - A. He would have a radio.
You told the Coroner that you did not see Mr. White, I
am not sure if you said for quite a long time but
certainly for a time? - A. I spoke to Inspector White
approximately ten past two. That is the last time I
recollect seeing him.

Until? - A. Half past three.
                                               W. C . CRAWFORD




Half past three? - A. Yes, sir.

So in your recollection for 50 minutes up to 3 o'clock
you did not see Inspector White? - A. That is correct.

Did he say anything when you last saw him as to where
he might be going? - A. No.

Had he been touring the concourse area under your
sphere of control, do you think it likely that you
would have seen him? - A. I would have seen him.   I was
the only serial in that actual part, turnstiles A to G,
I would have seen him.

Had he been there during that period, would you have
expected him to come from time to time to check with
you as the serial Sergeant to see what was going on? -
A. I would have done, yes.

He never did so? - A. He didn't.

You have told us you had your radio and it must have
been, as you say, turned on in such a way that had a
message come through — I am sorry, that is not what
you said and I will put it a different way. You had it
turned on so that you could receive messages if one
came through for you? - A. Yes.

Can you tell me where you keep your radio? - A. Yes,
sir.  It was in my top pocket and fastened over my
shoulder in the actual epaulette for safety.

Is that the normal place one would keep a radio doing
the duty you were doing on that day at a football
match? - A. Yes, it is.

And a big football match at that where one is expecting
noise? - A. Yes.  I had an ear piece also.

You had an ear piece? - A. Yes.

Was that in all the time? - A. Yes, it was.

Could you help us as to where you were approximately,
and do it by showing us on the model if you would, when
you saw gate C opened for the first time? Could you go
to the model? - A. Yes. The first time I was roughly
here which is turnstiles A and B.

So just behind turnstiles A and B? - A. Yes, this is A
and B here (indicating).
                                              W. C. CRAWFORD


Your pointer moved I think and I do not know whether it
moved by mistake a little bit further back. Is that
now where you are pointing to which would be a matter
of a few yards from those turnstiles? - A. No, I was
pointing at B turnstile and it slipped away.
That is where you would be, a matter of a few yards
from the back of those turnstiles? - A. Yes, the
turnstiles are close together, side by side.
Yes, of course. In that position, as I understand it,
did you see gate C open the first time or did you just
see what the consequences were? - A. No, when it did
open I saw the rush. I saw it opening for someone to
be ejected.
So you were actually looking in that direction when it
was opened? - A. I saw the gates opened and as I looked
I saw someone being ejected.
At that time when you saw the gate being opened for
someone to be ejected, you must have been looking in
the direction of the gate? - A. Yes, my attention was
drawn to the gate opening and obviously being aware
that the gate was open.
Do you recollect hearing, prior to that gate opening,
any request — I do not mean an order that it be opened
but a request — for gates or a gate to be opened from
Superintendent Marshall? - A. The second time, no.
No, I am talking now about the first time. Prior to
that gate opening the one you have just described, did
you hear any message over your radio, not to you but
generally from Superintendent Marshall for the gate to
be opened? - A. I did not hear anything.
You have told us you heard a good deal of interference?
- A. There was a lot of interference, a continual
crackling from the actual radio.
When you saw the gate open you went to try and close
it? - A. I ran. I ran towards the gate.
You went with a Police Constable? - A. A Police
Officer, yes.
Can you tell me why it was you did that? - A. Why I ran
towards the gate?
Yes. - A. Because at that time a number of fans rushed
in and it was to close the gate.
                                              W. C. CRAWFORD


How many fans had, and I do not mean the actual number,
and I am going to be very careful about this because I
do not want to try and put words into your mouth —
what was actually happening when you got to the gate in
order to close it? - A. The fans were coming through
the gate. A number of fans had already got through the
gate and they were still coming in and it was at that
time I saw a Police Officer on a horse, position his
horse across the entrance to the gate by the gap that
was open and it gave us the opportunity to close the
gate.
Some time passed, a number of minutes? - A. Several
minutes. There wasn't that many minutes.
Could you help us now as to where you were when the
gate opened for the second time? - A. I would be
probably in the central position between the turnstiles
A to G, right in the middle.
So a little closer to the gates? - A. A bit closer,
yes.
Your radio still on talk through? - A. I don't know if
it was on talk through. The radio was on.
It was in an on position so that if any message had
been passed on talk through you would have expected to
hear it? - A. Had the radios been functioning properly
I would say I would have expected to hear it.
Exactly, Inspector. You were still getting a lot of
crackling? - A. A lot of interference, yes. In fact,
that is all I did get, was interference.
Had you heard, instead of hearing interference, a
request from Superintendent Marshall to open the gates,
that is a request that the gates be opened, in other
words, that permission be given for the opening of the
gates, what would have gone through your mind at that
time in terms of any necessary step consequent upon the
possible opening of the gate. Do you understand what I
mean by that? - A. Yes, I understand what you mean.
The thing is that I didn't get the message.
I appreciate that. I am not suggesting for a moment
that you did because you have told us that the radio on
which you would normally get messages was crackling and
did not seem to be working. Can I try and suggest this
to you, that had you heard a request from Mr. Marshall
for permission for the gates to be opened you would
have thought to yourself, "Right, if this permission is
given I must try and ensure that there is no rush
                                         W. C. CRAWFORD


coming through the gates that the fans come in, in an
orderly way"? - A. Yes.

Would that be fair? - A. That would be fair, yes.

You would not need an order to that effect for you to
do that? - A. No.

Similarly, if you heard a message over the radio, again
I am not suggesting that you got it, saying that
permission had been granted for the gates to be open,
that would have further confirmed your response, namely
to ensure that the fans came in in an orderly way? - A.
Yes.

But you heard no message? - A. I didn't hear any
message at all.

Again you would not need to be told by anybody what you
should do? - A. Not really.  If that situation did
arise then I would have wanted to know where the fans
were to go.

You would then have asked the question? - A. I would
have asked the question, "Where do you want the fans?"

In the event of the radio not working, or you having
difficulty in getting through, you would no doubt have,
if I may say so, used your own initiative? - A. Yes, I
would.

Would it be fair to say, and I appreciate this is
hypothetical, that senior Officers would have been
entitled to rely on your using your own initiative? -
A. Possibly, yes.

Just one final point, Inspector. You have told us that
before all this happened there were fans coming in from
outside and they were complaining to you? - A. Yes.

They were saying that someone needs to be out there
because something needs to be done? - A. Or words to
that effect, yes.

Is the position that they were saying that something
needed to be done before someone gets killed? - A. That
is what was conveyed, yes.

They were giving the impression that people were or
were about to be hurt outside in the crush in the
turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Thank you very much.
                                                          105




        THE CORONER:^ Mr. King, I don't think we are
   going to finish with this Witness today* Can you give
   me an indication of how long you are likely to be and
   then I will decide whether I let you start, or whether
   you start in the morning?

           MR. KING:   I suspect probably about half an hour,
   sir.

        THE CORONER:   In that case I think we will not
   start. Mr. King, I know it is difficult for you
   because of your journey times, but I am anxious to
   redeem a little bit of time.  If we said we started at
   quarter-to-10 would that be very inconvenient for other
   people? I am not looking at you at the moment, I am
   just checking with the rest. What about you, Mr.
   Manning

        MR. MANNING:   It is difficult in that I have got
   to have treatment for my back tomorrow morning, but I
   have indicated I had no questions and someone else, I
   am sure, can note the matter, but if you will excuse me
   being a few moments late?

        THE CORONER:   Of course I would, no problem about
   that. Mr. King we could, of course, move to somebody
   else and take you later.

        MR. KING:   Sir, I don't request any indulgences.
   I think my record is although we have been going now
   some 60 odd days, the number of days when I have had a
   difficulty have been very few. Sir, I will undertake
   to be here to start at quarter-to-10?

        THE CORONER:   (Addressing the Jury) Could we
   start at quarter-to-10, would that be all right?

Q. So can you be here for quarter-to-10, please? - A. I
   can, sir.

       THE CORONER:   Mr. King, what I don't want you to
  do is to take any risks.  I am sorry to use that word
  in this context.  If for some reason you were delayed,
  we may well start at quarter-to-10 but we will come
  back to you.

          (In the absence of the Jury and the Witness)

        THE CORONER:   There is nothing burning, is there,
   that we need to do this evening, or is there?

          MR. MAXWELL:    It is only this, sir. I appreciate
  this     is a sensitive stage in the Inquest and it is even
  more     difficult than usual to judge the pace of the
evidence. The effect of that is that it is difficult
to know when to come and when not to come, for those of
us who are not always involved in the heat of battle
here.

     What I have in mind, sir, is this. When it comes
to submissions would you give leave for those
submissions to be made on the law in writing, for those
representatives who are not able to attend on that day,
which may occur eventually, when submissions are to be
heard? That would be on the basis that those
submissions would be copied for other representatives,
of course, but to made available to you in writing.  I
am not asking you to rule immediately on that but it
may well be convenient to me, and possibly to others
who are more on the periphery of these matters.

     THE CORONER:   In principle I would have thought
that was an excellent idea because the legal
submissions would be done in the absence of the Jury
anyway. Unless your colleagues were to raise some
fundamental objection, in principle - you very kindly
said I don't have to give a ruling now so I will take
that indulgence - I would have thought it sounds a
jolly good idea, and if it is helpful then it is even
better.

     MR. ISAACS:    Sir, not wanting to take up any
more time than is absolutely essential, we are under
pressure of time, we all know this, and I am concerned
that the way that some of the procedure that is being
adopted is going is actually taking up far more time
than we actually have, to the extent that we are now
sitting earlier tomorrow to try and catch up.

     One of the things I am concerned about, and I know
that it has happened throughout the course of this
Inquest, is the way in which your indulgence is perhaps
being a little abused. Witnesses, instead of being
cross-examined in the appropriate way, in my
submission, are having huge chunks of other witnesses'
evidence read to them, asking for their comments, and
all this does is increase the length of time that is
being taken.

     In other jurisdictions this would never, in my
submission, be allowed.  I know you have been indulgent
to us and I am not pointing any fingers, I am trying,
as I have done in the past, to make a sensible point.
I know I have discussed it with some of my learned
friends, that in a way it is merely a device for
rehearsing evidence of other witnesses before these
witnesses, and then someone says, "Well, if you don't
agree with that it is a matter for the Jury at the end
of the day".  In some ways it is merely a way of
addressing the Jury on the facts, rather than doing
what, as I understand it, should be the subject of
cross-examination, which is if, for example, you wish
to put another point of view or another piece of
evidence, you ask the question directly to the witness.
Let us take an example that has happened this
afternoon:   "Were you addressed by Inspector ...."
somebody or other, and either it is "Yes" or "No", not,
if I may say so, with respect, to read out a great
chunk of evidence as to what that witness said on
another occasion some three weeks ago, and say, "Do you
agree with that or not?".  It just is not the right way
and is taking far too much time.

     So may I just plead that weget a move on? I know
it is a matter that is dear to your heart because I
know that you are under constraints of time, but all
this is aggravating the situation that we are in.

      MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, on a broader front, I have
spoken to many of my learned friends and I think there
was unanimous thought behind this in that Easter is now
looming, and there is a very real prospect that this
Inquest is not going to be finished by Easter.   I know
that causes you, sir, your own difficulties aside from
that.   It may well cause difficulties on this side and,
we keep saying this, but please be firmer with us in
the questions that are asked, particularly in the case
of important witnesses who should have their minds
focussed on the issues that they are being addressed
to, rather than on the peripheral things.

     Secondly, I don't know whether an earlier start,
given that we are having breaks, might be a sensible
idea, subject to your own feelings, and obviously the
Jury, and also punctual starts and punctual coffee
breaks - ten minutes meaning ten minutes instead of the
usual fifteen, with respect - because we are all under
the threat, Easter is looming, and it is going to be
very, very awkward, I would think, if the Jury have a
split between either your summing-up and having to go
out, or if they are in the position of having to go out
with the risk of sitting over Easter. None of us want
to mess up their Easter weekend because it is not going
to do their concentration any good on the real issue,
which is how these poor people died.

     THE CORONER:   To a large extent, of course, I am
in your hands. That isn't quite right, because you are
in my hands in that sense. You have said to me be
firmer with us, but if I may say so it should not be
necessary for me to be firm with you because you are
all, apart from Mrs. McBrien, qualified people and you
know the form which the questions should take, probably
better than I do, and it should not be necessary for me
to be firm.  I would be reluctant to make any
fundamental change in the way I am conducting the
Inquest with the last three witnesses. There are a few
more than three, I admit, but after Mr. Crawford we are
down to three, if you like, key witnesses, but I think
my feeling is this, that we do not need to rehearse
every single detail of evidence with those witnesses
which we have already explored, in many cases ad
nauseam, with different people. What we need for them,
and I entirely agree with you, is evidence of the key
issues which are before the Jury.   In that sense I have
to look to you to use your abilities to structure your
questions, because I am aware that if I stop you with
key witnesses and say, "No, we are not having that",
you may feel that I have changed the rules at the very
last moment.  I don't want to do that but I do agree
that I would be exceedingly unhappy if we did not
finish before the end of this month, exceedingly
unhappy if that were to happen, for all kinds of
reasons, not just convenience.

     So as far as I am able we must make progress.    I
take your point about starting times.    It is not just
that I am sitting drinking coffee, because I am not and
there are sometimes reasons, but that is neither here
nor there and I agree with you, we can gain time by
being firm on that and it may be that we will have to,
as I have already warned the Jury, go on until 4.30.    I
didn t do today but   there is a reason for that as well
I am afraid.   It may be that we will have to start a
few minutes earlier as well in order to gain some
space, so to speak. My aim is to finish this month.
That is what I want.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    I am sure that is a relief to
   y P P                 eason, I do again stress, there
is m some ways a need to be firmer with us is that as
advocates we are used to a different jurisdiction where
you have a list of points which form the fundamentals
of a particular case, whereas obviously we are not as
familiar with this particular jurisdiction as you will
be, sir, and therefore we are left without our normal
way of thinking, our normal anchor, if you like, of
structuring a case.  So it may well be, because we are
all aware that in the end they are your witnesses, that
we can get assistance by your guidance, which is where
firmness comes in - it was not intended as a criticism,
it was more pushing us in the right direction as to the
way you see the jurisdiction should be exercised.

     THE CORONER:   I will certainly bear that in mind.
      MR. MANNING: Sir, two points which follow on
fairly naturally. The first is this, and that is I :
willingly go along with all the sentiments as to the
hope we can finish before the end of the month.
      I believe you may now have entered the Guinness
Book of Records and this may now having overtaken
Lockerbie be the longest running Inquest ever.
      THE CORONER:   That was not my intention.
      MR. MANNING: It was not my intention to make a
flippant remark like that, but much more seriously the
witnesses who have now to come are likely to be in the
box at least that day and probably more than that and
it may be more than two days.
      It is vital, in my view, if we are to avoid the
repetition of what I may say is wilting, unnatural wilting
if a person is in that situation, that we are going to
have to take regular breaks for those witnesses and
there is no avoiding that matter and whether that means
we have got to lengthen the proceedings, I think that
at least every hour we are going to have to have a
five or ten minute break for their sake as well as for
everybody else's.
      THE CORONER: Well you may have noticed I have
been doing that with the longer witnesses as near as
possible.
      MR. MANNING: We have gone through five or six
witnesses and it is much easier for them to have a break
than one person starting at the beginning of the day and
go through.
      The second thing sir is to save what I may say is
unecessary or unseemly jumping up and down by those who
represent. I hope you will have firmly in mind to
constantly remind those witnesses of the self-incrimination
point because almost everything conceivable is going to
fall within that category, that you do make it clear to
them that if they choose to answer a question that they
don't have to do and that we don't have to keep jumping
up and down and making the point.
      THE CORONER: As far as I am able I intend to do
that but on the other hand I have always said I am not
omniscient. Well I have never said that but I have always
thought that and I may well miss the significance of a
question, in which case I would expect you to get up if
you think it is significant because I may well not perceive
the incriminatory nature of that.
      MR. MANNING:  I said those words advisedly.  I take
the view that almost everything that would be asked of
the people concerned may very well tend to incriminate
and therefore the warning if you like should be given
with caution and therefore fairly frequently through that
course of the evidence and I hope that you will take that
on board sir rather than us having to if you like spring
up and say:  "Don't you think the warning should be given?"

      THE CORONER: I think up to now nobody has ever had
to do it yet. I think I have managed to give the warning,
or did you have to remind me?

      MR. ISAACS: No sir, but with respect there were a
number of occasions I felt during Chief Superintendent
Mole's evidence, and of course nobody was here representing
him, when quite properly I think the warning should have
been given.  It may be you took the view it was not
necessary but with respect to you he could properly have
been warned at a time when my learned friend M r . King
was attacking the Mole Plan.

      THE CORONER:   Okay, that   is a matter of opinion.

      MR. ISAACS:  Well sir if it is being put with respect
that the plan which Mr. Mole had devised was wholly dangerous,
and I think he put it in a rather stronger way than that
and touching on the irresponsible and it was obvious that
somebody may well be hurt as a result, that was effectively
putting something which had Mr. Mole agreed with it would
have serious repercussions, or at least as far as my
learned friend was concerned.

      THE CORONER: Very well, quarter-to-10 tomorrow.
We will finish with this witness and then we start on
Superintendent Greenwood followed by Superintendent Murray
followed by Superintendent Duckenfield, and whilst I am
on this subject in the light of their evidence I will then
review Mr. Goddard, Ryan and Bichard and if need be, if
I judge it is unnecessary I will cut them out altogether
or one or more of them or possibly even if I think it is
necessary to have their evidence, may decide to take it
as documentary evidence because that would save quite a
bit of time. It depends entirely upon the way the evidence,
what we hear, and I don't know that myself, but I say that
now so you don't think that we must necessarily hear those
three Officers and if I don't think it is necessary we
won't do it.

      MR. HALE: Sir, I am not noted for extending the
length of the time of this Inquest, but there is one
point that I have persistently indicated that I do wish
to investigate and that is the alcohol content of the
deceased.
                                                          Ill




      You kindly submitted or gave everybody your
schedule. I have incorporated any differences that there
were in your schedule in times of arrival and so on into
the schedule which I originally prepared.
      I am distributing copies   to everyone to see if
anyone has an objection and if   no one has an objection then
I just wonder whether there is   going to be some witness
called which would enable that   to go in?
      It is a fairly simple point, it does not need to
take very long, but I do feel it is important to show the
alcohol content of the deceased in an ordered way and that
is what my schedule does. The computer has sorted it into
order. It is very simple. I have incorporated the ages
of the deceased from your schedule and I think that is
far too important a matter not to be investigated in some
way.
      THE CORONER: The data has been supplied to a
statistician. Dr. Nicholls. I think you weren't here but
I have mentioned him before. I do intend to call him.
I am not saying he is going to deal with what you want
to deal with but he is going to deal with the statistical
analysis of the evidence and explain to us statistically
what relevance, if any, age, sex and so on have. You don't
need to rise, Mr. King, but I do intend to call him.   I
think it is a relevant point which needs addressing and
I intend to do it. Whether or not he will want to deal
with or be able to deal with supplementals from you that
will be a matter for him as part and parcel of your
cross-examination.
      MR. KING: Sir terribly briefly, I am not sure
Mr. Hale was here when in fact we have been through this
already. I have made my submissions to you already and
I say that for the benefit of my friend that my position
is clear and it is on the transcript.
      MR. RUSSELL: Sir, representing Superintendent
Greenwood who goes into the witness box tomorrow, may
I briefly welcome your practice of giving sufficient
breaks on the hour to witnesses who are having a long
stint in the witness box and moreover welcome your view
that not every witness should be taken through every
conceivable parameter from the history of football at
Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.
      I say that with Superintendent Greenwood in mind
whose evidence of course, his experience can span so much
history as well as what took place on the day and wonder
whether that was a consideration for you to limit the
realm of his evidence, not absolutely, but with certain
discretion to the issues that this jury has to decide.
      THE CORONER: Yes, can I. tell you the way I propose
to tackle my examination-in-chief with Superintendent
Greenwood.
      I am interested in hearing from Superintendent
Greenwood with regard briefly to the 1981 match because
he was there as far as I understand it.

      MR. RUSSELL:   He was.

      THE CORONER: It will be nice to hear from somebody
who actually saw what was happening on the ground.
      Two, I am going to ask him to again briefly describe
the management if you like of the Leppings Lane area
outside the turnstiles in 1988 and no doubt we will want
to cover the question of whether or not and to what extent
there were filters and what problems if any he had with
ticketless fans for instance but really it is as a scene
setter and to draw together what his understanding of
the position was in 1988.

      Thirdly, I want to hear from him as to what he did
in 1989.

      MR. RUSSELL:   Yes, of course.

      THE CORONER: And that is basically it. I don't
think there is any need to go over the whole ground that
Chief Superintendent Mole went over as to the details of
the orders and what each individual Serial was supposed
to do or not to do. We have heard all that before. Does
that help?
      MR. RUSSELL: Sir, I welcome that in the interests
of time saving and I wonder also whether you have in mind
limiting any attempts that might be made as to use him
as a sounding board or as an opinion, a source of opinion
as to what other people might have done, for example doing
his job in another year or doing a different job from him
in 1989 in a different place, and I wonder really whether
the jury might be assisted by that opinion and the expression
and eliciting of that opinion will serve no more than to
lengthen what is already a very long Inquest.

      THE CORONER:   Sorry, I missed the last little bit.
Could you repeat that?

      MR. RUSSELL: The last sentence, whether the process
of eliciting and giving that opinion is really going to
assist the jury and will merely serve to lengthen what is
already a very long Inquest.
                                                        113




      THE CORONER: Well I will certainly think about it.
I am getting less keen on opinion because we have had quite a
lot from people whose opinion, some of whose opinion was
valueless and others who I think did have something to say,
but we certainly don't need to go on getting opinion on
opinion.
     MR. RUSSELL:    Thank you.
      THE CORONER:   I must go, I am sorry.
             (The Inquests were adjourned until
             the following morning at 9.45 a.m.)
