OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and tim e raised
                                                                               H1       ^ o .      Num ber



T itle                     C-C5-1 {=»*

'(Inbfude source and any document number if relevant)               <£D<5t_        £> ^3

Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/N o   _______________________________________
                                                                                                                 Receiver




                                                                                                                  Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                             Statem ent Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                  Indexer
Indexed as indicated
                                                                                               >


No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                 S IO




Further action No(s)                                                                                              Indexer



When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                   peter   mcdonnell




                       Before

DR. S.L. POPPER,    LL.B, B.MED.Sci,     B M , B S , MRCGP

             (Her Majesty's Co r o n e r )




                           At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery S t r e e t ,
                  Shef fi e l d .

                           On

                   20th April,   1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                      INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                              Page N o .


                        Opening Remarks                           1.

                    o
                        DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER Called
                           Bv THE CORONER                         3.
                           Cross-Examined by MR. ERASER           4.
                           Cross-Examined by MS. NORCLIFFE        5.


                        POLICEWOMAN GILLIAN PARKES Called
                           By THE CORONER                         6.
                           Cross-Examined by MS. NORCLIFFE        3.
                           Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE       10 .


                D       PET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                           By THE CORONER                        11 .
                           Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE       13.


                        POLICEWOMAN GILLIAN PARKES Recalled
                           Bv THE CORONER                        13.


                        DR. FORREST Called
                           By THE CORONER                         14.


                        Closing Remarks                           16.




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
20th April 1990

          INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF PETER McDONNELL

      THE CORONER:  Mr. Fraser, alloy/ me to deal with
something before you address me.

      MR. FRASER:    Certainly sir.

      THE CORONER:  You may remember that when we were dealing
with Gary Harrison I looked vague and I said "There is some­
thing else that I wanted to deal with" but I could not
remember it and then halfway through the last Inquest it
came to me.  I know what it is now and I will deal witn it.

      I know that the family aren't here and Iknow that their
representatives are not here either but Itiling it is only a
matter of crossing a 'T' so I propose to do it.  Can you
just come back.

              PET. S G T . JULIE APPLETON Recalled
                         Bv THE CORONER:

Prof. Henry confirmed that in fact Simon Weigold had not
identified Gary Harrison to him? - A. Yes.

And I think I am right in saying that Simon Weigold has
actually given a supplemental statement just to confirm chat
his initial assumption that he had done so was incorrect?
- A. That is correct sir, yes.

      THE CORONER:    Yes, Mr. Fraser, you have no questions
on that, I hope?

      MR. FRASER:    No sir, thank you.

      THE CORONER:    Yes, Mr. Fraser.

      MR. FRASER:  Sir, the next Inquest you will hear
relates to Peter McPonnell.  I appear both as the j-amily s
solicitor and as a member of the Steering Committee in this
respect sir.

      Peter's mum and dad and his sister are in Court and
they have with them their Social Worker who has helped
them through the last twelve months.

      THE CORONER:  I am very sorry that you lost your way
and you have probably been very worried and upset about
getting here.  There was nothing we could do about getting
in touch but I have been in that situation myself so I
know it is not a pleasant feeling but I am glad that you
made it and that you are here this afternoon.

       Were any of your clients here on Monday?  I will
 briefly tell you what the procedure is so you can understand
 how the Inquest works, this particular Inquest that is.
                                                                                         THE CORONER


                               in a moment or two I am going to read the evidence
                        v/hich was given to me at the opening on the 18th of April.
                        There may be one or two errors in that.   Don't worry.  I
                        will read it as it was done at the time and then the mistakes
                        we try and correct as we go along today.

                               Having read that we will deal v/ith the mistakes and
                         then we will hear the Pathologist.         Having heard the
                    B   Pathologist the West M i d l a n d s reporting Officers will give
                         their evidence on the summaries and when that has been done
                         we will conclude the hearing at this stage and then anything
                         else I want to say I will say then, so that is the general
                         format of the proceedings.

                              You will hear we will be referring to various plans
                        and giving long reference numbers and so on.   Don't allow
                        that to distract you.  We need that because it has got to
                        be written down so that we know what we are referring to.
                        It is a bit distracting but don't v/orry about it.  Is it
                        all clear?

                                  MEMBERS OF THE FAMILY:                       Yes.

                               THE CORONER:  This then is a resumed Inquest which
                D       was opened on the 19th April 1989.   On that occasion
                         Neil Anthony Parkin, the Acting Coroner's Officer said:

                                   "The body which is the subject of this Inquest
                                   has been identified to D.S 1649 Hardy of the
                                   South Yorkshire Police as that of Peter McDonnell
                                   by Gerard McDonnell his father.    He was 21 years
                                   having been born on the 9th February 1968 at
                                   Liverpool.   He was a single man and he lived at
                                                               Liverpool.   He was
                                   a bricklayer by occupation.    He died at Hillsborough
                                   Football Ground following an incident there on
                                   Saturday, 15th April 1989.    P.C. 1431 Jackson
                                   caused the body to be removed to the Medico-Legal
                                   Centre and there he identified it to Detective
                                   Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently identified
                                    the same body to Dr. Slater.   It is the j.amily
                                   wish that the body should be buried."

                         Now the first correction that has got to be made is to do
                         with the address, isn't it, and what happened w a s I wrote
                         to you and Gerard McDonnell signed a form on the 2nd May lysy
                         and he there told me, made two corrections.                                                        One was that
                    G    the address
                               .U -J-C O O is I____________________________________________________________________________
                                               J - &                                                                           .___ _______
                             L  Liverpool, and the other correction that in tne
                         occupation he put bricklayer/painter and indeed ne also
                         told me about his qualifications which I recognise but
                         we don't put into the registration details but I know why
                         you put it and I can understand that, and the rest of the
                         information I believe as I read was correct, name and age
                         and place of birth.

                                                                   - 2 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                       dr   . D .N. SLATER



      MEMBERS OF THE FAMILY:    Yes.

      THE CORONER:  So we are going to describe him as a
bricklayer/painter.

      Nov/ we are going to listen to Dr. Slater.


                 DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER Called
                        By THE CORONER:

Dr. Slater has already taken the oath so we are not going
to ask him to repeat it, but if you could just repeat Y°ur
name for the Shorthand Writer? - A. My name is Dr. David
Slater.  I ara a Consultant Pathologist.

Despite what I have said about the identification, as fa^.
as you are concerned in fact the body was identified to you
by Inspector Tims, but in any case you verified the details
of the person by reference to paperwork and marks on the
body.  That is right, isn't it? - A. Sir, the body was
firmly marked by waterproof marking sir yes, with the name.

So we are talking about Peter McDonnell and the reference
number is 40, isn't it? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Now then, Dr. Slater, could you please in the usual way
take me through your post-mortem findings? - A. Yes sir, my
examination of Mr. McDonnell showed blueness of the j_ace
in addition to numerous scratches on the face, both
shoulders and the upper part of the tummy.  In addition
there was a very substantial pressure mark on his back.

       Internal examination s h o w e d evidence of haemorrhage
 and also bruising in both of the lungs and I formed an
 opinion that death was certainly due to asphyxia and there
 was clearly evidence of traumatic compression to the lower
 chest and upper part of the tummy.

       My autopsy also revealed an incidental finding
 a rupture to one part of the heart.   This was not associated
 with any degree of haemorrhage into the sac around the
 heart and therefore this was clearly a post-mortem cause
 and it v/ill have resulted from very severe pressure again
 to the chest and upper part of the tummy after death had
 occurred.
       My examination of Mr. McDonnell showed that he was
 fit and healthy and in my opinion would have had a normal
 life expectancy.

       My final stated cause of death, sir, was traumatic
 asphyxia.

. The McDonnells were n o t here on the opening day so they
                                                               DR. D.N. SLATER *


                          did not have the benefit of hearing Prof. Usher's opinion
                          with regard to (a) survival in asphyxia and (b) loss of
                          consciousness, but if I put to you in an asphyxial
                          situation consciousness is lost within seconds rather than
                          minutes would you agree with that or would you want to
                          take a different view? - A. I agree entirely sir.  The
                          normal sequence is a very rapid loss of consciousness,
                          within seconds you say, but then death may be two or three
                    B     minutes after that but unconsciousness is very quick.

                        Q. Prof. Usher said irreversible brain damage certainly between
                           four to six minutes, of that order, and ycu would go along
                           with that? - A. Entirely sir, yes.

                        Q. I wanted to say that because obviously it is a matter which
                           concerns families because the one thing you don't want is
                           to think of somebody being asphyxiated and in agony for
                           ages? - A. I appreciate that sir.

                                 THE CORONER:   Yes, Mr. Fraser, any questions you would
                           like to ask?

                                 MR. FRASER:  Sir, the blood alcohol level has not
                           been mentioned and a matter arises from it.
                D
                                 THE CORONER:  Shall I just give it to you.  All the
                           blood alcohol details were given on the first day and in
                           this particular case Dr. Forrest recorded a reading of
                           172 mgs./lOO mis.


                                           Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER:
                    E
                        Q. Dr. Slater, that is slightly higher than many of the blood
                           alcohol levels that we have had during the past few days.
                           Mr. and Mrs. McDonnell are concerned about that, obviously.
                           They recall very clearly that their son Peter went to a
                           party the night before the game and obviously drank some
                           beer and they understand that on the day of the game he
                           probably had about a couple of pints of beer before the
                           game.  Although the alcohol level is slightly high, could
                           there in your view be a residual reading from the party
                           the night before which might have produced a reading at
                           the time the level was taken? - A. I should explain that
                           I am a Consultant Histopathologist and not a Chemical
                           Pathologist and really questions like that should be
                           directed at the Consultant Chemical Pathologist, I am
                           afraid.

                                 THE CORONER:   Can I just put something to you,
                           Mr. Fraser, because it might help you, because one of the
                           statements says:   "We had about three or four pints and
                           stayed at the pub until about 2.30".   That is Mr. Atkin's
                           account of it which is slightly more than what ....

                H
                                                    - 4 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                      DR. D.N. SLATER


      If your clients are very anxious about this we could
try and see whether we could get Dr. Forrest over to help
you on this point.  I am very anxious that we should answer
your clients' concerns on the matter.  I can't guarantee
that it will be possible but we can try.

      MR. FRASER:    Would you give me a minute sir please?

      THE CORONER:    Yes.

      MR. FRASER:  Thank you for that sir.  No, the family
are simply concerned that for the record it should be noted
that Peter had been out socially the night before and they
are content to let it rest at that sir.  Thank you.

      THE CORONER:  I will deal with it. This blood alcohol
is bedevilled in some respects, a lot of this ma.tter, but
as far as the immediate cause of death is concerned is that
a level or did that level play any part in the death of
this young man? - A. Sir, I can comment on that in that
that alcohol level certainly had no contribution to death
at all.

You are not of course saying that it may not have affected
his behaviour in some way but it had nothing to do with the
immediate cause of death? - A. It quite possibly affected
his behaviour or mental state but certainly did not affect
the cause of death sir, no.

      THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, do you want to take that
any further?

      MR. FRASER:    No sir, thank you for   that.

      THE CORONER: We will ring Dr.    Forrest.   If we can
get him over we will bring him.    All right?   If we can t
then we will leave it as it is because I want as far as
I can for you to go away having heard the things that
concern you.    Any other questions?


               Cross-Examined by MS. NORCLIFFE:

Sir, I rise at this point because I am not sure whether
there is to be any evidence on the point later on.

      Dr. Slater, with regard to the rupture to the heart
which I think you said was caused due to pressure^post­
death, could that have been as a result of resuscitation
attempts on this particular person? - A. Theoretically I
have to say yes, but all I can add is that probably having
done over 5,000 autopsies over 15 years I have never seen
that as a result of resuscitation before.

 Were there any other signs of resuscitation attempts? —
 A. No.                  .
                                                                            DR. D.N. SLATER



                                        MS. NORCLIFFE:    Thank you.

                        q   .         THE CORONER:  You would have to have a pretty enormous
                                amount of force, wouldn't you? - A. Yes.

                        Q. It is much more likely, isn't it, that it was due to some
                           form of pressure either against an object or being contained
                           between various immoveable objects, isn't it? - A. I would
                    B      be looking towards whole pressure force there virtually to
                           cause that kind of damage.

                                      THE CORONER:       Does that help you?     Anything else you
                                wanted to say?

                                        MS. NORCLIFFE:     No, thank you.

                                      THE CORONER:  Anybody else want to ask any questions
                                on that?  (Ho response)

                                      Mr. Fraser, do you want to ask anything arising out
                                of that?

                                        MR. FRASER:    No thank you sir.

                D                       THE CORONER:     Ladies and gentlemen, have you followed
                                that?

                                        MEMBERS OF THE JURY:  Yes.
                                         THE CORONER: Dr. Slater, thank you.
                                               POLICEWOMAN GILLIAN PARKES Called

                    E                                      Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q. You have been sworn as well, haven't you? - A. I have sir.

                        Q. If you could tell us your name again for the Shorthand
                           Writer? - A. I am Gillian Parkes, Policewoman of the West
                           Midlands Police.

                            Q. And would you take me through the summary please? - A. At
                               about 0800 hours on Saturday, 15th April 1989 Mr. Gerard
                               McDonnell saw his son Peter leave the family home with
                               the intention of travelling to Sheffield.  Peter was known
                               to have a ticket for the Semi-Final football match which
                               was to be played at the Hillsborough Stadium that day.

                                      Peter travelled by car to Sheffield with a party of
                                friends, which included Mr. Albert Atkin.  They arrived in
                                Sheffield at about 1110 hours and after visiting two
                                licensed houses they walked to the stadium where at about
                                1445 hours they joined the mass of people in Leppings Lane
                                who were waiting to enter the ground.  They were jostled
                                in the crowd to such an extent that in order to escape
                                the crush they climbed over the outer perimeter gates and
                                into the area leading to-the West Stand turnstiles.  The
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                    p.w.   G. PARKES



crushing there was also severe but the group eventually
reached a turnstile at about 1500 hours.  Although the
five men were in possession of tickets for the terraces,
due to the crowd at the turnstile area they were unable
to go to the correct turnstile but entered into the concourse
at the rear of the West Stand.

       Peter McDonnell and Albert Atkin then decided to try
and enter the seated West Stand area in order to view uhe
match.   Albert Atkin saw Peter walk up the West Stand
entrance stairway and then saw a Police Officer who has not
been identified following up the stairs.   lie assumed tne
Officer was going to check his ticket but he said Peter
then went out of his view and he never saw him again.

      It has been established by virtue of photographic
evidence that Peter McDonnell did find his way into
Enclosure 3 although it is not known exactly how or when
this occurred.  It can only be surmised, however, that he
was turned away from the West Stand and directed to the
terraces where his ticket was valid.

      THE CORONER:  Can I just stop you for a moment.
Remember, ladies and gentlemen, that the West Stand is the
seated area, all right, because it is so confusing.   I find
it very difficult to recollect that.  Thank you.

      THE WITNESS:  Shortly after 1505 hours following the
severe crushing in the West Stand terracing, Police
Inspector Harvey went onto the pitch area and saw a man
he now knows to be Peter McDonnell lying on the ground near
to the Leppings Lane goalmouth.   With assistance he placed
him on to a hoarding and carried him across the pitch ■_o
the Spion Kop area of the ground.

      Police Constable John Jackson assisted to carry
Peter McDonnell across the pitch and then carried him into
the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had been set up.

       At 1550 hours Dr. Matthew James Bull examined Peter
 in the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

       Police Constable Jackson later escorted the body
 of Peter at that stage unidentified to the Medico Legal
 Centre and identified him by reference number to Detective
 Constable Weigold.

       At 1345 hours on Sunday, 16th April 1989, Mr. Gerard
 McDonnell identified the body of his son Peter to Detective
 Sergeant Hardy at the Medico Legal Centre.

        On Sunday, 16th April 1989, following identification
 by Detective Constable Weigold, Dr. David Slater carried
 out an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of
 death.
                                       p.w.   G. PARKES


      Evidence is included regarding the analysis of blood
taken from Peter McDonnell where the presence of ethanol
was detected.  The witnesses proving continuity of the
blood sample are Detective Constable Green, Detective
Sergeant Turner and Detective Sergeant rletcher.
Dr. Alexander Robert Forrest carried out this analysis.

If you turn to page 5, this is Albert AtKin's evidence,
he is one of the friends, isn't he? - A. That is right sir,
yes.
He said they went to a pub at about 12.30, I think.          Is
that right, top of the page? - A. Yes.

And then he goes on to say:  "We had about three or four
pints."  Is that right? - A. That is correct sir.

And then they stayed, he said, until about 2.30? - A. Tnat
is right.

Then they left, presumably to go to the ground.           That is
right, isn't it? - A. That is right.

      THE CORONER:    Any questions?

      MR. FRASER:     No, Peter's family have no questions
sir, thank you.


             Cross-Examined by MS. NORCLIFFE:

Sir, I rise on three points.  The first one, and I think it
is quite a minor point.  At paragrapn 2 - 1  am sorry, Officer,
I will have to refer to the statements.

      THE CORONER:     Yes, please do so.

Is it correct that the turnstile area we are talking about
where this young man and his friend were is actually in
the area of Turnstiles 1-16 as opposed to Turnstiles A-G?

       THE CORONER:    Inspector Layton, could you point out?

       INSPECTOR LAYTON:    It is actually marked on that
 plan there sir.

       MS. NORCLIFFE: Sir the reference is for the West
 Stand turnstiles.

       THE CORONER:    I can see the point that you are
 driving at.
       INSPECTOR LAYTON:  The xaain turnstiles that we have
 been referring to, sir, would be A-G which is adjacent to
 Gate C. The turnstiles that you have referred to, 1-16,
 are actually adjacent but further over in this area here-
                                                                       P.w. G. PARKES



                        q   .          THE CORONER:  And the question that you are being
                                 asked ___   A. His ticket was valid for the turnstiles
                                 to the right that lead to the terraces, the section of
                                 four.  However, because of the crush they entered via the
                                 West Stand.

                        Q.             MS. NORCLIFFE: And further obviously they were
                                 therefore unable to get to the correct turnstile has been
                    B            mentioned and they then entered into the concourse at tne
                                 rear of the West Stand.  I am just concerned as to whether
                                 the entry into the concourse was actually via a turnstile
                                 or possibly ....

                                       INSPECTOR LAYTON:  Sir, if I can assist there.      The
                                 concourse area is this area determined h e r e . Again it
                                 is adjacent to the turnstiles,  There is a brick wall so
                                 to speak here with a gateway.

                                       THE CORONER:     And in fact you can get through from
                                 those, 1-16?
                                       INSPECTOR LAYTON:  That is right sir.     You can get
                                 access from here to here or vice-versa.
                    D                  MS. NORCLIFFE:     Thank you, that answers that point.

                                       The second point, if I can, it is paragraph 5 o ± .
                                 this summary, the evidence seems to suggest that Police
                                 Inspector Harvey shortly after 1505 rendered his assistance
                                 by placing this gentleman on the hoarding etc.    I just
                                 query whether the time of 1505 is in fact a general time
                                 or indeed a specific one referred to because in the visual
                    E            evidence, the part at the bade sir at paragraph 1-j,
                                 Police Inspector Harvey in fact identifies himself doing
                                 this at a video time of 1533.  There is something of a
                                 half-hour difference sir and I would not wish a n y inference
                                 to be unfortunately drawn if the 1505 is in fact intended
                                 to be a general time.

                            Q.          THE CORONER:  Can you answer it?   I know what the
                                  answer is but you tell iAe? - A. If I can refer to inspector
                                  Harvey's statement I may be able to answer the query.

                            Q. I will see if I can help you with a page.   Rather long
                               statements, I am afraid.   It is difficult to find it in
                               this statement.  Some are clearer than others.   Can we
                               look for that in a moment.   In fact the answer to your
                               question is that that was a time when he came in.   It is
                               not entirely clear in the summary, you are quite right.

                                        MS. NORCLIFFE: I did not want it to appear if it
                                  was not the case there had been a half-hour delay.

                                        THE CORONER:  We will try and find an exact reference
                                  and come back to that in a little while.
                H
                                                            - 9 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                   P.W. G. PARKES



                                  MS. NORCLIFFE:     Thank you, sir.

                                   The third point is again something which may be
                             dealt with in due course, the paragraph again regarding
                             the effects, etc. and the clothing, tickets, whatever
                             you wish to call it.

                                   There is a reference in Paragraph 1 sir to this
                    B        young man actually having a ticket but I was wondering
                             if there was also a paragraph that had been omitted ou-
                             of this summary?
                                   THE CORONER:  No, I don't think we had intended to
                        Q.
                             but as"far as you know this youngster had a ticket but he
                             did not use it presumably because, or did he use it to tne
                             turnstiles? - A. They were all in possession of terrace
                             tickets and they all entered via a turnstile and there is
                             no ticket been recovered, so I am of the opinion and to my
                             knowledge the tickets were used although they were not
                             used in the correct turnstiles.   Does that answer your
                             question?

                                   MS. NORCLIFFE:     Yes, thank you.
                    D               THE CORONER:  When I let you sit down in a moment
                             just flick through.   It is only a matter of finding 1505
                             hours.   This occurs in many of the statements where tney
                             say:   "We entered the Stadium at 1505" or whatever time
                             it was and then various things happen, so I agree with^
                             you it is slightly misleading because the implication is
                             that that was the time when he got to the deceased.
                             That is not the intention of that paragraph.   Any other
                    E
                             questions?

                                   MS. NORCLIFFE:     No sir.


                                            Cross-Examined by MR. CATCKPOLE:

                        Q. Sir, I only rise in order to be of some assistance.

                                    It is right that when the crush was very bad a
                              number of tickets were collected in whole at the wrong
                              turnstiles, the Turnstile Operators didn't tear them
                              because they simply did not have time? - A. There were a
                              lot of instances when tickets were taken partly or wholly
                              or not at all.   I can't surmise in this case.

                                    MR. CATCHPOLE:    That was just a matter of assistance
                              for the jury.
                                    THE CORONER:  Anything further from anybody else?
                              Mr. Fraser, do you want to come back?

                                    MR. FRASER:     No thank you sir.
                H
                                                        - 10

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                               P. I. M. LAYTON


                              THE CORONER:  Dr. Forrest, we have found him and he
                        is coming over, so you will be able to hear from him in
                        person in a moment.
                              Right, you sit down and at your leisure just lea^.
                        through that statement and I am sure you will find it
                        because we checked through all these, but it is difficult
                        when you are looking at the time.

                              Right,   Inspector Layton.

                              INSPECTOR LAYTON:    Sir, we may have a slight difficulty
                        with the file.
                              THE CORONER:  Oh I see because you need the zolder.
                        Give the folder to Inspector Layton and Mr. Jones is going
                    C   to see if he can find it.


                                        PET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                                                  Bv THE CORONER:

                              THE WITNESS:  Yes sir, Michael Layton, Petective
                    D   Inspector, West Midlands Police.

                              Sir, in respect of Peter I have made an examination
                        of the visual evidence available by way of phonographs or
                        video and Peter has in fact been identified alive in the
                        enclosure v/hich we have previously referred to as number 3.

                               He is shown on a photograph v/hich is referenced
                    E   PMIF2/5 and if I can assist there, that in fact is a
                        'Paily M i r r o r 1 photograph which actually appeared in a
                        nev/spaper shortly afterv/ards.

                              Police Inspector Harvey of the South Yorkshire Police
                        has  identified himself assisting to place Peter onto a_
                        hoarding and he is shown on a BBC video tape and that is
                        given the reference number Map 7 and it, as has been seated,
                    F   it is timed at 1533:34:18.

                               The Officer has also identified himself carrying Peter
                         across the pitch on a photograph.  This is a South Yorkshire
                         Police photograph reference PR7/12 and it is in fact timed
                         at 1535 hours.
                               He has also signed a plan of the pitch area indicating
                    G    the approximate location at which he found Peter and that
                         is referenced T. Harvey/3.

                               Sir, perhaps if I can just indicate the reason for
                         the slight change in references is we do actually have a
                         TH/3 in an unrelated photograph so we had to alter the
                         system slightly.
                H
                                                    - 11 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                    D.I. M. LAYTON


                                   Peter's sister, Patricia McDonnell who is in Court
                             today, has in fact viewed photographs and she confirms the
                             identification made on the photograph DMIR2/5.

                                   Sir, if I can refer you perhaps to a plan which has
                             been given the reference number MWJL/126?

                        Q.          THE CORONER:  We will call that plan MWJL/126 C40.
                    B        - A. Yes sir.   That is a plan of the terraces and seeks to
                             show the position indicated by that 'Daily M i r r o r 1 photo­
                             graph.

                                   Sir, if I can refer you to a second plan, MWJL/65,
                             which relates to video and a photograph identification of
                             Peter on the pitch.

                        Q. That is number C41. - A. Yes sir.        Would you wish to refer
                           to any other plan, sir?

                        Q. Let's have Harvey's as well please.  T. Harvey/3 will be
                           C42.  Could you come over and show us? - A. Yes sir.

                                    (The Officer moves to a visual display board)
                    D
                             Sir, if we could deal with MWJL/126 v/hich relates to the
                             'Daily Mirror' photograph and referring to the terrace plan,
                             the location at which we believe Peter is shown is in
                             Enclosure number 3 in approximately this position h e r e .

                        Q. And that is alive,      Is that right? - A. That is apparently
                           alive sir, yes.
                    E
                                   If we can look at the pitch plan, sir, there is a
                             video sighting in relation to Peter in approximately this
                             location here on the pitch very near to Gate 3.

                                   There is also reference on that plan to a photograph
                             in fact  which relates to a position in this area her e ,
                             towards the Spion Kop end of the pitch.

                                   Sir, referring to Inspector Harvey's plan,
                             T. Harvey/3.   Again on the pitch the location is shown as being
                             here v/hich is in fact almost identical to that shown on the
                             video and he has also indicated a position here at the Spion
                             Kop end of the pitch, the route that he subsequently took
                             to carry Peter.

                        Q. So that ties in fairly closely with the visual evidence?
                           - A. It does sir, yes.

                                    THE CORONER:   Any questions?

                                    MR. FRASER:    No thank you sir.

                H                                     - 12



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  P.w. G. PARKES



                                           Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

                        0. The only question, Inspector, I think I probably know the
                           answer.     Do you have a time for the 'Daily Mirror' photograph
                           pl 0 ciS0 ?  A* 3NiO s i r .


                                   THE CORONER:' Can you come back and try and help us
                    B        with this 1505.


                                          POLICEWOMAN GILLIAN PARKSS Recalled
                                                    BV THE CORONER:


                        Q. Can you help us where we got the 1505 from? - A. In answer
                           to your question looking at Inspector Harvey s statement
                           in full 1505 is a general term.    Actually a time element
                           in his statement at 523 he is outside the ground engaged
                           in other matt e r s. He then goes into the ground after the
                           event has taken place when the match is being abandoned
                           which is around 1505/06.    He then helps casualties.  So
                           it is a general term.    He is not engaged with Peter McDonnell
                           at that time.    The video element of 1533 is a proper time.
                    D
                                   MS. NORCLIFFE:   Thank you.

                        Q.         THE CORONER:  In other words you pick 1505 because
                             it is related to an event which is known to have occurred
                             at around that time? - A. Yes.

                                   THE CORONER:  What page is it?  It is not very
                    E        important actually.  Don't worry about the page.

                                   Are you happy with that?

                                   MS. NORCLIFFE:   I am obliged for that clarification,
                             thank you.
                                   THE CORONER:  You are quite content, Mr. Fraser,
                             aren't you or are you not?

                                   MR. FRASER:  I had understood that to be the general
                             tenor in any event sir but did not want to make any waves
                             the point having been raised.

                                    THE CORONER:  It depends how you read this paragraph
                              because you can actually read it in the way which we
                              intended but I also agree that it can be read or misread,
                              shall we say, and give a misleading impression, so thank
                              you.
                                    Now Dr. Forrest has come.    Would you come down?

                                    DR. FORREST was called and took the following affirmation;
                    H
                                                     - 13   -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                      DR. FORREST


     "I do solemnly and sincerely and truly declare
     and affirm that the evidence I shall give
     shall be the truth, the whole truth and
     nothing but the truth."


                     Bv THE CORONER:

Dr. Forrest, thank you very much for coming over at sucn
short notice.

      The point is that this is one of the cases where the
blood alcohols were rather higher than some of the others.
It is the case of Peter   McDonnell and the level that you
recorded was 172 mgs./lOO mis. - A. Yes sir.

The point which has been - the ramily are moderately concerned
about this - and the point that has been put is that on the
night before the event Peter was at a party and no coubt had
something to drink.  What - I think I have got this right
what effect would that intake of alcohol at that time have
on the blood alcohol levels on two assumptions, if on the
day, you know say an hour or two beforehand, he had only
had two pints of beer or alternatively three or four? - A.
Yes sir.  Could I know approximately the weight of the
young man in question?

Yes, I am sure you can.    Have you got it in front of you,
Mr. Fraser?   (Document   passed to witness)

      MR. FRASER:  Sir, you know your way around your own
post-mortem better than I.

      THE WITNESS:  62 kgs. sir is somewhat below the
average weight.  I am sorry, could I check his date of birth
too please or his age?

      MR. FRASER:   Sir, he was 21.

      THE WITNESS:  So he is essentially a 21 year old male
in otherwise good health before this incident of less than
average size.

      Yes, I think it would certainly be conceivable   that
results of this order of magnitude could be produced   by
consumption of three to four pints of alcohol on the   day
in question perhaps over the lunchtime preceding the   lead-up
to the incident.

      The effect of going to a party the night before, well
it would clearly depend on the amount of alcohol he drunk.
In jurisdictions where the permitted level for driving is
rather lower than in this country it is common practice
for Police to stop people driving to work the morning after
so to speak.  For example in Norway, Sweden, Finland one
                                         DR. FORREST


sees this as a regular practice and the sort of concentrations
of alcohol one would get in a typical man who went to a
typical party and perhaps had rather more to drink than he
normally would, would result in levels of alcohol which could
well be over the permitted level in those countries and I
am thinking about levels of the order of 20 mgs. of alcohol
per 100 mgs. of blood the night after such a party.

       However, with a level of that order by lunchtime the
following day it would be likely to have disappeared and
one would be starting again from scratch, so other things
being equal and I would emphasis that calculations of blood
alcohol concentration from the amount of alcohol that a
person is said to have drunk are difficult at tne best oi
times,   these data would be consistent with a young man of
this physique having had something or the order of four
pints of alcohol, four pints of a typical strongish beer
two to three hours before death.

So in other words what you are saying is that the alcohol
from the party the previous night would either be non-existent
by lunchtime or negligible? - A. Unless a vast amount was
drunk which obviously we have no evidence to say was.

      THE CORONER:   Mr. Fraser, do you want to ask anything
further?

      MR. FRASER:    No thank you sir.

      THE CORONER:    I just ask you one other question. - A.
Yes sir.

Let's forget the alcohol from the previous evening for a
moment.   If he had only drunk two pints, given his height,
weight and age, well not his height, his weight and age,
could he have reached 172 mgs./lOO mis? - A. Unless it was
two pints of something like a barley wine or a super lager,
something of the order for example Tennents Super or one of
the other very strong lagers, Carlsberg Gold Label, one of
the lagers of that variety, I think it would be rather
unlikely.   If he had been drinking something a variety to
use a local example Wards or Stones he would be unlikely
sir.

He would be more the three or four pints and probably more
likely four? - A. I would have thought so.

      THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, anything else?

      MR. FRASER:    No sir.

      THE CORONER:    Just check with your clients in case
they h a v e .

      MR. FRASER:  No sir, save to add our thanks to
Dr. Forrest for coming back.
                                     THE CORONER


      THE CORONER:   Any of you want to raise anything?
(No response)
      Dr. Forrest, I am most obliged to you and you may
leave us again.

      DR. FORREST:   Thank you very much sir.

      THE CORONER:  I am very sorry to drag you over but
I am grateful to you.

      Mr..and Mrs. McDonnell, I hope that has helped you a
little bit with the levels.  Dr. Forrest knows his stuff,
as I think you will have realised.

      That is the evidence which we are going to take in
the case of your son at the moment. Can I say, as I have
said to all the families whom I have seen, how very very
sorry I am that this tragedy has struck you personally.
I wish one could do more than just express words but I
am afraid that is all we have got.

      I appreciate you coming.  As I say I am sorry you
were stressed with the mis-routeing, it is just- one of
those things, but at least you are here now and I hope
before you go you will have a cup of tea or something
so that you can relax and calm down a little bit.
Thank you and thank you, Mr. Fraser.   We v/ill rise for
a moment.

                  (The Inquest into the death of
                        PETER MCDONNELL
            was adjourned to a date to be fixed)
