HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

             STADIUM DISASTER

          ON THE 15TH APRIL,      1989




                    Before

 S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                       At

               The Town Hall,
                 Sheffield.

                       On

             11th January,     1991




         TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J .L . H a r ph a m, L t d .,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                         INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




SUBMISSION BY MR. KING


SUBMISSION BY MR. HALE


SUBMISSION BY MR.   ISAACS


SUBMISSION BY MR. KING


SUBMISSION BY MR. CATCHPOLE


FURTHER SUBMISSION BY MR.    ISAACS


FURTHER SUBMISSION BY MR. KING


FURTHER SUBMISSION BY MR. CATCHPOLE


DISCUSSION


SUBMISSION BY MISS SINCLAIR


SUBMISSION BY MR. MAXWELL


SUBMISSION BY MR. RUSSELL


RULING BY THE CORONER


DISCUSSION
                                                   1




          TWENTY EIGHTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

             FRIDAY,   11th JANUARY 1991

     THE CORONER:   I think we left it when I
interrupted you, Mr. King, that you were just going to
rise and cover Hr. Isaacs' point, and possibly
something else, and I stopped you.  We might as well
start there.

      MR. KING:   Sir, I don't think I can add much to
;ny observations yesterday.  Sir, on reflection
overnight I would only want to reiterate that I
maintain my submission that the so called voluntary
statement which was read out to the Jury has to form
and fall into the category of documentary evidence,
notwithstanding, sir, that it is referred to by
reference in the words which were spoken, according to
the evidence of the appropriate Officer, by Mr.
Marshall when being interviewed at the Police Station.

     Sir, although he refers to it in the PACE
interview, the words themselves were in writing
already.  It was not as if they were words which were
spoken to the Officer in the course of that interview,
it was merely referred to, but, sir, I don't want to
repeat myself any more than that, just to maintain that
submission that it therefore fell fairly and squarely
within Rule 37.

     Sir, the second matter I wish to pick up is this,
I did submit to you that assuming for the moment that
it was not within Rule 37, and accepting those passages
from Jervis, the textbook on practice and law relating
to inquests, read out by my learned friend, Mr. Payne,
that at the end of the day subject to the rules, that
is the Coroners' Rules, the strict rules of evidence do
not apply.  I accept that as a starting point.
Nonetheless, sir, given that you have been careful, and
very careful, and properly so, to maintain up to this
point certain relatively strict guidelines as to the
sort of evidence you will admit, and that you have
excluded - and I can remember submissions to you
involving the evidence of Mr. McGauley - you have been
very keen to exclude evidence as to other events,
especially other events not involving the Hillsborough
Ground itself.  You have been correct, sir, in wishing
to keep witnesses to their evidence of their
observations of fact and not of opinion.

     Sir, having regard to those very proper
guidelines, I still submit that in any act of
discretion* as you are entitled to ignoring the strict
rules of evidence, the only reasonable conclusion one
would have come to was that this so called voluntary
statement was so full of opinion and speculation, and
very little regarding factual basis for those opinions
and speculations, especially regarding other events,
that its probative value was very little indeed, and
its prejudicial value in the sense that it would have
an impact, or was likely to have an impact on a jury
outweighing its worth in probative terms, that it
should nave been excluded as a matter of your
discretion, sir.

     Sir, you very properly said to me in one of your
final observations last night that one of your concerns
was that interested parties, including myself, might
have objected to the exclusion of the document.   Sir,
my only observation on that, and I fully accept your
concern, would be to reiterate the wisdom perhaps of my
earlier submission that if there is a document of
which, sir, you the Coroner have knowledge and are
intending to put in, but as to which you, sir, yourself
have concerns, that a sensible procedure would be, and
it is only short, would be to allow interested parties
sight of it in order to hear their submissions as to
whether or not it should go in, because certainly one
of the problems, as you know, sir, about the way this
document went in yesterday was no notice having been
given of its contents, and sir, you have dealt with
that, that that was the problem.

     Sir, I don't think I can add to that, save that my
learned friend Mr. Isaacs stressed the point that
although it was a self-serving statement that was, in a
sense, irrelevant, but in my submission it is not,
because in the act of your discretion, sir, the fact
that a document is self-serving, as opposed to one
which is given against interests in interview, must
make one pause for thought in the act of discretion
whether its probative value is outweighed by its
irrelevance and yet its prejudicial value.

     Sir, normally in a court of law self-serving
statements written beforehand by a witness are not
allowed to be adduced in chief for obvious reasons,
that experience has shown that self-serving statements,
especially ones of opinion, in reality nave little
probative value.  I maintain that reason for the rule
is a sound one, and certainly where one has a self-
serving statement in existence, written before the
event of this inquest and not even made in the course
of any sort of cross-examination or interview at a
police station under caution, then the evils of self-
serving statements - I mean that in the sense of its
lack of probative value and yet its great prejudicial
value - become very obvious.  It would be very easy for
any number of witnesses, sir, to seek permission to
produce to you and therefore the jury statements they
have made in advance, written out, putting their case,
but of course the dangers of that are obvious and you
would not want to do that with every witness, sir.

     Finally, sir, Mr. Isaacs says, and I accept it,
that Mr. Marshall is not a party to the proceedings, he
is not under any sort of charge in these proceedings,
and therefore the fact that he is answering allegations
in a sense is an irrelevancy, but it isn't sir, because
it is unreal not to realise and appreciate, and I am
sure we all do, that the statement which was read out
is, in fact, in the nature of a defence to allegations
which he believes, and maybe rightly believes, have
been made against him at various times since this
disaster, but they don't necessarily deal with what his
evidence should be directed to, which are the facts of
what he saw and observed.   That is why I say, sir, you
can't ignore the fact that in effect it is a self-
serving statement seeking to answer allegations by
somebody who feels himself in the position of a
defendant.

     Having said that, sir, I merely bring all those
strands together to reiterate my submission that in the
act of your discretion, sir, that document should have
been excluded but it having gone in you know my third
point which I maintain is and was that if at the end of
the day you reject all my submissions, nonetheless the
evidence of Mr. Marshall to the Taylor Inquiry should
also be put to the Jury ....

     THE CORONER:   I don't actually recollect one of
the things you said but it isn't terribly important.
Can I then get it right, what you are submitting is (a)
you want the Jury discharged?

     MR. KING:   Because it was a statement which
should never have gone in, sir.

     THE CORONER:   (b), tell me the reason why you
want the Jury discharged?  What are the grounds?

     MR. KING:   Sir, on two grounds.  It was a
statement which should not properly have been read to
them and the two grounds are first that it was
documentary evidence which fell within Rule 37, and the
Inquest through yourself, sir, and in saying all this I
mean no personal comments on you, that Rule was not
followed.  Rule 37 clearly states that if documentary
evidence is to be produced, and the maker of the
document is available to give evidence, then parties
who object to that evidence going in should have the
opportunity first to see the document in advance, and
can object to it.  Indeed, sir, there is nothing in the
rules which indicates that you could overrule that
objection if the party is ready and available.  Be that
as it may, sir, no opportunity was given here for that
objection.

     The second ground, sir, is that if I be wrong on
that, and it was admissible by virtue of your own
discretion, not being bound by any rules of evidence as
such and it not falling within Rule 37, that no
reasonable tribunal properly directing itself could
have come to any other conclusion that the contents of
the statement as such, its probative value was little
or none, and its prejudicial value to any jury seeking
to weigh the truth of the matters they were
investigating was so overwhelming that it should have
been excluded.

     That is the basis upon which I say, therefore, it
was improperly put before the Jury and the Jury should
be discharged, and that it can't be cured, even on the
second ground, by simply summing up to the Jury saying,
as my learned friends have suggested, one should ignore
certain parts.

     Sir, that was my first submission.  My second
submission is that if you are against me on that and
that it is properly before the Jury in your judgment
and the Inquest continues, then logic and fairness
demands that just as the so-called voluntary statement
was admitted and read out to the Jury because it was
referred to in the PACE interview, so equally all the
evidence which Mr. Marshall gave to the Taylor Inquiry
is equally referred to in exactly the same way and
should be read in full to the Jury, particularly as the
voluntary statement not only refers to the Taylor
Inquiry evidence, but seeks to put glosses on it, seeks
to give an opinion as to what its effect was, seeks to
give an opinion as to the nature of cross-examination,
and seeks to give an opinion as to the general tenor of
the way evidence was presented to that Inquiry.




           /It would only be fair
It would only be fair and proper by hearing the evidence
and there is no logical fairness and it certainly could not
be cured, sir, simply by giving one cross-examination on
individual parts because it is the tenor and totality which
he refers to in his voluntary statement, indeed you
properly, in your judgment, decided the whole of the
voluntary statement should be read in its entirety without
pause.   Sir, if that be right I repeat that there can be
no answer, in my submission, to the point that that should
equally apply to his evidence to the Taylor Inquiry.  Sir,
those are my basic submissions, sir.

     MR. HALE:  Dealing with the last point first, sir, you
know it is already on record that I have not the slightest
objection to the Taylor transcript as a whole being read.
On the first point, the discharge of the Jury, I would
merely invite you to consider whether that would be an
absolutely futile exercise because all that would happen is
that we would have to go through everything again and there
would come the point when Mr. Marshall will be asked, as I
am sure he will be asked, not what he saw or what he did or
what he saw anybody else do but he will be asked to
speculate upon what he might have done.  There has been a
great deal of leading already of witnesses on that very
topic and it is a corner stone of Mr. King's case, not
merely of what happened on that date but what should have
happened if he had taken some undefined st e p s .

    I will refer to the fact that all this does not take
Mr. King completely by surprise because as long ago as 6th
June last year in a letter which you have before you, which
was sent to all the complainants' solicitors, they have had
since then to consider the implications. The implications
of that letter were very clear, that questions would be
asked and evidence would be given about the feasibility and
practicability of the things that they were suggesting
which at the moment are purely airy fairy without any basis
in fact laid before any of the witnesses.  So that is the
answer to the first point.

     We would go through it all again and then they would
have to decide whether they were going to confine
themselves to questions to Mr. Marshall on facts or whether
they are in effect going to make an expert of him.  I
submit the whole tenor of the examination so far of all the
witnesses leads one to believe, in fact the whole nature of
the application, that Mr. Marshall is also going to be
asked to be an expert and to say what he would or could
have done to control this crowd in a purely hypothetical
situation.

      In response to that he is entitled, like any other
expert, not only to say what he saw and did but also what
he knows from his expert knowledge is capable of being done
and what is done at other places and other e v e n t s .
Therefore, the whole of what the other side object to now
will come out in his oral evidence if he is asked in that
w ay to speculate and to say what he might or should have
done.
     Dealing with the way in which the thing came out, I
respectfully back put of that.     I leave that to others
because the way in which the statement came before the
Tribunal again is well known and documented.     It was put to
him quite clearly.     Incidentally, I owe you an apology,
sir.  I said yesterday I was not ambivalent.     I am a bit
like the man who said, "I used to be indecisive but now I
am not so su re " . I see from the transcript that I did say
I was ambivalent but ambivalent with a tendency, if I may
say so, towards excluding the statements because although I
knew what was likely to be in them I had no confidence at
all that they would support me.     You make a statement and
immediately other people can descend on it, take it to
bits, attack it, and so caution was very much in m y mind
and I was very happy for that statement not to go before
the Jury.  I was very happy for you to examine the witness
just as all the other witnesses have been examined and, of
course, Mr. King has frankly acknowledged that he jumped to
his feet and insisted on it going in.     In that I have no
part to play.     I leave that highly technical argument as to
how it came in.

    As to how it was made, I have no apology whatsoever to
make because there were already statements in writing,
self-serving statements, by the complainants, by Mr. Jones,
Mr. Hicks and Mrs. McBrien.  Incidentally, I must say that
Mrs. McBrien I exempt entirely from any suggestion that she
is being partisan.  I find Mrs. McBrien extremely objective
and extremely helpful in the way she has dealt with this
particular problem.

     Once those statements were there and questions were
asked, all that Mr. Marshall has done is reply to them.
The complaints were already in writing and they were very
specific and very self-serving on behalf of the
complainants.     I can see nothing wrong whatever in replying
to those written questions with written replies and I
recall, and perhaps Chief Superintendent Foster could be
called if necessary, that he said, "Do you want me to go
through all these complaints and you give me the oral
answers?"  We said, "No, the complaints are in writing and
they can be incorporated". That is all that happened
there.  If any objection had been taken to that, then all
that would have happened would be that Chief Superintendent
Foster would have orally put the questions and Mr. Marshall
would have orally replied to them exactly along the lines
that he did virtually as an expert because the questions
raised were not, "What did you see and what did you do
then?" but, "What might you have done and what could you
have done?" and so his answer to that was fully specific
and as it w a s .

     As I say, I make no apology in saying that if the same
thing happened again I would do the same again.  Perhaps
with the benefit of hindsight I would say that we had
better be careful and you had better ask the quest i on s . We
will answer them orally and they can go on the video and
nobody can then say it is a put up job in any way.    The
                                                      7



result would have been.exactly the same and the result will
be exactly the same when' Mr. Marshall is asked those
questions when he gives evidence.   The futility of it is
the thing that strikes me.

     On the technicality, several of m y learned friends
have mentioned the fact that the thing is not yet evidence
because Mr. Marshall has not yet been asked, "Is it a true
statement?" and so on.  If so, there is a technical way out
that I see, that he should not be asked and the Jury should
be told "For reasons which we do not need to go into we are
going to disregard all that and perhaps start a g a i n " .

     The thought does occur to me - and I am not as
experienced in Jury trials as m y learned friends - that
mistakes and little procedural difficulties might arise in
almost every Jury case and if you were to discharge the
Jury every time and start again then trials would never
come to an end.  It seems to me that I have frequently seen
Judges saying, "Yes, that should not have happened but I
will direct the Jury to ignore it.   They are perfectly
capable of ignoring it and let us get on with i t " .

      Finally, the other thing is that if they are going to
ask to see the PACE statement at all then I respectfully
submit that they must take it as a whole.   Your suggestion,
which I readily fell in with, was to exclude the earlier
part.   First of all the complainants have had that since
last June and so there is nothing there to take them by
surprise.   Secondly, I agree that subsequent events have
really washed out a good half of that earlier letter anyway
and, therefore, there is no point in me raising those
spectres now because the things of which I have complained
have been put right.

     MR. ISAACS:    Sir, I would not have said anything at
all save that m y learned friend, Mr. King, made reference
to an argument I put before you in relation to self-serving
statements and I would not want it to be thought that in
fact I was saying that which he thought I was saying and it
may be there is misunderstanding between u s . My point
about self-serving statements related to the contents of
the Police and Criminal Evidence Act interview and not the
contents of the so-called voluntary statement.   I agree
wholeheartedly with m y learned friend, Mr. King, as to the
inadmissibility of that statement and I do not think on
that basis there is anything between u s . My remark as to
the inappropriateness of the phrase "self-serving" was to
the contents of the answers to questions directed by a
Police Officer under caution.




                                    /THE CORONER.
     THE CORONER:    Mr. Isaacs, can you tell me...
What I understand you to say, you agree with Mr. King
with regard to the inadmissibility of that statement.
Can you give me your reasoned argument for that?    I have
heard Mr. King but I would be interested to hear how you
would put it.

     MR. ISAACS:   Of course.    My argument is insofar as
it was, or is inadmissible, such defect, such mistake as
was made, with respect, can be cured by a proper
direction to the jury, sir.    I know you appreciate that.
As to why it is inadmissible, I accept that you had a
discretion to include it as part of the PACE procedure.
To that extent I differ from my learned friend Mr. King
who says it should have come within the ambit of Rule 37.
Of course, if it did come within Rule 37 you would have
no discretion either way.    It is either in or it isn't.
Your decision was it didn't come within Rule 37.

     I, if I may say so, with respect, agree with you,
sir, that it didn't come within Rule 37 because it had
been introduced during the PACE procedure.   The question
then was whether in your discretion you should have,
notwithstanding that it was put in during the interview,
you should have allowed it in.   Certainly my view was
that you shouldn't have allowed it in because its
probative value was so limited.   I won't say it was
worthless because there are parts of that account which
the jury may have found helpful.   I refer back to what
you were saying yesterday that Mr. Marshall whilst not
being an expert on certain matters, is certainly an
expert on some.   Maybe in a relatively limited area, but
still he is an expert on some because he has many years'
experience of policing these sort of games.

     Certainly some of it is evidence which he could not
properly give because it is based on, for example, his
understanding of what happened (a) at Wembley, (b) at
Cagliari and I think he mentioned other matters as well
referring to the barrier.

     When one looked at it as a whole, perhaps it would,
with respect, have deserved rather greater pruning than
in fact turned out to be the case so I respectfully agree
with Mr. King that taken as a whole those parts of the
statement which may have been of some value to the jury
were not so great as to ameliorate the consequences of
the greater body which was either opinion, which was not
based on any expert knowledge, but more particularly on
the fact that when one listened to it and when one read
it, it looked very much like a statement of one's case.
It is really on that basis I would have submitted that it
was objectionable.   From my client's point of view it
was neither here nor there.   I think these are matters
which you, sir, could properly take into account.

     It would have been on that basis that I would agree
with my learned friend that it should not have gone
before the jury.

     THE CORONER:   So it is the content that you aren't
happy with rather than the method of introduction?

     MR. ISAACS:   Yes.   Within your discretion you
should not have admitted it.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I understand.

      MR. PAYNE:    Sir, may I make these short
submissions?     First, standing back from the particular
matter which is being addressed at the moment, ultimately
the question for the jury, if it is left to the jury on
the question of whether the verdict ought to be unlawful
killing, is likely to boil down to the question whether
any particular policeman or men was indifferent to an
obvious and serious risk of injury to the people who
died.     It may be in fact that that question should be
applied not only to a policeman or men, but also to other
candidates who fall into that category.     For example,
those responsible for the design and layout of the ground
and other supporters - spectators - who attended at the
ground.    I am saying "police" because that is the
subject matter of the present discussion about
admissibility of evidence.

     However, the overall question for the jury is
whether anyone was indifferent to an obvious and serious
risk of injury to the deceased.

     May I just make this comment about that fundamental
question?   In order to decide whether such a risk was
obvious, the jury will need evidence as to the state of
the knowledge of the person "accused" at the time, the
state of knowledge.   Knowledge means, obviously, what
was known and what was known opens up a great field of
information as to the ticketing arrangements, the layout
of the ground, the systems for counting and control and
also experience of crowd behaviour on other occasions,
the reasonable expectation of the police and those
responsible for the layout about the crowd behaviour
influenced by alcohol and how the behaviour of this
particular crowd compared with what could reasonably have
been expected.

     All that body of evidence, and I haven't covered it
all, but one knows what one is talking about, the whole
of that body of evidence is relevant to the state of
                                                    9




knowledge when one has to ask whether any person
"accused" was indifferent to an obvious and serious risk
of injury.

     I have tried to step back from the issue to try and
observe what the whole case is likely to be about.

     Coming to the particular point which is under
discussion, there are two aspects.   One is procedure and
the other is substance.   Now as to procedure, with
regard to the calling of these witnesses, of whom
Mr. Marshall is an example, two separate procedures have
been considered.   One is what can be described as an
ordinary practice, namely, to call the witness and, in
the Coroner's Court, to lead the evidence of the witness
by the Coroner and then for that witness to be examined
by other parties and finally by his own representative.
That is one procedure.

     The other procedure which, sir, you indicated at the
outset of the Inquests, was your normal practice is that
where a person has made a Criminal Justice Act or a
Police and Criminal Evidence Act statement, then you
would follow the other procedure by which the person who
took the statement would produce the statement and put it
in evidence as something which was said by the "accused"
on another occasion.   You indicated that that was your
ordinary practice and that was what you intended to
follow.   This was discussed at a very early stage in the
Inquests and certainly as I understood it, all parties
who are represented before you accepted that that was the
procedure which would be followed.

     Now it may well be that it could be said that one or
other of those procedures is to be preferred and it could
be said that that the "ordinary" procedure would be
preferable, but that is not the way in which you have
indicated you intend to conduct the proceedings and it is
not the way the parties have asked you to conduct the
proceedings.   To the contrary, all parties have agreed
that this other practice should be adopted.




            So then one has now reached
      So then one has now reached the stage that following
the practice which you have indicated, and which the parties
have accepted, that has now been put into effect and in
the course of it this so called voluntary statement has been
put in as part of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act
statement made by Mr. Marshall and objection is now taken
on the groundsthat some of the things which are said in
that statement are prejudicial, whatever that means, to the
interests of somebody.

      Now in my submission the use of the word "prejudicial"
is unhelpful and the only relevant question is whether the
evidence is admissible and on the question of whether the
evidence is admissible that boils down to the question of
whether it is material to an issue which the jury has to
decide.

      Now in order to answer the question therefore of
whether the "voluntary statement" contains material evidence,
one has to look carefully at the whole contents of the state­
ment and on doing that our submission is that one finds that
parts of it are material evidence because they are within
the knowledge of the person making the statement and they
bear directly on the issue which the jury has to decide as
to whether anyone was indifferent to an obvious and serious
risk, and parts of the statement are matters which at first
sight are probably outside the knowledge of Mr. Marshall and
are expressions of his opinion not based on matters which
are within his particular expertise.  It could be said that
those parts, and there are not very many of those parts,
a small part of the statement, may not be material to an
issue which the jury has to decide because the evidence has
no weight.

      In my submission that is the situation which has been
reached and all that needs to be done to put right the minor
wrong which has occurred is that the jury should in due
course be directed that those expressions of opinion by
Mr. Marshall based on matters outside his own specialist
knowledge, and I am referring particularly to the collapse
of the barrier and the cause of the collapse of the barrier,
are not matters which the jury should take into account in
reaching their verdict because Mr. Marshall is not qualified
to express any opinion about that particular matter.

      That therefore in my submission is the situation which
has been reached.  It is certainly not a case where the
jury should be discharged because the minor matter can easily
be resolved in the way in which I have suggested.

      Now*there are two other points which I need to mention,
I hope it will be helpful at this stage, first of all with
regard to Rule 37.
                                                            11




      Now one can certainly see that there is an argument
to say that this is a document and it is being put "in
evidence" and accordingly it can be seen that there is an
argument for saying that it does fall within Rule 37.

      I don't really wish to make any submissions about that.
You have indicated that the practice which you intend to
follow is that the transcripts of the interviews should be
circulated as an aid to note taking at the time at which the
transcript is first played or read to the Court and you have
indicated that having heard argument or submissions that to
follow any other sort of practice would generate a huge amount
of paperwork and potential argument about the admissibility
of particular parts of the evidence leading to extremely
complex editing procedure over I think it is all together
about six witnesses, most of whom have made many hours
apparently of statements, so you have indicated what your
practice is intended to be and we have no submissions about
that and we accept your ruling.

      Finally with regard to the discharge of the jury, as
I have said we oppose the idea that the jury should be
discharged because in view of the length of the proceedings
so far and the public interest it would be intolerable if
the Inquest had to start again, when if there has been any
minor impropriety it can easily be corrected as I have
said, but sir if you were minded to consider discharging the
jury then we would ask you to adopt the practice that you
indicated that you were so minded because we would certainly
wish to apply for a review of that decision if you were to
make it.   Sir, we would ask you to give us a chance to apply
for a review before actually discharging them.

       THE CORONER:   I understand.

      MR. PAYNE:  Sir, unless there is anything else upon
which we can assist you that is our submission.

       THE CORONER:   Not at the moment.     Thank you, Mr. Payne.

      MR. MANNING:  I have nothing to add sir to the state­
ment of position which I made yesterday.

      MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, I myself am in the same position
as Mr. Manning, save only to say I object on both procedural
grounds and the contents.   The contents was very fully and
if I may say so very well expressed by Mr. Isaacs and proper
objections have been taken.

       As to procedure I differ.      Sir, perhaps I can just
add.

      Yesterday I made two submissions.  One I did not
develop fully*. Mr. King has now picked up on one arm of
that and that is that any statement, whether it is PACE
or this particular statement falls within Rule 37.  I know
you have ruled against that sir but perhaps I can just very
briefly outline why I am of that view and why this should
have been, in my respectful submission, disclosed to us
in advance.

      That is that the statement made by the, the evidence
given by the West Midlands Officer in this case was simply
that the statement was made.  He can and could have given
evidence as to its contents if he could remember it.  He did
not give oral evidence.  The only way he could have given
evidence and has given evidence is by producing a document,
a tape.  That puts him plainly, in my respectful submission,
with Rule 37 sub rule (1).

      If that is wrong and it falls outside it is plain
from Rule 37, second submission, that there is some safeguard
put in for parties to take legitimate objection to certain
parts of documentary evidence that is going to be placed
before a jury.

      In my respectful submission having seen - and you were
the only one sir who had knowledge of this apart from Mr. Hale
- what is in effect a separate part of the PACE statement,
19 pages, a lot of which - with respect to what Mr. Payne
says - a lot of which is not proper material to go before
a jury because it is an expression of opinion.  That is some­
thing with respect in my submission which should have been
brought to the attention of the legal representatives.   Even
if it was not a Rule 37 statement it is clear that the
rule provides in most cases where documentary evidence is
going to be put in for some safeguards in the interests
of those parties who are going before them and with respect
I submit this should have been disclosed in advance because
once it went before the jury the damage is done, but having
said that, and indeed I have said before, I don't believe
that the damage is so great that a properly directed jury
is going to be unduly or improperly affected by this evidence
and I would invite you and continue to invite you not to
discharge this jury but to direct them at the appropriate
time as to what evidence they can properly rely on.  This
statement in a large part is not evidence they can properly
take into account.

      THE CORONER:   May I just ask you this, Mr. Catchpole,
if I understand you rightly, forget this particular Inquest
for a moment and just move to a non-emotive standard death
where a person is being interviewed under caution either
by way of contemporaneous notes or by way of audio tape.
Are you in fact saying that in those cases when the Officer
sits in the box and I or indeed any other Coroner in the
country say to the Officer:  "Tell me what you know about
this case" and the Officer will say:  "I attended at such
and such a place and I saw an accident and I took the driver
to the station.  I then interviewed him" and he produces
the notes, are you saying, and I use my normal practice indeed
believe the standard practice throughout the country is to
say to the Officer having verified the signature:  "Please
read those notes to me" that that is in fact a breach of Rule 37

      MR. CATCHPOLE:  In many cases an Officer will sit down
and make his own contemporaneous notes and in that case when
you ask an Officer to read from those he is giving his
evidence of what took place at that meeting.

      The difference in this case is that the Officer has
produced a document.  It is not his own oral evidence, he
has produced a tape which on any definition is a document
and that has been played.   The only evidence he has given
is that he was there when that document was made.   That puts
it within Rule 37, so similarly if you had asked an Officer
to produce a statement that had been signed by the witness
and that document was put in evidence and read out, I would
say that is within Rule 37.   If you ask the Officer himself
from his own contemporaneous notes to give his evidence of
what took place that is his oral evidence.

      THE CORONER:  So if I can put it like this then, I
am just wanting to explore so that I can understand precisely
what you are saying because we can all learn apart from
anything else.

      If we were then to take Mr. Hale's point, if instead
of tabling, if I can use that word the paper, Mr. Foster had,
or if you like the paper was tabled and Mr. Foster then had
gone through it seriatim line by line and asked the question
and Mr. Marshall had replied.  Let's imagine that he could
have replied in identical words as in that statement, you
would say that would not then constitute a document within
Rule 37.

      MR. CATCHPOLE:  Perhaps I can put it in my own words.
What I was saying was if an Officer or any person takes
down their own note and then is invited in effect to refresh
their memory from that note, but a convenient way in the
case of a long document is simply to read it out whilst
giving evidence, that is their evidence that they took down.

      If the evidence has been collected by another means,
i.e. someone else has written out a'statement which has been
signed, or it has been collected on a document or a tape,
then that is a document that is being produced by that witness
because he is not giving evidence as to what took place.

      Perhaps I can just remind you sir, I am sure you are
familiar with it, the words of Rule 37(1) itself.  It says:
      "Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 2 to 4
      the Coroner may admit at an Inquest documentary
      evidence relevant to the purposes of the Inquest
      from any living person which in his opinion is
      unlikely to be disputed unless the person who is
      in the opinion of the Coroner is within Rule 22
      objects to the documentary evidence being admitted."

Now in this case the document that was produced by the West
Midlands Officer was a tape and unless there is some other
residual discretion which I understand you have ruled is
the case, that the PACE statement itself in these circumstances
falls outside that rule and you can admit it by another
means •••••

      THE CORONER:  So are you then saying that if' a con­
temporaneous note had been taken of this interview by an
Officer, either the statement or indeed of everything which
is said, 120 pages, because as I understand you you are not
merely saying that the voluntary statement is a document,
you are actually saying that the tape is a document as well
and what you are saying since the introduction of PACE where
all statements are gradually being moved from contemporaneous
note form to audio form, perhaps an inadvertent but a con­
sequence of that is that all the evidence becomes inadmissible
in the Coroner's Court unless you can squeeze it into Rule 37
and get the consent of the interested parties, because that
is effectively what you are saying?

      MR. CATCHPOLE:  Effectively I think that is.   It may
sound bizarre but I do think it is the effect of the law.
It is the normal rule of evidence.  You are allowed to
refresh your memory from a document and you can give your
own evidence from your own recollection if necessary
refreshing your memory from a document.




                          The only effect
The only effect of asking an Officer what took place
when he had his own notebook is you saying refresh your
memory, but for convenience read it out.

     THE CORONER:   I have not detailed experience of
proceedings either in Magistrates' Courts or in the
Crown Court, but my understanding is that PACE
statements are played as a matter of course because I
have spoken to the Clerk in Sheffield, but if you are
right, then that creates identical problems there,
doesn t it?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, no, because they won't be
subject to the rules under the Act that you are and
they would be admissible in a criminal case, and even a
civil case, for different purposes, because there will
be an admission, they may be put to witnesses for a
previous inconsistent statement, and much of what has
been discussed by my learned friends earlier, so there
are different rules that apply in the case of criminal
courts tnan would apply in your court, sir.

     I have to say even if the procedure is wrong, in
this case I don't think I would go on to submit that it
is not mandatory direction, in fact failure to adopt
this procedure in this case does not nullify these
proceedings.  As I say, I think it can be cured by a
proper direction to the Jury ....

     THE CORONER:   It can be cured exceedingly easily
by actually getting the maker of the statement to read
it - no problem.  If Mr. Marshall consents to read it
we can have it read a second time, in which case if
your point is right ....

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, that was why I was saying
yesterday, the procedure - it sounds rather curious,
but if Mr. Marshall had come into the witness box first
and said, "I made a PACE statement, it's true", then it
is his evidence and it is his document that is being
produced.

     THE CORONER:    That point I find exceedingly
difficult to follow.   Are you saying that if we had
started reading the PACE statement and had got to page
5, where it says, "You have now handed me a 19 page
document, read me the document that was handed in",
that that would be acceptable, but because we did it
the other way round it ceases to be acceptable?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   The difficulty arises in this
case because we are reading a statement out in full and
it will contain, as has been pointed out, matters which
would not be properly admissible before this Jury, may
well   be properly put forward in an interview of this
kind   when one is faced with the prospect at least of a
criminal investigation and possibly criminal charges
put against you.    The objection that has arisen in this
case   has been to passages which had they been sought to
have been given by oral evidence, we could have
legitimately taken objection - I say we, Mr. King,
myself, I suspect Hiss Sinclair - on the grounds that
for the purposes of this inquest that evidence was
wholly inadmissible, was an expression of opinion on
matters of which Mr. Marshall had no particular
expertise.

     THE CORONER:    Let's just take Miss Sinclair's
case, because in some ways it is less controversial at
the moment.  If Mr. Marshall had been asked, or if I
had said to Mr. Marshall, "You opened the gates, people
came in, have you any explanation?   Did you check what
was going on inside?   he might well reply, "No, I
didn t, four reasons, (1) it wasn't my responsibility,
(2) I knew there were other people inside (3) I had
people in danger, and (4) they wouldn't have died
anyway, if the barrier had not broken they wouldn't
have died".  That is, in effect, what he says.   He may
have used several hundred extra words but that is what
he says.

      I have no doubt that Miss Sinclair, when we got up
to her, would have said, "Mr. Marshall, I heard you say
that.   What experience have you got of the construction
of barriers", and she would have challenged him, cross-
examined nim and if need be torn him to bits, but I
find it difficult to see how, if he had given that
reply, you could have jumped up, or indeed anybody
could have jumped up and said, "We can't have that
reply".   You can cross-examine on it ....

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I entirely accept that.  We could
equally, as I have been saying to you now, say when
you, sir, come to direct the Jury such replies from Mr.
Marshall, or any other witness, of that nature should
be subject to a proper direction as to what weight the
Jury can attach to them.  If, for example, anyone had
asked Mr. Marshall the question, "Do you think the
crush barrier was the cause of the deaths?", I readily
apprehend that you, sir, and a number of others here
would have leapt to their feet saying that was not a
proper question.

     All we are arguing about is whether the evidence
slips in and has to be dealt with later which in my
submission is unfortunate because the effect is on the
Jury already and one has to rely on the direction, or
whether it becomes obvious to the parties at any
earlier stage there is going to be a question asked
which is improper in using that term to mean matters
that should not be asked of this particular witness.
If this voluntary statement had come before us by
whatever means beforehand, we would at an earlier stage
have been able to anticipate that there was a problem,
and been able to make submissions as a whole the
statement should not be read.  That is the difference.

     THE CORONER:   I have understood your argument on
Rule 37 perhaps more clearly than I had initially
understood Mr. King's.  The consequence of what you are
saying is, forget the voluntary statement for a moment,
we are just talking about the legal principle now, the
consequence of what you are saying is that every single
PACE statement which exists from people who are
interested parties in this Inquest, none of those are
in fact admissible unless they are treated as documents
within Rule 37 and are deemed to be non-controversial.
I have no doubt the whole PACE statement and everything
else is definitely not con-controversial, there is no
question about it.  It is controversial, no way would I
have considered it falling within Rule 37, but what you
are saying is that none of them are admissible.   Is
that right, is that what you are saying?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    Sir, in effect you have to
remember sub-rule (2) of Rule 47 which says that
documentary evidence so objected to may be admitted if
in the opinion of the Coroner the maker of the document
is unable to give oral evidence within a reasonable
period.   In this case it may well be that you could
bring the West Midlands Officers within that sub-rule,
simply on the grounds that the document made is such
that they cannot given oral evidence as to its
contents.   They can say it was made and they can
produce it.

     THE CORONER:   That might be true.  There is, I
think, at least one person, I won't mention the name,
who may in fact be incapable of coming because they are
ill.  We might have to cross that bridge if and when we
come to it.  That might apply but I find it impossible
to imagine we nave got Mr. Marshall fitting there,
which we had yesterday, to say this chap is incapable
under sub-rule (2) of giving the evidence.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   No, it is the maker of the
document.  In this case the maker would be the West
Midlands Officer.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, but the point about that, Mr.
Catchpole, ^and maybe because we took, if you like, a
procedural short cut, but that is one on which we did
                                                   18




actually agree, namely that we agreed on 19th December
that we would notionally admit all these PACE
statements on that day, and then play them when it was
appropriate, in order to avoid the officers travelling
backwards and forwards and sitting here for hours.
Technically you are right, the officer should have been
sitting here.  It should have been the officer who
stood up, took the oath, and said, "Here's my tape and
I am putting it in now", or words to that effect.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, I agree.   I think that was
why my learned friend was saying.   We all agreed to
following your normal practice, sir, which was to put
PACE statements in evidence.  The effect of Rule 37, if
it applies, would simply have been in this case not to
prevent the statement being put in evidence in the way
it has, but for some advance warning to have been given
to those of us on this side who may have taken
legitimate objections to passages that could have been
easily excised.

     THE CORONER:   No, that is the point that I can't
understand, if I may put it like that.  Yes, Mr.
Isaacs, are you going to help me?

     MR. ISAACS:   I am sorry, sir, but it seems
certainly to me, having read very carefully Rule 37,
that my learned friend and perhaps Mr. King, but
certainly my learned friend Mr. Catchpole has fallen
into error in his reading of Rule 37.

     May I seek to try and help you?




             /THE CORONER:   Please
     THE CORONER:    Please.

     MR. ISAACS:   It is a view that I know my learned
friend, Mr. Payne, Shares as well and so perhaps I speak
for us both.  The mistake that my learned friend, Mr.
Catchpole, makes is to treat Section 37 as in some way the
only rule whereby you are entitled to put documentary
evidence before the Jury.  It is not.  It is an
inclusionary rule and not an exclusionary rule and if one
looks at it one can see very clearly the purpose of the
rule and the reason why in certain circumstances there has
to be advance disclosure.

     Let us take the purpose for the r u l e . The purpose for
the rule is when you get - that is you, sir - some
documentary evidence but the maker of the statement you do
not want to call for whatever reason and the maker of the
statement is alive and w e l l . You take the view that the
giving of that evidence in the documentary form is not
going to be challenged by anybody.      The provisions of the
rule then enable you to check to see whether it is going to
be challenged by anybody and so you disclose the document
to the interested parties.      If they want to make objection
to you they can do.  If that objection is well founded you
will call that witness live before the Jury and no doubt
that evidence would then be given and be challenged by way
of cross-examination but by Subrule 2 there is a provision
whereby if it turns out that the maker of the document
cannot give oral evidence within a reasonable period then
notwithstanding all the objections in the world the
document can be put in its form before the Jury.

     Effectively Rule 37 is to enable you to put before the
Jury documents which no one challenges. That is not the
character of the document we are now referring to.  There
is no doubt a cassette recording is in fact a document but
that is not the character of the sort of document that Rule
37 applies to which is documentary evidence from any living
person which in your opinion is unlikely to be disputed.
It is in fact evidence given by documentary means of an
interview between an Officer and, let us say, an
interviewee but it does not come within Rule 37 at a l l .

      The fact that Rule 37 makes reference to certain
types of documentary evidence which you would wish to put
before the Jury does not mean that other forms of
documentary evidence have to come somehow within the rules
and, therefore, have to be shown to interested parties.    It
is only documentary evidence which has to be shown to
interested parties which you consider is unlikely to be
disputed and which you wish to put before the Court without
calling the maker of the document.   We have had the maker
of the document.  We have the interviewee or we will have
him and my submission is that Rule 37 clearly does not
apply in these circumstances but the error into which my
learned friend has fallen is that in looking at Rule 37 he
says that any documentary of any sort must be the subject
of prior disclosure. It is not.    It is only that
documentary evidence which you consider will not likely be
                                                           20


disputed and the maker.of which is available but you do not
wish to call him.

     That is a possible reason for the difficulties we are
now in and the objections to the evidence or at least the
submissions that are being made that in some way it should
be disclosed to everybody, that submission is based on a
misconception and unfortunately a misreading of Rule 37.
When you look at it clearly one can see the purpose of Rule
37 and that is not the purpose for which this evidence is
being add u ce d .

     MR. KING:      Might I just come back on that, sir?

     THE CORONER:      Certainly.

     MR. KING:   In my submission, sir, a document which is
read out as evidence does not cease to be documentary
evidence within Rule 37 because the maker of the'document
is available to give evidence.   What I would take issue
with, sir, in your interjection before you were indicating
that it would be proper as an alternative to have called
Mr. Marshall and say, "Mr. Marshall, read out this
voluntary statement" because, in my submission, that would
not be giving oral evidence.   In reality he would simply be
reading a script and I would be on m y feet, as I am sure
everybody would, if a witness was allowed to follow that
procedure every time they went into the witness box, "Don't
give oral evidence but read out a prepared statement".
That would not be within the meaning of true oral evidence,
in my submission, but it would merely be reading out a
self-serving statement.

     What has happened here is that one has got round that
problem - and I do not mean got round intentionally -
because whereas you had called Mr. Marshall and you said to
Mr. Marshall, "Is this your statement?  Read it out", I
would have objected just as if on an earlier occasion
another witness had gone into the witness box and you had
said, "Would you read out the statement which you gave to
the West Midlands Police as your evidence?".  I am sure a
lot of other people would have objected because it would
not be giving spontaneous evidence on the matters which the
Jury have to d etermine.

     What has happened here is that this document, the
voluntary statement document, the contents of it had been
read out as a document as part of the evidence and I
reiterate that I find no difficulty in saying that whatever
procedure was used, it was documentary evidence.  I know
that Mr. Catchpole wishes to address you.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Can I come back to what Mr. Isaacs
said? With respect, it is quite clear that the effect of
Rule 37 is that it admits uncontentious documents to be put
in evidence.  It follows from that that they are documents
which are not prejudicing the interests of the parties
involved becadse all parties have consented to them.   The
logical step, with respect to Mr. Isaacs,, is that a
                                                         21


document which is contentious should not be put before the
Jury.       The effect of Rule 37 is not simply just to make a
small provision about the minor documents but it only
allows in documents which are uncontentious because there
is no need to protect anyone from uncontentious d o cuments.
The interests are protected when it is a contentious
d oc u m e n t .

     It may well be, and I am certain it is right, that if
a document comes into the possession of the legal
representatives here and they read it and they only object
to certain parts of it then by consent that document and
the unexcised bits can go before the Jury but the parts
objected to may be the subject of legal submissions.    That
is a different matter.  What we are talking about is the
procedures we go through and with respect to my m y learned
friend, and I hear what m y learned friend says, but it
would be very strange indeed if the rule was providing
safeguards and provided for the admission of documents
which would cause no one any conceivable prejudice, if I
can use that word, and yet left up in the air all the
contentious documents and allow them to be admitted by
other means.  It just does not make sense.

     Rule 37, with respect, does cover all and the use of
the word "may" quite rightly is permissive but it is to be
construed as extending the jurisdiction to allow in certain
categories of document and certain c a s e s . Where that takes
us in the present case may be a bit different because we
had all agreed to the fact that all the PACE statements
would be played.

     THE CORONER:   What you are saying, as I understand it
- and again I want you to forget the voluntary statement
because I am more interested, in a sense, in the tapes
because that the fact that in this particular interviewing
technique a document was handed in was incorporated into
the PACE statement was a complicating factor - is that at
the moment in arguing out and understanding, or making sure
that I have understood the fact of your argument, I again
put to you, are you in fact saying that we were all
mistaken when we said we could use the PACE statements?
Because it happens to be on a tape and is not a
contemporaneous note written by the Officer in his own hand
it is a document and, therefore, can only be introduced
under Rule 37 if I deem it to be non-contentious unless I
can bring it in some way under Subrule 2 of Rule 37 because
if you are saying that then, of course, what you are
actually saying is that it is impossible to use PACE
statements in Inquests?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   No, sir.   With respect, the PACE
statements can be used for a number of purposes.   There are
similar purposes for the purposes of the Inquest as there
is in a civil or criminal trial.   I would just go back to
Mr. Isaacs when he raised this point, what is the value of
this particular statement?  It can be used, for example, to
put a previously inconsistent statement to a witness and to
that extent it would be admissible.   If the witness himself
adopts it as part of his evidence, sir, it then becomes
part of his evidence.  So there are ways that it would be
able to come in, with respect, but the only thing is that
if it is allowed in in this way introducing it with one
witness where it has not come in via any of the other
rules, one is forced back on to Rule 37.  That is why I
think this procedure has gone wrong in the way it has come
to be played and put before this Jury.

     THE CORONER:   If your argument is right, and I think
I have understood you, and you are saying what I am saying,
the proposition I am putting to you is that the standard
practice is for the Officer who has taken the PACE
statement to attend, or if he is not available somebody
else is present with him (which is what we in fact did with
Chief Inspector Tope) to say, "I took the statement" and
for it then to be played without any further by-your-leave
from anybody.  The interested party is usually in Court
because nine times out of ten it is the driver and it may
well be very prejudicial against him which is the reason
why it is used because it may be impossible to ask the
driver the questions you want, subject to their probative
value, because of the rules against incrimination.

     If you are right then that method cannot and must not
be used.   What you are saying is that you could use it in
some other way.   If the driver were to give evidence, for
instance, and to say, "I was driving at 20 miles an hour"
and in his statement he said he was doing 50 miles an hour,
one could then say to him, "Here is a previous inconsistent
statement.  Listen to this.   What do you say now?" in the
way which we have from time to time used Lord Justice
Taylor's transcripts and occasionally statements.      I have
done it with the witnesses.   I have said, "Are you sure you
are right because what you say in your statement is X or
Y?".  That is not the issue.    The issue is a fundamental
one which you are    saying and it    is whether or not the
change in the law    introduced by    PACE has had a fundamental
effect on the procedure of Coroners' Courts which has not
been spotted, at least up to now by me and I do not think
by anybody else.   Is that you are saying?

      MR. CATCHPOLE:    Effectively I am saying that a
document has to come within the rules unless it can be
admitted by other    people but in    this case,sir, it is a
different matter. I have to reiterate, as    Mr. Payne said,
we had all agreed to the fact that these PACE statements
would be played.   You had consent up to that point to play
them.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    M y complaint is that we did not see
at least this part in advance in accordance with the rules
in that we were not told we could have a copy in advance
and so we could have taken a legitimate objection to
matters which I believe could have been properly excised.
I hear what m y learned friends say right along the line
about the difficulty in excising odd sentences from a
                                                        23


statement or from a tape.   I appreciate that and again that
is something that can be dealt with as a matter of
direction but to put a self-contained unit in a large
statement which is, by and large, inappropriate for the
Jury is a different matter.   That is a matter which I
contend I should have been able to put submissions to you
on as to whether it should have gone before the Jury at
all.  That is a different matter.

     THE CORONER:   The difficulty is, Mr. Catchpole, and
this is if you like a gloss on what Mr. Isaacs has said,
the rule is quite clear.  It talks about the Coroner may
admit statements which in his opinion are unlikely to be
disputed.  Irrespective of the voluntary statement aspect
of it I would have found it difficult to take the view that
the PACE statement of Mr. Marshall and indeed some of the
other witnesses is unlikely to be disputed.  If I take the
view it is unlikely to be disputed and your point is right
then it cannot be used and that is the end of the matter.

      I agree that we spent quite a long time right at the
beginning about this as to whether or not we should use
them and one of the problems everybody was faced with was
the rule against self-incrimination and the difficulty of
trying to ensure that the principal parties, the interested
parties, would have the opportunity of getting a clear
account, whichever way that account may be, before the Jury
and also to give an opportunity so far as it is possible
within the rules against self-incrimination for those
interested parties to be examined and cross-examined.   It
was felt that the best way of achieving that was to use the
PACE interviews and I think I must be absolutely truthful,
it never crossed my mind - and I do not know whether that
makes me reckless within the definition of recklessness -
that one could argue that because these statements had been
taken by way of tape recording as opposed to
contemporaneous note form that this so changed their
character that they could be objected to.  My understanding
is that if the Officer had sat and written it all down -
and I am not talking about the voluntary statement but the
whole six hours of it - and then we had called him and he
said, "Here is my statement.  I will now read it" or "Here
are my notes of interview and I will now read them" no
objection whatever could have been taken because that is
his evidence.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     On strict rules of evidence I think
that is quite right.     What I was saying was that if the
Officer could be called now and he sat down and was asked
to tell us from his own recollection what took place in the
interviews, and he remembered everything that was said,
that would be his evidence of what took place.     The purpose
of having notes quite sensibly is to refresh his memory and
for convenience very often the notebook is read verbatim.
That is not saying that that document or those notes are
the evidence.     He is still giving his oral evidence and
refreshing his memory from his notebook in accordance with
the normal r u l e s .
     THE CORONER:    That is in fact what is happening here.
Perhaps I ought to say riotionally because Inspector Tope is
not here.  What Inspector Tope is doing is that he is
telling me he is reading from his notebook in the form of a
tape, if you wish.   I think it would be a stronger argument
for saying, is that entirely true when you look at the
voluntary statement.   I can see that point because the
voluntary statement was, if you like, put in but
necessarily read by the Officer at that time.   He may well
have read it earlier.   I do not know.  There is certainly
no evidence on the video that he had read it at the time.

    MR. CATCHPOLE:   All I am concerned about is the
voluntary statement and so I am content with that.

     THE CORONER:   I know but I think there is a point of
principle at stake which you have raised which is what it
all hinges on and that is what I want to sort out.

     MR. HALE:  It is all in the transcript, sir, at page
139.  The evidence is actually given as to how the
questions were asked and how the document was brought in.
I should say that that is the transcript of the video and
so there is no need to speculate.  There is the transcript
of the video and it shows what happened on page 139 which
deals with the way in which that document was put in
response to the complaints.




                                   /THE CORONER.
                                                    25




    THE CORONER:    I have not brought ray copy.

     MR. HALE:   I will hand mine in, with pleasure.
That is what Chief Superintendent Foster would say if he
were here.

     THE CORONER:   I am not trying to be difficult, Mr.
Catchpole.   On the contrary it is a very interesting
point.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   As ray learned friend Mr. King has
pointed out, the difference is if the tape is to be taken
as the officer's notebook, then there is an argument that
he is merely refreshing his memory from it, even though
he is not actually sitting there giving his own evidence.

     It is equally arguable that the tape itself is a
document because it is not being played through the mouth
of the witness himself.   All he has said is, "I took the
statement.   The tape was recorded and here it is."

     THE CORONER:   I think that is a point, if it is a
point - forgive me, I am putting it very rudely - if that
is a point then that is one which will have to be
resolved, not necessarily in these Inquests but sooner or
later because it is...    What page?

     MR. HALE:   It starts at the bottom of page 138, the
question asked by Chief Superintendent Foster.

      THE CORONER:   Yes, I am reading this through.   I
can see what Mr. Hale is saying.    It modifies slightly
what I said but it does not alter the principle which
is...    If your point is right, then apart from the fact
we may not be able to correct the error, procedurally, if
it is an error, it also raises the question what we do
with regard to everybody else who has got to come later,
who has given a PACE statement.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   The effect of that, sir, is if you
ask the witness, "Did you give a PACE statement?   Is it
true?" it effectively incorporates that within their
evidence anyway.

     I see Mr. Isaacs looking pained so I am obviously
making a very fundamental mistake, but that is as I
understand it.   All the persons who...

     THE CORONER:   But there is no point in doing that,
is there?   If the witness is willing to admit the truth,
if I can use that word, the truth of the PACE statement,
we might as well take his evidence viva voce orally in
toto from scratch and ignore everything that has gone
before.
     MR. CATCHPOLEs   Subject only to it containing
passages which could be put to the witness if he says
something inconsistent.

     THE CORONER:    Yes.   In a sense that is what we
were exploring a couple of days ago, when we put this.
Unfortunately, in the light of events, we turned it down
because we would not have been in this dilemma over this
witness.    We would still possibly have got into this
dilemma with others, but we certainly would not have got
into this dilemma over this witness.      However, be that
as   it may, that is water under the bridge.

     Does anybody else want to   say anything on
Mr. Catchpole's point?

     MR. HALE:   Yes, sir.   It seems to me that as far
as Mr. Catchpole is concerned, and I am extremely sorry
to find myself in this position, really there is only one
word and that is the word "corroded".    If Mr. Marshall
had merely said the barrier collapsed.    That is a fact
that is known to everybody and he doesn't really put
forward any opinion as to why or how it collapsed, but
unfortunately there is the word "corroded".    Now that is
something he has no direct knowledge of.    I concede that
and that is a matter which can easily be excised, or a
direction given to the jury on, on the whole question of
the barrier.

     We have slipped into a slight error, if I may say
so.   You yourself, sir, said you didn't propose to go
into the disciplinary proceedings and unfortunately that
is exactly what we have done because as is clear from the
transcript, what was said was in reply to questions asked
by the complainants.    Having asked the question I don t
think they can complain they got answers.    They may not
like the answers, but they got answers which they
specifically asked for.

     If anything is going to be left out, it should be
the whole thing.   It should have been the questions and
the answers.

     I then come back to the question:  is it all futile?
If Mr. Marshall is giving evidence, if somebody feels it
is in their interests to ask him those questions now it
is in your discretion as to whether you allow the
question to be asked.   I doubt very much whether you
would exercise much discretion over allowing someone to
answer the questions that have been asked.

     We have been very careful throughout, and there have
been certain supporters, as you know, sir, who might have
some responsibility from not having tickets or in other
ways, and we have all be very careful not to press.   The
fact has been mentioned.   You have raised your eyebrows
and we have backed off and there has been no serious
examination of those persons even thought they might have
had quite a bearing on the results.

     Now if you are going to allow the question to be
asked of Mr. Marshall which tends to suggest he ought to
have done something, then I think the question having
been asked he must be allowed to reply and reply as fully
as possible.

     The further thing is there isn't very much opinion
in what Mr. Marshall says.   It is mostly fact.   The
Wembley incident, for instance, is the subject of a
report and that report can be produced.   Other incidents
- if he wasn't there personally he saw them on
television.   The families in this case have established
as legal precedent that seeing something on television is
virtually the same as being there.   Therefore, he is not
expressing opinions about things, they are things that he
knows and they are relevant to his overall view of what
is possible in relation to policing.

     The other thing is I respectfully agree with you,
sir, and I think Mr. Catchpole, that we are talking about
the tape as a whole.    I would strongly resist any
suggestion that the fact that certain parts were put in
the way that they were, takes them in some way out of the
entire statement.    In my view, the whole tape and the
whole transcript, if you like, isn't a document and the
people who want it to be put in must either have it put
in as a whole, subject to our agreement to excising a
little bit which wasn't necessary, or they must have the
whole thing left out.

     THE CORONER:   Miss Sinclair, I hope you d i d n ’t mind
my using the barrier as an example.  I ought to say that.
It was purely to help me understand things better.

     MISS SINCLAIR:    Not at    all, sir.   It is probably
most helpful to know   what we   are talking about.

     Sir, I don't propose to wade in amongst the
procedural arguments   that I hear around me, I just want
to put my position very briefly and very clearly, if I
can.   First of all, we object to the voluntary statement
having gone in at all on the grounds that overall its
probative value was less than its prejudicial effect.
Mr. Isaacs set out those grounds, the objection on its
contents, very clearly and very eloquently.    I don't
propose to repeat them.
                                                    28




     However, sir, it is not our view that it is
necessary to discharge the jury as a result of the
statement having gone in.   We consider that it can be
cured by the appropriate direction.

     Sir, I would have said I did not expect any dispute
on what the appropriate direction would be in relation,
at least, to the remarks that concern those instructing
me.   After what my friend Mr. Hale has just said, sir,
perhaps it is necessary to elaborate a little on that.
I am surprised I have to say it is not just a matter of
Mr. Marshall expressing his opinion on the corrosion, or
otherwise, of the barrier, more particularly it is a
matter of Mr. Marshall expressing his opinion on the
causative effect of a barrier collapsing.   His opinion
on that is of no more value than that of the next man.
He has no expertise.   He doesn't even have any observed
facts upon which to base that opinion.

     Sir, in my submission, the expression of that
opinion now it has happened, is sufficiently damaging to
merit an immediate direction to the jury.  When I say
"immediate", sir, I mean at least before the end of
Mr. Marshall's examination in chief, or at the end of it.

     Other than that, sir, I would only say that you do
have a general procedural discretion in the conduct of
these proceedings.    Of course that is subject to the
Rules.   It is ray understanding that Rule 37 is
permissive and not exclusive.    Sir, I would appeal to
you simply in the interests of expedition in these
proceedings to allow the representatives to have notice
of the text of PACE statements to be used in the future,
on whatever legal basis they are to be used, simply, sir,
so that we can avoid the proceedings being adjourned for
a number of days for this sort of argument.

     MR. MAXWELL:   Sir, I am troubled by the direction
in which we are going.   If what originally seemed like a
good idea as to the way in which we would deal with
evidence is taking us off course, then it is time to
stop, take stock and, in my submission, time to go back
to what we would regard as an orthodox way of dealing
with the evidence.

     Whatever be the merits of the argument about
Rule 37, the reality here is that this material is being
put before this jury as though it were the
evidence-in-chief of the witness.   Ultimately, as I
understand it, in each case each person who has been
interviewed and provided a PACE statement, will be called
before the jury.   No doubt they will be asked whether
that is what they said.   They may even be asked whether
it was the truth.   Any attempt by them at that stage,
and perhaps they haven't thought this through fully, to
claim privilege, is likely to be affected by the waiver
of privilege which will have occurred.

     The problem that this procedure creates is manifold.
You have no control over what a witness is saying when
his evidence is played back or read out.   The jury are
not able to hear, at the moment at least, from the person
who recorded the statement or who conducted the
interview.   No doubt that is a   difficulty which could be
overcome.

     There is a risk that inadmissible evidence will be
put before the jury.   I think,   with respect, it may have
occurred already, with the best    of intentions on all
sides, but I have read Mr. Marshall's statement - what
has been called the voluntary statement - which in the
form I have it begins at page 9.     It seems to me, with
respect, sir, that this does offend against that Rule
which provides without equivocation that no person shall
be allowed to address the Coroner or the jury as to the
facts, because there is comment, comment upon his views
about matters, on the facts.     That opportunity for
persons to address the jury, whether it be in the form of
Mr. Jones reading a statement, or in the form of a video
or a tape recording, must not be allowed because if that
is to be allowed one person, then no doubt others - and
others, perhaps, whom Mr. King represents - would wish to
have the same opportunity.   However, it isn't allowed
and we mustn't permit it, sir.

     I say with great respect that if any of us feel, in
spite of what may have been earlier agreed as the
appropriate course of action, if any of us feel that it
is going wrong, we ought to stand up and say so.   Sir, I
do say that.   I invite you to return to an orthodox
procedure, which would be one where a witness is called
and if he wants to claim his privilege then so be it.

     If there are relevant matters in any interview, then
they can be put in evidence before the jury;  his consent
matters not.   Here I tend to disagree with my learned
friend Mr. Catchpole.   It is open to you to make use of
PACE interviews to the extent that you think it is
appropriate and you can call witnesses to say, "This was
said in an interview."

     What we have done, with respect, is to cobble
together two different ways of dealing with the evidence.
By putting these PACE interviews in, in effect, as the
evidence-in-chief, we create this problem.

     Sir, it further offends, as you will appreciate,
against the Act itself.   If I am right that that is what
we are doing, to treat this as in effect the
evidence-in-chief, then, sir, with respect, you are not
examining on oath that person.   Of course it would be
your obligation to do that, if that is to be his
evidence-in-chief.

     I appreciate that we can say that we get round that
by calling him into the box and asking him, "Is that what
you said?    Sir, that is not the way witnesses are
examined on oath as to their knowledge of relevant
matters.

     I respectfully ask you to return to the orthodox and
regular way of dealing with matters and it may be that we
all of us - not you, sir, all of us - eat a little humble
pie here and say that we made a wrong decision earlier.




       THE CORONER:    I have got no
      THE CORONER:  i have got no objection to changing
my mind at any stage.   Just because we have taken a decision
or come to some understanding as to how we proceed, if on
reflection it does not work or it does not work properly or
it creates problems or we need to alter what we are doing
so be it, we do whatever is necessary, so I am entirely
with you on that point.   I am grateful to you for making it.

      My only comment if I may is this:  you have said that
this evidence is being treated as the evidence-in-chief of
the witness.  I have never looked at it in that light.  It
is the evidence-in-chief of the Police Officer who is giving
it, not the interviewee whoever that might be.  It happens
to be another Police Officer in this instance but that is
neither here nor there, so we have not got anywhere near to
Mr. Marshall's evidence-in-chief.

      The purpose of having the evidence of that Officer
which is being presented to us in the form of a video
recording but it could have been an audio recording as well,
is that he says:  "I asked this question.  He gave that
reply in my hearing". That is evidence of what that Officer
said and heard but we have already gone over this, in the
rules, certainly in another place, it would not be evidence
against the Police Officer who is being interviewed as to
the truth of what is being said unless he accepts and admits
it, which is I think Mr. Catchpole's point, so it is an error
if you like and the error is compounded because we did not
have Chief Superintendent Tope sitting there.  The visual
impact of that was lost or is lost.  That was because I
thought that we had sorted it out on the 19th of April.

      That I am certain is purely a very minor procedural
matter and not one which is actually substantial because
we knew what we were doing but the impact if you like is
infinitely greater by not sitting here than we had anticipated,
or at least that I had anticipated, but I don't think ....
Does that help in any way, Mr. Maxwell, on that point.

      MR. MAXWELL:  Sir, I am not concerned   with the formal
rules of evidence here.  What is happening,   as I understand
it, is that an interview is being played to   the jury and a
statement is being read out without editing   without any
attempt to exclude any particular matters.

      I am not as I say concerned with the formal rules of
evidence.  The reality sir, I respectfully say, is that
with Mr. Marshall as I understand it for a time seated back
here while this evidence was put before the jury, Mr. Marshall
is in effect hearing his evidence-in-chief.   Is it to be
supposed sir that he will go into the witness box and be
taken through the whole history in chief again by you?    I
would rather think not but if I am wrong about that then
sir no doubt I? will be corrected immediately, but as I
understand it what we have done is to accept a compromise,
a compromise whereby persons might otherwise have said:
"Well I don't want to give any evidence if it is going
outside that which I have put before the Interviewing Officers".

      If that is what is happening, sir, then I say with
respect it is time   to says  "That is not an avenue we will go
down.any further.    We will  deal with it in an orthodox way".
He is to be called   to give  his evidence. He takes his stand
on privilege as he wishes.

      THE CORONER:  In other words what you are saying is
call the witness and see what you can get from him in accordance
with the rules?

      MR. MAXWELL:   Yes, and I say with respect quite apart
from the interesting safari we have engaged on today and no
doubt I hear yesterday, it is likely to be time saving.

      THE CORONER:  I agree, that is why I was grateful to
them.  That is why I raised the point with them, with you,
because I could see that there would be considerable time
saving if we did it the other way.

      I have rightly or wrongly tried on the whole to fall
in with the wishes of the people.    Not entirely, I have not
agreed with everything as Mr. Isaacs knows and various other
people know as well, but I have attempted to do that.    I
may be in error there but be that as it may it is neither
here nor there.   I am listening at the moment and then I will
have   to decide but yes I have heard you.

      MR. MAXWELL:    Sir, may I finally say by way of repetition
I appreciate, this would not prevent you putting before the
jury those parts of any interview that you thought to be
relevant to the jury.

      THE CORONER:  But how would you do it if Mr. Catchpole's
point is right that these are in fact documents which fall
entirely and completely within Rule 37 because by definition
if I want to put something which the witness is refusing to
answer, for instance because he says it is incriminating, it
cannot be evidence which is unlikely to be disputed, he has
just disputed in our very presence by saying:  "I am not
answering"?

      MR. MAXWELL:  Sir, you don't need to comply with
Rule 37 if you are calling the maker of the statement.

      THE CORONER:   Yes, that is right, .you could do that.

      MR. MAXWELL:  If Mr. Catchpole or anyone else requires
by way of what I suppose is a formality for that to be done
then no doubt it can be done.
      THE CORONER:   But I did not understand Mr. Catchpole
like that at all.

      MR. MAXWELL:   I agree, I didn't sir either.

       THE CORONER:  What Mr. Catchpole is saying is it does
not matter how many makers you call.   You can call Chief
Superintendent, have him here swear on oath that he was the
interviewer; that he interviewed Mr. Marshall; that he was
there when the tape was put in; that it was switched on, and
then when you say:   "What was said at that interview?" he will
say:   "May I please refresh my memory by listening to the
tape?"   As soon as he says that Mr. Catchpole's point comes
in and says:   "This is actually producing a document.  It is
not his own contemporaneous note, therefore it must be either
undisputed or vetted" if I can use that word, by the legal
representatives and that I don't think is a practical
proposition.

      MR. MAXWELL:  No, I respectfully agree and I along
with Mr. Isaacs go back to the wording of the Rule which
allows you to admit documentary evidence in certain specified
circumstances and it allows you to do that without calling
the maker of the document.

      Sir, those are my representations.

      THE CORONER:   Yes, I am very very grateful.   Thank you,
Mr. Maxwell.

      MR. HALE:  I support that application, as you know
sir, and that is not in hindsight.

      MISS ADDLEMAN:  Sir, you will be relieved to know
I have nothing to add to the submissions already made.

      THE CORONER:   Thank you, Miss Addleman.

      MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, I feel rather like someone who
secures their house and goes away for the weekend and comes
back and finds that during the weekend there has been a
hurricane on the Saturday night and a burglary on the Sunday
morning, but I have not of course been privy to everything
that happened yesterday.  I have had snatches of it reported
to me by various of my learned friends, I am grateful to
them for that, and I have been able to listen to the arguments
put before you this morning.

      I hope I can short-circuit what I am going to say by
saying from what I have heard I can broadly support what
I have heard my learned friend Mr. Isaacs say.

      I am rather perplexed when I hear my learned friend
Mr. King talking about "self-serving" statements.  Certainly
in the way in which self-serving statements are referred
to in the books on evidence which fortunately I have not
got with me, a self-serving statement is a statement,
whether in a document or otherwise, that is used to back
up what a witness has said in oral evidence to show that
the oral evidence which a witness has given is correct
because of what he said earlier is consistent with it and
that of course has little probitive value.

      I am reminded of one instance, or an example of what
is really a self-serving statement and sir you will remember
when Mr. McGauley was recalled at the request of Mr. King
and Mr. King wished to put to the witness a letter that he
had written to a newspaper setting out matters.

      Now that of course is a clear example of a self-
serving statement and perhaps is a better example than the
statements that have been referred to by my learned friend
as "self-serving" statements.

      Sir, I was not here to see which parts of Jervis
on Coroners were referred to you, but I have overheard a
debate as to whether Rule 37 of the Coroners' Rules should
or should not apply to the PACE statements and any voluntary
statements which might have been incorporated into the PACE
statements by reference to them during the interview, and
again I not only adopt my learned friend Mr. Isaacs's view
that you only have to read the words of Rule 37 itself to
see that the type of documentary evidence referred to is of
a particular category.  It is documentary evidence relevant
to the purposes of the Inquest from any living person which
in his opinion is unlikely to be disputed.

      I don't know whether there was reference to the
relevant parts of Jervis in respect of that.  I understand
there might not have been at page 186 and 187 of the
Tenth Edition where that rule is referred to and if this
has been read out then please stop me.

      THE CORONER:   It hasn't.

      MR. RUSSELL:  If one is looking for some authoritative
guidance on whether Rule 37 is exhaustive or permissive,
one could look at paragraph 15.56 and about halfway through
that paragraph is a sentence beginning:  "The admissibility
of documentary evidence".

      "The admissibility of documentary evidence is
      governed by similar rules to that for oral
      evidence."

There is a footnote referred to, footnote 69, and that simply
reads:  "including those for privilege and immunity" and
reference to earlier paragraphs in the book.
     The sentence continues:

      "But there are express provisions for admission
      at an Inquest of (1) documentary evidence from
      a living person which in the Coroner's opinion
      is unlikely to be disputed and (2) any document
      created by the Coroner where the Coroner is of
      the opinion that the contents are relevant to
      the Inquest purposes."

So it would appear that the Editors of Jervis, if it is not
Mr. Jervis himself, hold to the view that Rule 37 is permissive
and not exhaustive and I do draw that to your attention.
If one is not bound by Rule 37, as my learned friend
Mr. Isaacs said, we fall back upon the ordinary rules
applicable to a Coroner's Inquest whereby you, sir,
have a discretion as to the nature of the evidence to
be adduced, subject to having a view to the shibboleths
of tne rules of evidence from ordinary court
proceedings, and those I thin were referred to, I am
informed, where they appear in Jervis at the beginning
of the section headed "Evidence", which I think begins
at paragraph 15.22 and thereafter, and I won't go to
those.

     Sir, it does seem to that extent if you direct
that the PACE statements should be admitted in
evidence, they may be admitted subject, of course, to
them complying with the overriding requirements of the
rules of evidence, but of course they are not the
evidence of the person who has given the interview, in
the case of Superintendent Marshall, Superintendent
Marshall's evidence, they are the evidence of the
interviewing officer.  Now whereas in a criminal trial
it might be appropriate because the Prosecution case
comes first and the defence case comes second, for any
interview to be dealt with during the course of tne
Prosecution case, it is going to be convenient in a
case of this nature with this number of witnesses, and
where one does not have opposing sides, for the
relevant evidence in terms of interviews to be dealt
with before such interviewed person gives evidence
themselves, and if that is a convenient procedure to
use, sir, it would be appear to be appropriate.

     THE CORONER:   Could you just repeat your last
sentence, please?

     MR. RUSSELL:   A convenient procedure might be
not, as might happen in a criminal case - in repeating
it I am afraid I am expressing it slightly differently
- not as would happen in a criminal case to have all
the interviews read out ad nauseam by the interviewing
officers when those officers might be called to give
evidence, but rather to preface the evidence of each of
the people who have been interviewed, and whose
interviews you see fit to put before the Jury, by the
interviewing officer giving that part of his evidence
before the person interviewed gives evidence to the
Court, but of course those interviews must, as my
learned friend Mr. Isaacs has stressed and I support
him in this, be subject to matters which are admissible
within the ordinary course of things.

     Sir, I do recollect that I made not what the
transcript-writers referred to as a submission, but an
observation, before Christmas, about the nature of the
evidence which was tending to be adduced which seemed
to contravene the desiderata for the rules of evidence,
namely the amount of opinion evidence, and what I learn
from the nature of the evidence given yesterday it was
the opinion of Superintendent Marshall to which a
violent objection is taken which would be inadmissible
evidence and it does appear that that evidence should
not have been admitted, but from what I hear it is not
a breach of the rules of admissibility loosely as they
bind you, but matters which quite clearly can be
corrected by you giving an appropriate direction to the
Jury.

     THE CORONER:   I think we had better have coffee,
don't you?  A good half hour.

                (Short Adjournment)

     THE CORONER:   Is there anybody else who wants to
say anything at all at this stage?  (No response) Well
let me say I have listened with the greatest of
interest.  It is a a difficult problem obviously, and a
difficult problem for me, but I have found the
submissions and the discussion exceedingly interesting,
if I may say that.  That does not, of course, solve the
problem, but I think that what we will do is this:  (1)
I do not propose to discharge the Jury; (2) I have
heard the opposing views with regard to Rule 37 and I
think it is obviously not the world's easiest task to
sort out which of those views I will personally adopt,
so to speak, and I don't think I need to do so at this
stage.

     What I intend to do with regard to what has
happened with the PACE statement, the voluntary
statement and indeed the other statement which was read
as well is this, I am going to give the Jury a
direction that they are to totally ignore everything
that happened yesterday, the voluntary statement, the
recollection and the playing of the first three-
quarters of an hour of the video tape.

     I won't go into all the details with them because
I don't think there is any profit in that, but on
Monday we are going to start again, if I can use that
word, with Superintendent Marshall, and we will adopt,
in the circumstances, both Mr. Maxwell's and Mr.
Payne's suggestion which is we will swear him in and we
will take his evidence in the conventional way in which
we would normally take evidence, indeed, as we have
done from other witnesses, subject, of course, to his
right against self-incrimination.  That is what makes
him and some of the others different to some of the
other witnesses.  We have had loads of witnesses but
                                                    38




they have not been in any jeopardy.  He is potentially
in jeopardy and therefore he has certain rights, but we
will start again, I will take his evidence in my usual
way and then we will go down the line as we always do,
and when we have finished that's it.

     That means, of course, that I will not read LJT's
transcript either, because if we are ignoring
everything else then there is no reason why I should
read that.  As you know I have never wanted to read
those transcripts, I have always said I didn't want to
read them, and nothing has changed my mind really on
that score.

     There are two other things.  With regard to the
remainder of the witnesses, if you like shall we say
the PACE witnesses, I will sleep on it over the
weekend, but my present intention is to do exactly the
same as we are doing with Superintendent Marshall.    We
will call them, we will swear them, we will take
evidence subject to their rights and privileges.   If
they want to exercise their privileges where it is
incriminatory then so be it.  Whether or not I use the
PACE statements subsequently or in addition, or when we
have cross-examination or by some other means, I have
got plenty of time to think about and I will make up my
mind and do whatever I think.

     The other thing that we are going to do - I will
wait until the Jury are in but I am telling you now -
we gave those two documents exhibit numbers so we could
find them again.   I don't like doing it but it is the
only way to do it, I am going to expunge them, if that
is the right word, from the record.   We will delete
them because otherwise they are in the exhibit bundle.
We are not deleting them, of course, from the
transcript, but the Jury have no access to the
transcripts.   Everything that has happened and been
said and done is recorded, so to speak, for posterity
or for use as the case may be, but as far as the
exhibits are concerned I will expunge them and then I
think we have done the best we can in the
circumstances.

     I have always tried all along to conduct this
Inquest properly and fairly, in the interests of all
the parties as far as I am able, and I intend to
continue doing that.  I hope we will not have any more
major crises but we may and if we do and it means
reviewing procedures, or methods of proceeding, then we
will do it - which is really your point, Mr. Maxwell.
We have got to be flexible and not too rigid.  That of
course does not mean that all or every one of you
                                                         39




cannot consider what I have said and take whatever
appropriate steps you wish.

     The Jury will be here in about 20 minutes.  We
asked them to come back at one o'clock, not because I
was going to take any evidence today but because I was
not quite sure what I would hear, and I was not certain
what I was going to do.  I wanted tnem available in
case I needed to tell them something, so I am going to
do the directing, if I can use that word, now when they
come back, and tell them about the Monday start, and
then they can forget it over the weekend.

      Of course, what is said is said, I am not stupid,
I can't do anything about that, but it is the best we
can do in the circumstances.   I think if any damage is
done my feeling is this is perfectly adequate to remedy
that.

     MR. HALE:    If it will help, I would be very happy,
for you to take the barrier as an example, if you feel
you have to give any reason at all, to say that it
became apparent in relation to the barrier that opinion
evidence  which will be covered later and so on ....

     THE CORONER:    I will give them some indication
that we had serious problems, that there were opinions
and were things which did create considerable
difficulties ....

     MR.   HALE: I would not want it in any way to be
suggested that Mr. Marshall had done anything improper.

        THE CORONER:      No, I think I will manage that - I
hope.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, because we have a little time,
I don't know if anybody wants to say anything about
what you have just said, I certainly don't, but that we
could use the 20 minutes perhaps quite usefully in
relation to another matter which does arise obliquely
so far as Mr. Marshall is concerned, but will I
understand be more likely to arise more importantly in
relation to some of the other witnesses.  That is only
because I understand that Mr. Marshall will not be
wishing to rely upon his privilege.  If I am wrong
about that, so be it.

        MR. HALE:      That is right.

     MR. ISAACS:   Before I do make observations to you
I wonder if there is anything anybody else wants to say
about the matters that you have recently determined?
     MISS SINCLAIR:   Sir, can I just say briefly in
response to my friend Mr. Hale, I would be very happy
if you did not use the barrier as an example when
directing the Jury.

    THE CORONER:    Okay, don't worry about it.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, the points that I wish to make
relate to the question of the privilege, and they
relate to the privilege in two ways.  First of all, as
to how you put the right to the witness, because I must
say with respect I was not entirely happy with the way
in which it was put wnen Mr. Marshall came to give his
evidence although of course it not being my client I
did not feel it was right that I should interject.   How
that we are without the Jury I can make certain
observations to you.

     The second point relates to the way in which any
objection is taken.  I am very concerned, as you know
from what I said right at tne outset, that insofar as
any objection is taken, then it should be done in the
most edifying way possible, whether it be by the
witness himself or perhaps by you or by the legal
representative acting on behalf of the witness, who
feels that perhaps is a question which does not require
to be answered.

      May I deal with those two matters in this way,
sir?   First of all as to the way in which the privilege
is expressed, sir, when Mr. Marshall came to give his
evidence you said, "Of course, Mr. Marshall, you have
tfte rignt not to answer any incriminating questions",
and left it at that.   Sir, I do recollect that many
weeks ago when this matter was being raised you did say
certain things to the Jury which actually put the
privilege in far broader terms, but I am doubtful with
respect as to whether the Jury now, so many weeks
later, could actually remember the minutiae of what you
told them.

     What you in fact told them, quite rightly in my
submission at that time, was that people have these
rights and that you have a right not to answer a
question if the question is one where a possible answer
may have the tendency to incriminate.



          /Now, my concern about the way
                                                        41


     My concern about the way you put the privilege to Mr.
Marshall yesterday was that there was a risk, in my
submission, that the Jury might consider that if the
privilege was relied upon then it was being relied upon
because the answer would tend to incriminate.   All I ask,
sir, is that you make it clear when telling the witness he
does have this right - I would say to refuse to answer a
question - he does have this right not to answer a
question.  He has a right not to answer the question even
if his answer would not tend to incriminate because the
question itself has a tendency to incriminate.   You will
remember, sir, the dialogue we had about this very point
and the way you put it when you gave your decision on the
submissions that I then made.  Sir, what I would ask you to
do is to make it clear when you deal with this privilege
that the person has the right not to answer if the question
is one where a possible answer to such a question may have
a tendency to incriminate.  That is m y first point.

       Secondly, and this is not by way of submission but by
w a y of observation merely with a view to trying to resolve
some of the problems which may arise from questions being
asked repeatedly - I do not mean the same question but
repeated questions being asked - which do rely upon a
witness to rely upon the privilege as to how we are to
resolve that particular problem.     Now one of the ways, let
us just take an example, and I take my learned friend, Mr.
Manning, who asked the question and you, sir, may
immediately take the view that it is one the answer to
which may have a tendency - I do apologise because it
becomes a little difficult - a possible answer to which may
have a tendency to incriminate and you will say to the
witness you do not have to answer that.     You may miss it.
The witness may say,    "I see that as a question which may
tend to incriminate"    to use the short form.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, I know what you mean.

     MR. ISAACS:      He may miss it and I m a y come to the
conclusion if it is my client being questioned that it does
in fact have a tendency to incriminate.      Sir, so that we do
not have to have an unedifying spectacle, do you want me to
rise to m y feet, do you want me to - and I say this with
the greatest respect - wink at you, put m y hand up, how
would you wish us to do it? I do not want the situation to
develop, whether it be my client or anybody else's client,
where we are forever jumping up and down.       To a degree, of
course, I shall rely upon the good sense of m y learned
friends, Mr. Manning, Mr. King and Mr. Catchpole, to ask
questions which they do not believe to offend against the
privilege and so we do not have to have this difficulty
arising.   In so far as questions are asked which m a y offend
and, therefore, there would be room for some doubt about it
or something which has been missed by       you or by the
witness, and I take the view there is argument which can be
addressed as to why the question should not have to be
answered, how would you like us to do it?        The Jury then
has to go o u t rif there is going to be argument about it.
This is without, of course, making it look all the time as
if here is a witness who has got something to hide and he
has not.  He has the privilege.

       THE CORONER:     This is a concern of yours on the first
day.

       MR.   ISAACS:   Yes.

     THE CORONER:    This point about arguing about each
individual question.   I think there may be the occasional
one but my tendency has been that if a person exercises
privilege, which occasionally happens in m y Court, I have
tended to the point of view that I would err on the side of
caution and if he perceives that the answer tends to
incriminate him then I will allow him to exercise the
privilege.  It may well be that the question is asked which
prima facie cannot possibly be incriminating and for gome
reason he wishes to exercise privilege and says that it is
incriminatory or that he does not want to exercise his
privilege and perhaps we do have to argue those out.   We
will have to see how we go along really.

     As far as indicating to me, I really do not mind.   I
agree entirely with you.  I am very conscious that it is
possible for me to miss an incriminating question and it is
also possible for me to actually ask them because you
cannot always, although I have a rough idea of what the
story is, cover everything.  It does not mean to say that
when I am formulating a question at a particular point in
time that I have actually thought the consequences through.
I have always taken the view that the witness and his legal
representative can say, "Hang on one minute".

     MR. ISAACS:    It is only as to how you would wish us
to do it, sir.   If we were in another Court in another
jurisdiction then you m a y be aware that the w a y in which we
tend to operate is that the party who objects does not do
it in the American fashion and say, "I object" but will
just stand to his feet.    I am quite happy to do it on that
basis.

     THE CORONER:   I am happy for that because I
immediately see you then and know that you want to say
something.

     MR. ISAACS:   Of course, one hopes, and I know that
this will be the case as far as m y learned friends are
concerned, that they will be prepared and will be aware
that this may happen during the course of such questions as
they ask.  I leave that point now, sir.   I do not want to
go on interminably about what you have to say about it.
The second point was the first point, as to the direction
you give, as to the warning at the outset and I just leave
that to you to mull over at the weekend.

     The third point that arises out of what you said is
that I am perhaps happier than I was having regard to what
you have said'about this whole procedure, about the fact
that you tend to err on the cautious side, because you have
                                                       43



said, now many weeks ago, that it is difficult in certain
circumstances to conceive of any question that will not at
some stage offend.,

     THE CORONER:   I had actually thought about it and, as
it happens, although normally speaking that is my view I
think in this particular case it will be possible to ask
questions which are not incriminatory.  For instance, if I
were to a s k . ..

     MR.   ISAACS:   Take Mr. Duckenfield as I am on my feet.

     THE CORONER:   If I use him as an example, if I were
to ask him what Mr. Murray did or said or what he saw him
do, that is not likely to be incriminatory of Mr.
Duckenfield.  One would have to be a little bit careful.

     MR. ISAACS:     It may or may not but it depends on the
question.

     THE CORONER:   Indeed, that is what I am saying.  I
think there is scope.  I think in fact there is a little
bit more scope for questioning in these proceedings than
there is in a conventional one where there is really just
one person whose conduct is being called in question
because they are multiple parties.

     MR. ISAACS:   Of course, sir, but you would have to be
aware that what Mr. Duckenfield says he saw may have a
tendency to incriminate Mr. Duckenfield.  I hope you
appreciate that.

     THE CORONER:   I do understand that or at least I
think I understand it.  If he says, for instance, "Mr.
Murray told me to do this" then that may be a very
incriminatory response.

     MR.   ISAACS:   Yes, of course.

     THE CORONER:   On the other hand, if he says, "I saw
Mr. Murray rush out" - I am inventing this because I have
got no idea - "of the Police control box" then that is not
likely to be incriminatory of Mr. Duckenfield but it does
in the bit about Mr. Murray.

    MR. ISAACS:   It does indeed, sir, but the problem is
this; the question itself has as one of its possible
answers, "I saw Mr. Murray waving his hands frantically
directing my attention to a screen which I wholly ignored".
That, of course, would be incriminatory.

     THE CORONER:    .I know.

     MR. ISAACS:   So the question itself has a tendency to
incriminate because one of the possible answers is an
incriminating answer.  It could be said that the witness
has the right to refuse to answer it, although the answer
he would give; "I saw Mr. Murray rushing out of the control
box", would not be incriminatory at all and this is the
point I-was seeking to.make at the outset as to how one
gets this across to the Jury.

     THE CORONERj   It is a very difficult problem and I
will think about it over the weekend.  It looks as though
Mr. Payne is going to say something.

     MR. PAYNE:      Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:      Mr. Isaacs, had you finished?

     MR.   ISAACS:    Yes, sir.

     MR. PAYNE:    Sir, while you are thinking about it over
the adjournment it might be helpful to have in mind the
position of the Chief Constable about this which is that
with regard to the evidence of any of the Police Officers
giving evidence then the Chief Constable would not ask you
to give a general caution at the beginning of that evidence
unless you have been specifically requested to do so by the
person representing that particular witness.   For example,
in the case of Mr. Marshall, you did in fact give him a
warning and we would ask you not to do that unless a
particular request is made on behalf of the Officer
concerned;  the reason being that in the light of the five
weeks of evidence that you have called about the wholly
exceptional and unique circumstances which obtained on the
15th April our submission in due course will be, and it
will be a matter for the w ay in which you direct the Jury,
that it is not likely that any question will tend to
incriminate the Officers but that remains to be seen as the
evidence develops.   At the moment, sir, our submission is
as I have just made it.

      THE CORONER:  I think, Mr. Isaacs, if I may look to
you, in some respects I and you are fortunate because the
chances are that Mr. Duckenfield will be near the tail end
by which time hopefully we will have gained in experience
and it may turn out not to be as difficult a problem as you
fear.

     MR. ISAACS:   What I had to say, sir, was really meant
as a general application knowing that Mr. Marshall is next
and will be asked questions and although I am told he will
not rely on any privilege he m ay wish to do so.

     THE CORONER:   He has got to be given the right.  When
a question is asked and when I feel it is correct he should
be alerted, if you like, to the risk.  As I said to him, it
is a right and not an obligation.  He can choose to answer.

     MR. ISAACS:   The most important thing, sir, and this
is Mr. Payne's point I think, that in making it clear one
does not appear to be casting aspersions in the first
instance.

     THE CORONER:   I think what you are worried about is
that if one is not careful then as soon as a chap exercises
                                                       45


his right that can be construed as an admission of guilt.
That is what you are saying, is it not?

     MR. ISAACS:   Yes, exactly.  As I said, with respect,
the way it was put to Mr. Marshall tended to a group of lay
people, the Jury, to have that weight and to give that
impression.

     THE CORONER:   I have it   very much in mind that when I
address the Jury I am going to give them a clear direction
on the question of silence and its implication because that
is important and is absolutely right.   Silence is not the
same as admission and there are plenty of cases for that.
I am sure you would draw my attention to them anyway.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I have said what I have to say
about it in relation to such advice as is given to each
witness as they come into the witness box.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King,   did you want to say
something?

     MR. KING:   Just very briefly, it could be the case
that those who are asking questions should take care not to
ask incriminating questions because, of course, there is no
bar on incriminating questions being asked.  It is the
privilege of the witness whether to answer them or not and
I was a bit taken aback by my learned friend's suggestion
that those who are cross-examining a particular witness
should be careful not to ask an incriminating question
because that certainly is not the law as I understand it.

     THE CORONER:    I think the point is this, Mr. King,
from a practical point of view that if, for example, you
were wishing to explore subject X, whatever that subject
happens to be, and you start off with a question.   You
might think to yourself that this is an incriminating
topic.  Quite rightly, you might say, "I can ask any
question I like, incriminating or not" and you ask your
question.  Hopefully if I spot it I will say to the
witness, "Answer that if you wish, but it is an
incriminating question.    Consider your position" or words
to that effect.   It depends what he does.  Supposing he
then exercises his right - and it may be after legal
argument I do not know - and you may then say, "We have had
a no on this one and we will go on and still explore X " .
You may then ask another question on X and go through that
again.  I am not saying that as soon as you have had a
negative, if that is the right word, to one question that
is it, you are debarred.   What I would be unhappy to see is
for you to go on - and I am saying you because you are
standing but it could be anybody, of course - for hours
hammering away at X once it is clear that you are not going
to get a reply because there is no point in it other than
being highly prejudicial in the sense of creating an
adverse impression out of a negative response.

     Yes, you-are right about what you have said and the
way I have interpreted Mr. Isaacs' comment and the w ay I
will apply it is that I will in the end say, "That is it,
Mr. King.  You have tried it.   You have had a good whack
and please move on, to your next topic".  You might then on
the next topic get answers or you may not, as the case may
be, and if there are certain topics that need covering, for
instance, and you get negatives on all of them then so be
it.  That I do not think is prejudicial because you would
be moving from topic to topic.




                       /It may be prejudicial but it is.
     What I don't want to see, merely because it is
unavoidable, but what I don't want to see is a waste of
time, if you like, putting it no higher.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I don't disagree with anything you
say on that issue.

     May I say finally, sir, about the ruling you have
given on the other matters.    As you know, sir, I will be
taking formal instructions over the weekend and, sir, you
indicated to me your wish that if any steps were going to
be taken for a Review based on any ruling, that it should
be done now rather than later.    I think that was your
wish, without wishing to extract any undertaking from me.
Sir, what I intend to do on Monday, when I have my
instructions, is to tell you as best I can, subject to my
instructions, what the proposals are.

     THE CORONER:   I have had some further thoughts on
this as well.   You are quite right, that is exactly what
I said to you and it will be helpful if you are able to
say something on Monday but you are not obliged to.

     I think that unless one could get...   Supposing you
were to decide to go for Review on it, unless one could
get a Review almost instantaneously I think I will
proceed and carry on with the evidence and bring these
Inquests to a conclusion.   If I don't do that we are
left in a limbo land where we don't know where we are.
If I do bring it to a conclusion and you go for Review
and you win, the court then can decide what it wishes to
do.   It can either upset the verdict and say start
again, or it can uphold it or it can substitute it.    I
can do what it likes.   Whereas if I stop, in a sense we
are nowhere.    I have re-thought it.

     MR. KING:   Sir, at this stage I don't make any
further submissions on that matter to you because, of
course, it is a matter for submission to you whether
there should be any adjournment in the light of whatever
steps are taken and, indeed, it would then be a matter
for the Divisional Court if one went there to see whether
they agreed or disagreed on that issue, if that were of
significance.

     I was merely out of courtesy, sir, telling you
because I remembered what you had said to me last night,
that I will on Monday, as best I can subject to my
instructions, indicate what steps are likely to be taken.

     THE CORONER:   That would be very helpful.    In a
sense I have shifted my position a little bit from
yesterday, because the impression I left with you was
that if you were to indicate that you were going to go
                                                     48




for Judicial Review I would probably adjourn u n til that
had been   done.   In a sense I have changed my mind.

     If you don't like that - supposing you did want to
go for Judicial Review and you don't like what I have
said, there is nothing to stop going to the Divisional
Court and getting an Injunction to stop me, if you wish.
I am not   stopping you in any way.

     MR. KING:   Sir,  I make clear at this   stage thatI
haven't made any submissions to you at all on the matter.
I am merely reminding ourselves as to the stage we
reached last night, sir.
     THE CORONER:    I didn't want you to feel you were
under any obligation to tell me things which on
reflection you thought you would rather not say at all.
In fact, I am trying to be helpful and say to y°“ » J®"
prejudice your position if you feel it would be better
not to say anything.
     I have just one other thing to say.   It is a point
you raised, Mr. Catchpole, a few days ago, about looking
at the statements and deciding who we would call.
Having a review, if you like.   I am going to go through
my provisional list of witnesses and I am going to cull,
if that is the right word, and decide...   There are a
lot of people there who I already know we don t need, but
I have decided I will not circulate the statements of the
culled people.   In fact I am not even sure whether I
will tell you whom I have culled.   I am getting to the
stage that I have found that every time I do something it
tends to create more difficulties for me and for
everybody else.   I will just do it as I think.

      It may be that when I get right to what I think is
the end, or almost the end, I might just pause for a
moment and say to you when the jury is absent.   Look, we
are virtually there.    Is there anything you feel, or
anyone you really feel we need?   and I will think about
that.    I am not having long lists at that point.   This
is just an opportunity, if you like, for you to say,
''Look, you have forgotten Mr. Duckenfield, for instance.
Why haven't you called him?"    Is that clear?

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I think for all our benefits if
when you have done your cull, and I agree with you
absolutely that you shouldn't tell us who you are having
and who you are not having in terms of the choice you are
making, but if you could tell us once you have done your
cull when you think it is likely that the Inquests will
finish, having regard to your timetable, that will be or
great assistance, certainly to myself, my learned friend
Mr. Manning, no doubt to Mr. Payne.    All of us have, of
course, other arrangements.   Those other arrangements to
a large degree wait upon the end of these Inquests.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I quite understand.   Certainly
we may find if we adopt the procedure which we are going
to use with Mr. Marshall on Monday, if it works with the
others, it will save a great deal of time.   It is very
time consuming listening to hours and hours of video and
audio tape.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, would you have any objection if we
were to write a letter to you giving a list of those
witnesses who we feel really ought not to be culled?   I
hope it won't come to more than about twenty maximum.

     THE CORONER:   By all means write to me.    I won't
promise that I will necessarily accede but by all means
do that.  Yes, I don't mind that.     That goes for all
of you.   I have listened to the evidence.    I am already
beginning to assess it.   There are still areas we have
not touched on, but there is a lot we have.

     Now shall we have the jury in?

              (The jury were brought i n )

     THE CORONER:   We are not taking any evidence today.
What I do want to do is this:  it must be obvious to you
that there has been a problem which we have been
discussing and thinking about.   The problem arises in
fact out of the evidence which we heard yesterday
morning.    I don't think there is any need for me to go
into the details of what the problem is, or was, but
certainly one of the aspects was that there were...    As
you know, I have been very concerned about opinions being
expressed and clearly in some of the evidence which we
heard there were opinions.

     We have argued it out as hard as we can and I have
decided that the best way of proceedings is as follows.
I would like you to totally forget, as far as you are
able, everything that happened yesterday morning.   That
is anything that was read or anything that you saw on the
screen.   What we are going to do is to start afresh with
Superintendent Marshall on Monday, and we will take his
evidence in the way we have got used to taking the
evidence.   Put him in the box, we will swear him, I will
ask him questions, everybody else will ask questions in
the usual sort of way.   That will be the evidence which
I will want you to remember.

     Of course, in one sense you can never unsay things
that have been said, but what I am directing you is that
you should ignore entirely from your consideration
                                                      50




anything and everything that was said yesterday in
relation to, or by Superintendent Marshall.   Is that
entirely clear to you?

      Now the second thing we are going to do in order to
make quite sure we don't make any mistakes, you may
remember that we gave "C" numbers to the stuff which we
used.    We are going to expunge these "C" numbers because
we don't want this evidence in before you.    Which are
the numbers?

     MR. JONES:   349,   350.

     THE CORONER:   So those have disappeared.   They
will reappear when we have some other exhibits, so we
will be using them again, so to speak.

     Is that absolutely clear?  Is there anybody who
wants to say anything?   Anybody who wants me to add to
this direction?   I think it is pretty clear.

     Now, then home!   It is a 10.30 start on Monday.  We
have finished for today and we will start afresh.   I
wanted to tell you today because it means you have got
the weekend to forget all about it.

             (In the absence of the jury)




            MRS. McBRIEN:       Sir, I do just want
                                                         51




      MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, I do just want to say one thing.
I was wondering if the transcript from the Taylor Inquiry
would be used at all?

      THE CORONER:  Well I have always said that the answer
is no and I am not deviating from it and that is still my
position.

      As you know occasionally we have put to witnesses bits
- i think you have done it once or twice M r . King - and so
long   as you use discretion I am not saying we can't use that.
What   I would not be happy is to start putting the whole of
the transcripts question, line by line.   I want to take the
evidence as you know in this Court as far as we can get it
and we have dealt with this issue.   That was one of the
points we discussed at length on the 19th of November I think
and I am not changing my mind on that.

      MRS. McBRIEN:  There seemed to be quite a number of
very relevant points in that.

       THE CORONER:  Listen to the evidence.   It may be that
all the relevant points which you are concerned about we will
hear, but you see what you can do is you don't need, you need
the Taylor Report.   You need it so that you know what points
you are worried about.   Do you see what I mean? But if witness
X says something and he has not covered the point you know how
to do it now, you just get up and you ask the question.      If
he then gives you an answer which is totally different to
what is in the Taylor Report - you know supposing in the Taylor
Report he said it was raining cats and dogs and here he says
bright sunshine, you can then say:    "Hang on one minute, have
a look at this” and you would pass it to him and he looks at
it and then you say to him, as Mr. King has done:    "Do you
remember that? Is that right?"     He said:  "Oh yes, that is
right".   Then you say to him:   "Read to it and tell me ..."
and then he will say:   "Oh I made a mistake, I remember now
it is this" or he may say:   "What I said to the Taylor
Inquiry was mistaken".   You don't know which way he is going
to go.   Or he may do, as one of the witnesses did,
Mrs. Hockenhull I think it was, it was put to her the
matter in the Taylor Report and she qualified it.     She did
not deny it entirely but she said:    "What I meant was this
or that", so a witness will do whatever is necessary and
whatever is appropriate, subject to the point which we have
been discussing because some of these witnesses have rights
against answering questions which are incriminatory and we
have been discussing that.    If you then put something to him
out of the Taylor Report which is incriminatory or potentially
incriminatory, then he must be given his warning and he has
the right, however much you dislike it, to say:     "No, I will
not answer it" and what is more you can't draw the conclusion
from that that he is guilty because we don't in England do that

      MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, would we be able to introduce things
                                                           52




from the Taylor Inquiry which had not been dealt with?

      THE CORONER:  Only insofar as it is relevant to the
Inquest, so there are things, loads of things in the Taylor
Inquiry which are very interesting and terribly pertinent
and so on but totally irrelevant to the Inquest.   We don't
deal with any of that, but that has been the case with
everybody and you know that because you have seen people
from time to time I have said:   "That is enough, no further"
so the rule as far as if you like Superintendent Marshall is
concerned is exactly the same as far as the Taylor Inquiry
is concerned as everybody else barring the fact that because
he is a party whose conduct is likely or may be called in
question, because of that he has a privilege which the rules
specifically provide for and which it is correct and right
that he should have of not answering questions which tend
to incriminate him.

      MRS. McBRIEN:    Right.   Thank you very much.

      THE CORONER:    Not at all.   Is it clear?   Are you happy?

      MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.

      THE CORONER:  Well, ladies and gentlemen, I think it
is home for you as well.  I hope you have a nice weekend and
look forward to seeing you on M o n d a y .


         (The Inquests were adjourned until 10.30 a.m.
                  on Monday, 14th January 1991)
