                                                                                                                                 <£5
        INQUISITION                                                                                           18


        An inquisition taken for our Sovereign Lady the Queen

        At Coroners Court                         in the W est D i s t r i c t                 of South Yorkshire

        On the          19 th                     day of    A p r il                            19       89
        [And by adjournment on v a r io u s d a te s up t o and in c lu d in g
                                                  day of                                        19       91 ]
        [Before and by] ['] me    o n v a r io u s d a te s up t o and in c lu d in g

        One of Her Majesty's coroners for Itesakk     S ou th Y o r k sh ir e (W est) D i s t r i c t

        [and the undermentioned jurors] touching on the death of
        [ac                                                                      PAULA AM SMITH

        The following matters are found
    1 Name of deceased                                                           PAULA AM SMITH

        Injury or disease causing death: [*)   1 ( a ) T r a lm a tlo A sp h p tla



    3 Time, place and circumstances at or in which injury was sustained: [3]

        I)4J20l an th ji /S^fjprd (93R as a fesuJJr d^cru sl uyortaT
    S u S fa m fid cd H LUsbcxuvqk FcvbbaU grourvdj S k s ij^ jild
    4 Conclusion of the jurv/coroner as to the death: [4]



    5 Particulars for the time being required by the Registration Acts to be registered concerning the death
         a Date and place of birth                                      e Date and place of death       15. 4 . 89.
              27. o.6 2 . Liverpool.
                                                                           Hillsborough Football Ground . Sheffield.
         b Name and surname of deceased                                 f Occupation and usual address
                                                                          U p Known O ccu p a tio n
(   )      PAULA AM SMITH

        c Sex
        d Maiden surname of a woman who has married

                                                                                         a
                                                                        Signature of^or^ne^

        Signature of jurors:




                                                                                                                      Please turn over
  NOTES
1 Modify this as necessary according to whether the
  inquest is held with or without a jury or partly
  with and partly without a jury.
2 In the case of a death from natural causes or from
  industrial disease, want of attention at birth, chronic
  alcoholism or addiction to drugs insert the immediate
  cause of death and morbid conditions (if any) giving                     Date             19
  rise to the immediate cause of death.
3 Omit this if the cause of death is one to which
  Note 2 applies.

4 a Where the cause of death is one to which Note 2
    applies, it is suggested that one of the following
    forms be adopted:
     C.D. died from natural causes.
                                                                           Re
     C.D. died from the industrial disease of

     C.D. died from dependence on drugs/non-dependable
     on drugs.
     C.D. died from want of attention at birth.

      (In any of the above cases, but in no other, it is
      suggested that the following words may, where
      appropriate, be added:
      "and the cause of death was aggravated by lack of                    Cause of death
      care/self-neglect').

   b In any other case except murder, manslaughter,
     infanticide or stillbirth, it is suggested that one
     of the following forms be adopted:
      C.D. killed himself/herself (whilst the balance of
      his/her mind was disturbed).

      C.D. died as the result of an attempted/self­
      induced abortion.                                                    Verdict
      C.D. died as the result of an accident/misadventure.
      C.D. was killed lawfully.

      Open verdict, namely, the evidence did not fully or
      further disclose the means whereby the cause of death
      arose.
   c In the case of murder, manslaughter or infanticide
     it is suggested that the following form be adopted.

      C.D. was killed unlawfully.
   d In the case of a stillbirth insert 'stillbirth' and do not
     complete the remainder of the form.




   Price £4.00 for 25 copies or £14.00 for 100 copies (exclusive of tax)

   ISBN 011 340764 5
   Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty's Stationery Office
   Dd 291453 C130 11/88
                                   OFFICE O F H.M. C O RO N ER FO R      MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                         WATERY STREET
                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                         SHEFFIELD
                                                  (West District)
                                                                         S3 7ET
    STEFAN   L.   POPPER,   LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M.. B.S.. M .R.C.G.P.
                                                        CORONER


                               Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721                           19




Your Ref

Caplan Goodman & Coote,
107 Townsend Avenue,
Liverpool. LE11 8ND.




Our Ref: Hills/Sol/4/SLP/JT                                              17th September 1990



Dear Sirs,                           ?

Re: RESUMED INQUESTS 19th NOVEMBER 1990.


If you are not already aware, I intend to resume the Inquests into the deaths
of the 95 people who died at Hillsborough, one or more of whom you represent,
on the 19th of November 1990 at 10.a.m. Details of venue will be notified in
due course.

I do not have to remind you of the fact that a considerable amount of
evidence has already been taken, nor of the nature and limitations of a
coronal investigation which you will recollect is not adversarial but
inquisitorial in nature, and which of course has only limited objectives.

Subject to the Coroners’ Act 1988 and the Coroners’ Rules, the Inquest is
under my control, and in particular, it is my responsibility to select the
witnesses who wish to give evidence.  I am at present engaged in considering
this and in determining who I wish to invite to attend.

 Without prejudice in any way to my rights in the matter, I am writing to you
 to give you an opportunity to draw to my attention the names and other
 appropriate details of any witness or witnesses whom you would like me to
 consider calling to give evidence at the resumed Inquests.

 May I please ask you in considering whether you wish to draw any names to my
 attention, to bear in mind the scope and limitations of an Inquest.

 I also want to make it absolutely clear that the submission of a name or
 names for consideration is nothing more than that, and that the decision as
 to who to call to give evidence is and remains a matter for me.

 I would be grateful if you could respond as soon as possible. If I have not
 heard from you by the end of September I will assume you have no names to
 submit.

 Your        aithfully,
                               O FFIC E O F H.M. CO RO NER FO R             '   $ £       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,

                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                              (West District)        „ ..
                                                                                      ,   WATERY STREET
                                                                                          SHEFFIELD
                                                                                          S3 7ET
STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                              CORONER


                           T elep h o n e: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721                        2 l 0 " t ' A t l g U & t .......................^

SLP/JT/E/007.

Caplan Goodman & Coote,
107 Townsend Avtmue,
Liverpool. m i 8KD.




             Sir-
             WJLA• « # $



Re: m       AM m m (daceaeed). Seas*
I refer to my letter Reference SLP/JT/H/OO3 to which I have
not yet had a reply.

Nevertheless, I have written to you in accordance with the
terms of letter Reference SLP/JT/H/006 which is attached
hereto.

If for any reason you do not represent the bereaved family
or are unable to communicate with them, I would be grateful
if you could please let me know by return, so that I may
then if possible get in touch with a representative member
of the family.

 I would also be obliged if I could have your reply to my
 letter Reference SLP/JT/H/0 0 3 as soon as possible.


 Yours faithfully,



 S.L.Popper,
 H.M.Coroner.
                               OFFIC E O F H.M. CO RO NER FOR         MEDICQ-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                      WATERY STREET
                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                      SHEFFIELD
                                              (West District)
                                                                      S3 7ET
STEFAN   L.   POPPER,   LL.B., B.M ED.Sci.. B.M., B.S., M .R.C.G.P.
                                                     CORONER


                           T elep h o n e: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721
                                                                        21st AugMt       1^89*

SLP/JT/H/006.

Caplan Goodman & Coote*
107 fovns«nA Aronua,
Liverpool. EBll 8HD.




Dear Sirs,

Ke: PAULA AS®                  mm            (<lec@as0<i) Ho.l8#
As you are aware, the Inquest(s) arising out of the Hillsborough
Disaster stand adjourned to a date to be fixed. You may also
be aware that it haul been in my mind to resume these Inquests
on the 15th of January 1990.

I have now been informed that the Director of Public Prosecutions
has decided to have a criminal investigation undertaken on his
behalf. In these circumstances, I have decided not- to resume the
Inquest(s) on the date mentioned.

I will review the matter further after the Director of Public
Prosecutions has announced his decision as to what action (if any)
he may wish to undertake.

I am not in a position to say how long the Police Inquiry
or the Director of Public Prosecutions consideration of the
matter will take. I anticipate however that there will be
a substantial period of time before I am in a position to communicate
on this matter further.

I would be grateful if you could please ensure that this information
is conveyed to members of the bereaved family so that they may be
fully informed of the position regarding the Inquest(s).

Yours faithfully,



 S.L.Popper,
 H.M.Coroner.
TELEPHONE:                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                     POLICE HEADQUARTERS

TELEX: 547996                                 SNIG HILL

FAX: (0742) 523243                             SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P WRIGHT CBE OSt J CBIM
CHIEF CONSTABLE


   ) L Popper
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield
S3 7ET




I refer to your recent conversation with Superintendent
Sleath concerning the release of the deceased persons from
the Hillsborough incident to their respective next of kin,
following the adjournment of the inquest.

After consultation with Professor Usher, I have no objection
to this course of action.



   )
