HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

 S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

         (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Shef field.

                   On

          14th December, 1990




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




 From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
      Official Shorthand Writers,
  55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                           INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                 Page

    L . PROCTOR Sworn

          By The Coroner                           1
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Hale               9
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne             10
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Coughlin          14
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King              14
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole         18
          Cross-Examined by Mrs . McBrien         22
          Further by The Coroner                  27
          Further Cross- Examined by Mr. Hale     29
          Further Cross- Examined by Mr. King     30
          Further Cross- Examined by Mr. Payne    30

     P.M. SCHOLEY Sworn

          By The Coroner                          32
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne             38
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King              39
          Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien          40

     A .J . TAYLOR Sworn

          By The Coroner                          42
          Cross-Examined     by Mr. Payne         49
          Cross-Examined     by Mr. King          50
          Cross-Examined     by Miss Addlemann    51
          Further by The     Coroner              52

VIDEO FILM SHOWN TO JURY                          53
*S
                                                                  1




                                                            L. PROCTOR


                         TWENTIETH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                         FRIDAY. 14th DECEMBER 1990
     B
                            LIONEL PROCTOR Sworn

                               Bv THE CORONER;

         Q. It is Lionel Proctor, is it not? - A. That is
            correct.

         Q. Police Sergeant 323? - A. Yes, sir.

         Q. You were the Sergeant in charge of the serial which I
            think was known at that time as Serial 19 on the
            15th? - A. 19, that is correct.

         Q. Your job on that particular day was outside the
            Leppings Lane perimeter gates, is that right? - A.
            Yes, in the reception area.
     D   Q. Just to make sure we are talking about the same
            thing, we have used the term reception area as the
            paved area between what I call the roadway proper and
            the perimeter gates, would that be correct? - A. That
            is correct.

         Q. I think you initially at least had ten Constables
            with you, is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

         Q. Does it mean you were eleven altogether? - A. Yes,
            there was myself supervising ten Constables.

         Q. You joined the general briefing at about eleven
            o'clock in the stadium? - A. I think the general
            briefing was at ten o'clock.

         Q. Then after that did you have another briefing? - A.
            We had a further briefing at eleven o'clock behind
            the turnstiles at Leppings Lane.

         Q. I do not want it in minutiae but what was the general
            import of that briefing so far as you were concerned?
            - A. As far as I was concerned Inspector Sykes did
            the briefing to be sure that everyone knew what
            duties they had got but in addition he did mention in
            his opinion Liverpool fans would have taken alcohol.
            He wanted us to be selective, meaning he did not want
            all the PCs arresting people and being taken away
            from the area.




     H
                                                         2




                                                 L. PROCTOR


Q. Because if you arrest somebody you have to take them
   somewhere? - A. Usually when you arrest someone there
   are two of you who disappear until the prisoner has
   been processed.

Q. The arrangement on that day was that if you had to
   arrest somebody you had to go into the ground into
   some detention room somewhere, is that right? - A.
   That is correct.

Q. I just want to check one other thing. Apart from
   being out there did you have any responsibilities
   with regard to vehicles in Leppings Lane? - A. My
   brief was to assist with orderly queues, help the
   other serials if I was required to but also the
   reception of public service vehicles.

Q. In other words, South Yorkshire Transport bus? - A.
   Yes, and coaches initially.

Q. That is what I was going to ask you. Did that
   include coaches or not? - A. What happened was that
   we were under the impression that the coaches were
   going to be unloaded at car parks which under these
   circumstances is always better so that the people
   know where they have left the coaches. Approximately
   five arrived at the gates which we unloaded and it
   was obvious to us that it was going to create
   problems if they got too many coaches and so after
   that I think Inspector Sykes said they must unload at
   the car parks.

Q. Do you know approximately what time this was when the
   five coaches were unloaded? They obviously would not
   have been altogether but what time was the latest you
   unloaded? - A. It is very difficult to remember.  I
   would think somewhere perhaps between twelve and one
   o'clock.

Q. Early on? - A. Yes, early on.

Q. When you unload a coach what do you actually do?
   What actually happens when a coach is unloaded? - A.
   Can I go to a normal match?

Q. No, take one of the coaches that you unloaded on that
   day and want did you do? Do you just open the door
   and say, "Everybody out"? - A. First of all, someone
   will walk up the coach to see that they are not
   carrying alcohol and then they would be asked to
   leave the coaches. There may be random searching
Ai

                                                                     3




                                                              L. PROCTOR


              depending on the type of person who was getting off
              the coach.

     B   Q. It is a matter of judgement for the Officers who
            happen to be unloading that particular coach? - A.
            That is correct.

         Q.   How much or how little they do? - A. That   is correct.

         Q.   That is not a criticism? - A. No, no.

         Q. Obviously you do not want to search people you do not
            think is necessary? - A. We get families and you
            don't start searching ladies, old ladies,you know.

         Q.    I think the turnstiles opened at about noon?   - A.
              That is correct.

         Q.   You have told me about the coaches what was it like
              initially when you were in the area? - A. When we
              went outside soon after the eleven o'clock briefing
     D        there were one or two fans already in the area.
              There were some without tickets at that time      because
              they were asking the other    fans had they any   spare
              tickets as they came. They were in very good heart
              the people.   There were one or two carrying cans of
              beer and cans of lager which we asked them to deposit
              in bins at the side of the turnstiles and there was
              no objections. They did that.

         Q. Co-operative in other words? - A. Yes, yes.

         Q. These lads and lassies who were there without tickets
            who were asking their friends, you actually heard
            them ask? - A. I actually heard them ask.

         Q.   It sounds to me as if there were not very many at
              that stage? - A. No, there   were just a few.

         Q. Did you ask them to leave?      - A. Yes, we asked them to
            leave the area.

         Q. What happened when you did that? - A. They moved up
            to Catch Bar Lane towards the bridge and we were
            satisfied they were out of the reception area.

         Q. What you are saying is that when you asked them to
            leave what you wanted them to do was leave the
            vicinity of the ground but you were not actually
            saying, "Get back to wherever you came from",
            whichever town that was? - A. We were asking them to
                                                              4




                                                     L. PROCTOR


      leave the area completely. As I say, they were
      moving up Catch Bar Lane out of the area and that is
      what we were immediately worried about, the numbers
B     gathering there.

    Q. Describe then to me what happened with regard to the
       build-up after that? - A. Around twelve o'clock when
       the turnstiles opened two of my Officers actually
       went and arrested a ticket tout who was in Leppings
       Lane. Obviously a ticket tout has a large crowd
       around him and he was completely obstructing the
       footpath.

    Q. Do you know the names of those Officers by chance? -
       A. I know one, PC Roberts.

    Q. Tell me more? -    I can't tell you more about the
       ticket tout.

    Q. You cannot? - A. No. Two of my Officers went and
       dealt with it and so far as I was concerned I carried
D      on with my work.

    Q. We can find out from somebody else? - A. I am sorry.

    Q. I thought that you might know. Those two went off? -
       A. Yes, that is correct.  Then between half past
       twelve and two o'clock we were engaged in unloading
       buses, the South Yorkshire Transport buses, which
       were arriving on the other side of the road to the
       reception area. When that happened we would go
       across the road and as they got off there again if
       the Officers would be looking to see if they were
       carrying anything. Also when they were getting off
       there were people without tickets asking them if they
       had got any spare tickets. What we tried to do was
       encourage them to go across the road into the ground
       but some of them were reluctant to go into the ground
       and in fact were asking where the nearest eating
       places and pubs were. Gradually over the time the
       numbers started to build up and in particular the
       ones without tickets. We were constantly in the
       reception area moving them out. The mounted
       department, I know they were without tickets, because
       the mounted department kept on saying, "If you have
       got tickets go into the ground.  If you haven't then
       move out of the area". These gathered on the bridge
       at Catch Bar Lane on both sides of the bridge and
       they started obstructing the footpath because the
       numbers literally grew into hundreds eventually and I
       kept asking the mounted departments to patrol up the




H
                                                        5




                                                  L. PROCTOR


  footpath to clear the footpaths because the ones with
  the tickets were having to walk into the road to get
  past them.

Q. Did you hear a message about the arrival of the
   train? - A. Yes, the one thing I must stress to
   everyone here so far as time was concerned I know
   very little about times and if people are going to
   argue with me about times I can't argue back.   It was
   around two o'clock that I heard a message come over
   the radio to say the train had arrived and they were
   escorting the fans down to the ground.

Q. Did you see that column arrive? - A. I did because I
   got a number of my men in the reception area to form
   a cordon so that we could filter them into the ground
   and I would say the supporters from the train were
   very orderly.  The usual chanting and shouting was
   going on but they were in good spirits and they
   seemed to come through the cordon very good and I was
   quite pleased.

Q. This is still in the reception area? - A. We were in
   the reception area but other serials were further
   down the road. We more or less kept them to the
   footpath.




                          /Q.   Everybody has said.
ft I
                                                                  6



                                                PROCTOR


           Q.   Well everybody has said that that particular group
                behaved very well. - A. They were very good.

           Q.   And you confirm that? - A. I confirm that, yes.
       B
           Q.   Before I take it from that stage I want to just take
                your mind to the perimeter gates for a moment? - A.
                Yes.

           Q.   I am particularly interested in the perimeter gates
                which were outside turnstiles A to G? - A. Yes.

           Q.   Do you know that there are three sets of perimeter
                gates in that area, or do you want me to show you a
                picture? - A. I know that there are three sets.

           Q.   There is one on the River Don side, there is the big
                double set and then there is one on the other side? -
                A. Yes, on the other side.

           Q.   On the left-hand side if you look at it? - A. Yes.

       D   Q.   Initially, say between 12 and the time this train
                group arrived, were those gates open as far as you can
                remember, or were they shut? - A. As far as I can
                remember they were open, but it is only what I can
                remember.

           Q.   I think after the train passengers had gone through,
                did you receive a message, or did you notice that
                something was happening around the turnstile area and
                the area in which you were located? - A. Yes.  Bearing
                in mind quite a few minutes elapsed for them to go in
                the ground, suddenly we seemed to be swarmed with
                people.  Concentrating on the train queue going in,
                they seemed to come from behind and down Catch Bar
                Lane and large numbers started arriving.

           Q.   Was it your impression that you were getting a lot of
                people down Catch Bar Lane, is that what you are
                saying, from the top? - A. That is the impression.  I
                know that a lot were coming down Catch Bar Lane.

           Q.   You have already said that you are very doubtful about
                the times, but can you hazard a guess, and I will not
                hold you to it, how long it was after the train lot
                had got through? - A. It seemed to follow straight on
                to that, you know.

           Q.   So what happened then as far as you were concerned? -
                A. As the numbers were building up, I was stood on the
                Reception Area and there were one or two difficulties
                with people.  People kept coming up and asking us
                about where they should go.  The tickets were colour




       H
                             L. PROCTOR


marked and I think with the crowd building up they
could not see the colour marks on the turnstiles and
they were wanting directing, and this is all happening
and the numbers are building up.  I looked down
towards the A to G turnstiles and saw that they
appeared to be crushing up and one particular mounted
man appeared to be stuck in it.  He had been
surrounded and he was having difficulty coming out.

At the same time and, as I say, I guessed at half-past
2 at the Tribunal and it was a pure guess, Inspector
Sykes asked me to go down to the perimeter gates and
see if I could help with relieving the pressure.

So what did you attempt to do there? - A. I asked a
number of officers around me, three or four officers
around me, to follow me down to the gates, but the
crush was such I had all on to get through myself, and
one other officer, PC Scholey, got to the gate with
me.  I saw one or two of my other officers hadn't got
down to the gate and were involved with the crowd at
the other side of the gates.  We were trying to ask
people to come back, to try and relieve the pressure,
but it was to no avail, and at this point I decided
that if I could get the gates closed, I perhaps could
relieve the pressure on the turnstiles.  As I say, I
went to the middle gates with PC Scholey and with the
help of Mounted Department we were able to close the
gates and PC Scholey dropped the bolt on his side of
the gate and that left us on the inside of the gates,
the gates closed and the horses on the other side, and
that, by the mere fact of closing the gates, left an
area of room which one would have thought the crowd
who were crushed up to the turnstiles would have come
back into, but they didn't.  They were leaving the
space there and we were shouting to them to come back,
but it was to no avail.

But at that time we were getting so much abuse from
the crowd and some of them had been drinking heavily
and under normal circumstances, the normal football
match, had we got the manpower they would have been
arrested and taken away.   In 28 years service now I
have never had as much abuse thrown at me.  In fact,
whilst I had got the gates closed at least three
people got hold of me telling me to open the gates.
More than likely they had got split up from friends
who were on the outside of the gates and we tried to
explain to them all we wanted to do was to help their
fans at the front to relieve the pressure, but we kept
getting this abuse.

At this time, I tried to remember at the Tribunal, I
don't know how long we had the gates closed, I really
                                                       8



                                  L. PROCTOR


     don't, but the crowd on the outside of the gates
     seemed to manoeuvre the horses out of the way and then
     they came to the gates and the pressure on the gates
     was such that I almost had to ride the gate to stop my
     ankles being chopped off by the gate.  The other gate
     sprang open and later on PC Scholey pointed out that
     the bolt had bent, the pressure had been so great.

Q.   We will be hearing from PC Scholey in a few minutes? -
     A. Yes.  The mere fact of the crowd coming in had
     pushed me towards the riverside, but as they came in
     one or two fell down and we helped them up to their
     feet, but I was still towards the riverside.  Some
     minutes elapsed and then there was another surge and
     at this time I had got my back to the gates.  I was
     obviously speaking to someone and one of the Mounted
     Department came through and unfortunately the horse
     decided to take it out of me and kicked me behind my
     left knee which incapacitated me somewhat.

Q.   You know this gap which you said was created? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   That was created on the inside? - A. On the inside of
     the gate between the turnstiles and the perimeter
     gate.

Q.   You are saying that the people adjacent to that gap
     did not step back at that point? - A. They didn't come
     back.  We shouted to them to come back.   We obviously
     had to remain near the gates to stop them being
     opened, but we shouted to them for them to come back
     and they just didn't take any notice.   They were just
     intent on getting in.

Q.   The people on the far side of the gate in the
     Reception Area, it was they who were pressing forward
     towards the gate, is that what you are saying? - A.
     That is correct.




                                /Q.   Were you there
                                                 L. PROCTOR



Were you there in 1988 by chance? - A. I wasn't at
Leppings Lane.   I was on a Tango mobile away from the
ground.

I think I am right in saying you then went towards Gate
A, which is the other end of    the... - A. Yes, the    Gates C
and B were open.

You saw that? - A. I was feeling sorry with my injury,
you know, but I saw the gates open.   I didn't take
particular notice of it.   I just thought that at long
last the pressure was being released.   I could not see
any other way of the pressure being released.

I am not going to go into much detail   but I think      you did
eventually hear a message to   get into the ground?      -
A. That is correct.

Where did you come into it? - A. I went down through A
gate to the North Stand    and the first gangway I went
down.     By the time I got there, bearing in mind I was
limping, my Serial had left me.      I noticed there were a
lot of people coming on to the track and on to the grass.
At first I thought it was a pitch invasion because they
just    said the Liverpool fans were coming on, but as soon
as I    got on Icould see that people were what I call
walking wounded were coming on and sitting down on the
grass near to the track.      I took it on myself to get the
officers to pull them further on to the pitch so there
was room for more to come out.

Can you remember whether the players were still on the
field when you emerged? - A. Oh, no, there were no
players.

I don't think we need to take it any further with you.
You are certain there were no players on the pitch? - A.
There were no players there, no.

You, as you have already explained, were rather slower
than some of your colleagues? - A. That's right.

Because your leg was hurting you at the time.

              Cross-Examined by MR. HALE:

You had some experience of trying to hold the perimeter
gate against the crowd? - A. That's correct.

Did you see whether other officers were trying to hold
other parts of the gate? - A. No.   Whilst we were^
holding the gates you were too intent on your particular
gate to notice anything else.
C '
                                                                    10


                                                          ’ L. PROCTOR


          Q. You don't know whether you had the whole crowd outside
             against your gate or only a section of it? - A. I think I
             can remember the gate nearest to the river being closed.
             I don't know about the top gate.

      B   Q. Did you notice what was happening to the people at the
             other side of the gate that you were holding? - A. No, I
             could not notice because immediately in front of me were
             the horses so I could not see.

          Q. The horses were also adding to your barrier? - A. The
             horses were protecting the gates from the people.

          Q. I think you didn't see Gate C opened? - A. I saw Gate C
             open at the end, but I didn't take particular notice of
             it.   I just noticed that the crowd...

          Q. What ended your holding of the gate? - A. The pressure
             that was on, they forced the gates back.

          Q. Just forced it open.   You weren't able to get it shut
             again after that? - A. No, we didn't.

      D           MR. HALE:   Thank you.

                          Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

          Q. Why, during the early stages, were you encouraging people
             to go into the ground? - A. Well, we tried to encourage
             them into the ground so that we don't get the masses
             outside late on.

          Q. When the train contingent arrived you were able to form a
             cordon and filter the people into the ground? - A. We
             filtered them to the turnstile areas.

          Q. Why weren't you able to form a similar cordon when the
             large crowd arrived later? - A. Because the crowd
             overwhelmed us.

          Q. Tell the jury please about your previous experience at
             policing large football matches? - A. Well, all that
             season I had done the same job as I did on the semi-final
             day.

          Q. And on previous seasons? - A. On previous seasons, I have
             been doing different jobs at football matches - working
             Tango mobiles away from the ground.

          Q. Have you attended outside football grounds on the
             occasion of big matches in the past? - A. Yes, first
             division matches.

          Q. Have you? - A. Oh, yes.




      H
                                                 L. PROCTOR


I just want to give the jury an idea of your experience
of policing big football matches? - A. I have got
considerable experience.

For how many years? - A. Well, with the lapse of a few
years in CID, twenty-eight years I would  think.  Idid
the World Cup and that's going back many  years.

How does the arrival of this crowd shortly before the
kick-off compare with your experience of other big
matches? - A. There has been nothing similar.   I mean, I
have never met so much abuse.

Have you ever known so many to arrive during the period
shortly before kick-off? - A. No, I have never known so
many to arrive at such a short time.

You have told the court that you attempted to relieve the
crush from where you were stationed in the reception area
outside the perimeter gates.   That is where you first
started your efforts to relieve the crush, is that right?
- A. No. We worked our way down to the gate.

Quite, from the back of the crowd? - A. Yes, that's
correct.

I didn't put the question very clearly.   Quite a number
of other policemen have described their efforts from the
front of the crowd.   For example, Inspector Purdy
standing on the railing and signalling to people to go
back without success.   You are attempting to relieve the
pressure from the back.  Were the people at the back
responding at all to your appeals? - A. We were saying,
"Come back."   We were receiving this abuse and we said,
"All we want is to help your fans at the front."   You
know, to take the pressure off them.

It didn't work? - A. It didn't work.

Can you estimate the number of people altogether, and I
appreciate it is only an estimate, whom you saw trying to
get hold of tickets, asking for spares? - A. That I
actually heard?

Yes. - A. It is virtually impossible to say.

Can you give an idea?   Is it 5, 6, 20? - A. That I
actually heard, there was perhaps upwards of 100.

Can you estimate the number   of people who gathered
towards Catch Bar Lane area   when you moved them away? -
A. I find it very difficult   to give assessments.   At the
Tribunal I said 400 to 500,   which I think is on the fair
side.
                                               L. PROCTOR


Four or five hundred gathered...? - A. On both sides of
Catch Bar Lane.

In relation to the police preparation for the event I
want you just to look at the Operational Order to
identify your place in it, really just so that the jury
have had a chance to glance at your particular
instructions - page 33.    Serial 19 at the bottom of the
page.    You are Police Sergeant Proctor? - A. That is
correct.

There is your serial underneath, ten men, including
Mr. Roberts whom you have named? - A. That is correct.

It gives your instructions very much as you have already
said to the court:

     "This serial will be located at Leppings Lane and
     ensure that orderly queues form.   They will assist
     other serials at this location as required and in
     the event of vehicles, coaches, arrivinj, supervise
     their unloading."

Did you do that to the best of your ability? - A. We did
that to the best of our ability.




           Q. Was it possible
                                                           13

                                                    L. PROCTOR




0. Was it possible to ensure that orderly queues formed
   when the large crowd arrived? - A. When the large crowd
   arrived?

Q. Yes. - A. We couldn't form orderly queues.

Q. Was there anything that you could have done to form
   queues once that crowd started to arrive? - A. We would
   need an army of Policemen to do it.

          MR. PAYNE:   I am not going to ask this Witness
     about the damage to the bolt on the gate because I
     think there is another one coming?

          THE CORONER:   That is right, Mr. Scholey is
     coming and Mr. Mackay has mentioned it already anyway.

          MR. PAYNE:   I have got a photograph of it and I
     would like to show it to one witness, with your
     permission, sir?

          THE CORONER:   We will show it to Mr. Scholey:

Q. Perhaps, Sergeant, when you have finished if you stay
   in the vicinity of the Court, if we need to recall you
   we will do so, but I don't think it is going to be
   necessary. - A. Right, sir.

Q.        MR. PAYNE:   One last question please.  You have
     mentioned that you noticed that the gates into the
     ground, including Gate C, were opened, and your comment
     about that was that you thought the pressure had been
     released. - A. The pressure had been released and quite
     honestly it is the only way I could have seen that
     pressure being released.

Q. Was it obvious to you that by releasing the pressure in
   that way this was going to cause a crush to develop
   inside the ground? - A. No, it wasn't obvious to me


          THE CORONER:   No, I don't think we will take that
     question ....

          MR. PAYNE:   Sir, this is an important matter.
     This witness is experienced; he has attended football
     matches for many years as an Officer responsible for
     policing crowds.

          THE CORONER:   Could you ask him how much
     experience he has had of working within the ground?

          THE WITNESS:   At that end behind those
     turnstiles, I would think very little.
                                                  L. PROCTOR




     THE CORONER:   I don't think he is the right
witness, Mr. Payne, I am sorry.  You would be getting
an opinion which in my judgment is not worth having,
and which also reopens the whole very painful issue as
to opinions, so I would rather we wait until we get
witnesses who ....

     MR. PAYNE:      Yes, sir, as you please.     Thank you
very much.

           Cross-Examined by MR. COUGHLIN

Sergeant, just a question or two to clear up something
in my mind.  You said that people were asking where to
go? - A. That is correct.

And referred to colour marks on the turnstiles.   What
did you mean by that? - A. They had got different
coloured tickets and they wanted to know which
turnstiles to go to, because there were different
colours for different areas.

Are there physical colour marks on the turnstiles? - A.
There were colour marks on the turnstiles, as I can
remember, but I didn't need the colour markings because
I knew where they had to go to for the particular area,
like for the terrace A-G, so I had no need to look for
the colour markings.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, before you rise there is
something I have forgotten to ask.  May I just do it?

     MR. KING:      Of course.

     THE CORONER:   Can you remember a landrover
arriving at any time? - A. I can't.  As I say, when you
are in the middle of the crowd you are very much in
your own environment and you can see very little.

You don't have to remember it - you can't.  Can you
remember any announcements that you heard over either
loudspeakers, tannoys or any other way? - A. I have got
to be honest, I don t remember any.

That is fine.     That is all I wanted to know.

                Cross-Examined by MR. KING

I suppose, Officer, the crowd noise was such it was
very difficult to hear anything? - A. It was very loud.

What, the crowd noise? - A. The crowd noise.
                                                           15
                                                    L. PROCTOR




Q. Can I very, very briefly deal with the ticket
   situation? - A. Yes.

Q. Was the position that you were getting lots of
   questions from people who seemed to be confused as to
   where they ought to go? - A. Yes. Whether it was just
   because they were in the crowd and they couldn't see
   the turnstiles ....

Q. The Jury have seen photographs which I don't need to
   show you of the position of letters over the
   turnstiles, of how high up the colouring was? - A. Yes.

Q. But the general picture was with the numbers there the
   people were confused? - A. They were confused.

Q. Just finally on that, I think you had a suggestion,
   didn't you, as to how you things might have been better
   on the tickets themselves? - A. I can never understand
   on the tickets why they have the - I am going back to
   memory - I think they have got the row of the seat then
   the entrance.  One would have imagined that the
   entrance should be first. That is the first thing you
   are going to come against.

Q.        THE CORONER:     You mean the order? - A. The order
     on the ticket.    I can never understand why they have
     the - I think it says the row of the seat and the
     entrance.

Q. Yes, that is right.

Q.        MR.   KING:    You have got a good memory, Officer.
     I think    your idea was there ought to be a much bigger
     marking    on the ticket showing the turnstile entrance? -
     A. That    is my thought - it is being wise after the
     event.

Q. Yes.  Dealing with queueing generally for the moment,
   again I don't want to go into too much detail, but the
   area between the turnstile area and A-G is a very
   narrow, restricted area isn't it? - A. It is narrow.

Q. We have heard from Inspector Sykes, who of course was
   your senior Officer? - A. That is correct.

Q. His view was that, not particularly on this day, but
   that when you get a maximum crowd it really is
   impossible in that area, given its shape, to have
   queues.  It is really impossible? - A. It is impossible
   because the only way you could form queues is by having
   Policemen between each queue.
                                               L. PROCTOR




And the shape is such it does not lend itself to
straight lines, does it? - A. No.

Indeed, outside the perimeter gates that   area itself
does not lend itself to queueing because   you have just
got a wide open space, haven't you? You    haven't got
any straight walls or anything? - A. No,   you are
funnelled into that turnstile area.

So we are generally dealing with an area where
queueing, if a lot of people arrive, is generally
impossible, isn't it? - A. It is, especially toward the
end when large numbers arrive.

But leaving aside this particular day, the area is such
if you have got a lot of people arriving queueing is
really impossible, isn't it? - A. It is if you are
thinking of a queue one behind another, two behind ....

Yes, I don't need to take that any further with you,
Officer. - A. All right, thank you.

When you received information that led you to go back
towards the perimeter gates in order to try and help
the situation, the situation at that stage was that the
mounted Officer you could see in the turnstile area was
already enveloped with people? - A. That is correct.

You yourself, I couldn't quite picture where you were
at the time, before you made your way back to the
perimeter gates.  Could you help us on the model where
you would have been, roughly? - A. Yes.  It would be
easier for me to walk to the model.  I would be
somewhere around this area.

      THE CORONER:  Can you just say what that is? - A.
It is the reception area and the bridge up to Catch Bar
Lane.

And the roadway, yes.

     MR. KING:   Thank you, Officer, and the picture I
had is that you had your back to the perimeter gates,
because you were perhaps dealing with people coming to
you with ticket problems and so forth, and then you
suddenly noticed that the Officer was trapped inside? -
A. Yes.  You are busy dealing with the immediate things
round you and don't envisage what is happening.

I understand that.  Again this is obvious but I just
want to see that I have got it right, that for anybody
to go into the turnstile area they had to have gone
through the perimeter gates.  That is the only way in,
isn't it? - A. That is the only way in, yes.
                                             L. PROCTOR




Although you say people were coining from Catch Bar Lane
in larger numbers than you expected, people were coming
along Leppings Lane in good numbers? - A. Obviously
they were, it is just with me being towards the top,
towards the bridge, I felt they were coming ....

That is where you were looking, so you weren't really
observing what was coming down Leppings Lane? - A. No,
I wasn't.

I say down Leppings Lane, I understand the expression
is up Leppings Lane, but you know what I mean? - A. I
would just say towards the ground along Leppings Lane.

Yes.  So although you can say that there were large
numbers coming from the Catch Bar Lane over the bridge
direction, as far as up Leppings Lane is concerned
there were clearly, as far as you know, still large
numbers coming along there? - A. As far as I was aware,
yes.

Indeed were you aware that - I think it was
Superintendent Marshall who was in charge, wasn't he? -
A. Yes.

In the area outside.  Were you aware that the road,
Leppings Lane, had been closed to vehicles by that
stage? - A. I can't remember seeing vehicles so I did
not know whether it had been closed, but I can't
remember seeing vehicles so quite possibly it had been
closed.

I am just trying to build a picture of the numbers of
people, you see, coming from both directions. - A. Yes.

Would it be fair to say that there were large numbers
coming from both directions? - A. I can only
concentrate on Catch Bar Lane and the other side I am
not too sure of.

So be it, but when you yourself tried to take some
members of your serial towards the perimeter gates, you
had difficulty getting there? - A. That is correct.

Because of the numbers outside the perimeter gates? -
A. That is correct.

Again, those people had to have got there in some way,
didn't they? - A. Yes.

Do I understand from your evidence that there were no
Officers themselves stationed actually on the perimeter
gates, before you went over there? - A. There was
                                                           18

                                                  L. PROCTOR




     nobody there before I went, other than the mounted
     department were around them.

Q.    Yes, but as far as the serials were concerned, there
     was no serial whose duty it was to be on the gates as
     such? - A. No.

Q. Because the situation when you realised the problem was
   that there was already a great mass of people in the
   turnstile area enveloping the horse? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. You can't help us as to how that happened because you
   did not see it happen, that is correct* isn't it? - A.
   No.

Q. You didn't see that great mass of .... - A. No, I
   didn't.  I knew that there were large numbers going
   down but I didn't see - they were already enclosed.

Q.   You can't help us with the problem of how that large
     number of people got into the turnstile area in the
     first place? - A. It was obvious that they had come
     through the reception area.

Q. Yes, but would you agree with me this much - indeed,
   you do because you tried to stop it - if you get too
   many people in the turnstile area, you have problems,
   don t you? - A. You have problems.

Q. It is crucial to prevent   if one can too many people
   getting in, you would agree with me? - A. I would agree
   with you.

Q. And when you tried to do that by seeking to close the
   perimeter gates, there were already too many people in
   weren't there? - A. That is correct.

Q. I have no further questions.

               Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE

Q. Sergeant, can I concentrate on the turnstiles for a
   moment.  The object of policing any end       of theground,
   but Leppings Lane end in   particular because we are
   concentrating on it, is to ensure that when people get
   up to a turnstile they are able to walk in one at a
   time, going behind each other, that is right, isn't it?
   - A. That is right.

Q.   And I am sure, as must be obvious, pressure on a
     turnstile creates not only problems for the crowd    in
     safety terms, but also creates problems for the
     turnstile itself - it slows it down? - A. Yes.
                                             L. PROCTOR




If you have got two or three people trying to force
their way into one narrow turnstile gate that causes
difficulties for the people and slows things down? - A.
I would agree with you.

We have heard from other witnesses is that one of the
most dangerous things you can have, is when you have a
wedge shape and people at the pinnacle of the wedge are
being pressed from all sides, trying to get into a^
narrow, confined area? - A. I would not disagree with
that.

Would you mind looking at C255?  It perhaps gives a
better view of the turnstile area.  If you look at the
turnstiles, on the right hand side you can see the
barrier running down, which separates turnstiles A-G
from turnstiles 1-16? - A. Yes.

And you can actually see that these turnstiles have the
opposite effect, that the narrowness is at the
perimeter gates and it fans out? - A. Yes.

So it follows logically from that there is more space
at the turnstiles when people are going out, so if -
and I want you to assume you have a crowd that is co­
operating and is not pushing forward, if you have that
sort of crowd going forward to those turnstiles, would
you agree that there is more space at the front to
enable them to be filtered into the turnstiles and to
walk in? - A. Yes.  The only thing I would say is that
they would come through the gates and they would fill
the area, the whole area, and then you would get more
pressing in towards ....




                 /Q. I am not concentrating .
LZ. i



                                                                     20




                                                               L. PROCTOR


            Q. I am not concentrating for the moment on what
               happened when the large crowd arrived on this day but
               we are talking about a large crowd in general. Let
        B      us assume it is one that is actually listening to
               what the Police do. Have you seen the way Police
               horses have been used to help form orderly queues or
               lines in that area when there is a large crowd? They
               go up and down the perimeter gates? - A. That is
               correct.

            Q. People are kept roughly in a line? - A. Yes, sir.

            Q. The idea is to keep the pressure off people to allow
               them to walk through those turnstiles without too
               much trouble? - A. That is correct.

            Q. Would you also look at C.305? This is actually a
               photograph taken on the day and I can tell you it was
               at 2.30 because it has been shown on a number of
               occasions. Do you see the Police Officer there on
               his horse and you can see his helmet sticking above
        D      the crowd by the brick wall? - A. I can.

            Q. He is carrying out the motion we were just talking
               about going up and down to keep people in line? - A.
               I would think it was that particular mounted man that
               got trapped in.

            Q. That is right later on? - A. Yes.

            Q. Just look at the gentleman in the red jacket to the
               right of that.  I have described him as an elderly
               man and someone took issue with that. He has a cap
               and there is a gap in front of him? - A. Yes, sir.

            Q. As far as you can tell, and it is difficult to tell
               from a photograph, that is not a large crowd that is
               anxiously pushing forward.  They are standing in
               lines or queues or whatever you want to call them
               waiting to get into the turnstiles? - A. That is the
               appearance that I have got here, yes.

            Q. That is not what happened on the day later on, is it?
               - A. No.

            Q. That was not the scene that you saw? - A. No.

            Q. Is the difference between this scene and the scene
               that you saw that there were far more people packed
               in there? - A. Yes, I wasn't looking from the side
               that you are showing.  I am looking from the
                                                              21




                                                     L. PROCTOR


      perimeter gates and I am on the perimeter gates,   So
      far as I am concerned they were under pressure.

B   Q. The pressure was because of people pushing forward,
       is that right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

    Q. The difficulty of forming and helping to maintain a
       proper orderly line to get people into the turnstiles
       is created by the pressure being put on people at the
       front.  If they are being pushed from the back the
       lines go? - A. That is correct.

    Q. That is when it becomes impossible in your terms for
       orderly queues to form because people are not
       listening to what you are saying? - A. That is
       correct.

    Q. So the queues can only form if you can go up and down
       saying, "Right, stand in line, lads. Don't push,
       don't do that".  Is that correct? - A. Yes, that is
       correct.
D
    Q. Once the crowd stops responding to the Police then
       you get an impossible situation? - A. As everyone
       knows at a major event like this you police with
       consent. Once the crowd takes that consent away....

    Q. Would it be fair to say - and again I want you to
       assume this - that the crowd that is wanting to be
       policed with consent, if you are walking up and down
       in a large crowd, outside A to G turnstiles, saying,
       "Stop pushing" and they respond to it, then that does
       not cause problems at the turnstiles? - A. It causes
       no problems at the turnstiles.

    Q. Just on the tickets themselves when the fans were
       arriving and asking you questions, this was when
       there was already a lot of people in that area? - A.
       That is correct.

    Q. I imagine from your own experience of seeing crowds
       that people who are not used to seeing a body of
       people in one particular area can be disorientated by
       that simple fact. They roll up, they see a whole
       mass of people, and then "Where am I going to go?"? -
       A. That is correct.

    Q. The other thing on your suggestion for the tickets,
       which no doubt will be passed on to Sheffield
       Wednesday, if you look at a ticket stub and you see




H
                                                   L. PROCTOR


     the word "entrance", what would that in your mind
     mean? - A. In my mind it would mean the entrance.

Q. Which is? - A. The outer gates.

Q. And the entrance to a football ground is normally by
   what means? Is it by a large concertina gate or is
   it by turnstiles - A. Yes.

Q. By turnstiles? - A. Yes.

                Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN;

Q. Sergeant, you said you were encouraging fans to move
   forward, is that right, when you were in the
   reception area? - A. To move forward?

Q. You were encouraging people to move towards the
   turnstiles? - A. I don't think I have said that.

     THE CORONER:   Give him the time, Mrs. McBrien.  He
did say something like this but he qualified it with regard
to the time.

     THE WITNESS:    The only encouragement I was giving
them was when   they were coming off the buses, and I was
encouraging them across the road to go into the ground and
we are talking about before two o'clock then.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   What about later? Were you
     still encouraging them? - A. No, as I have said, I
     was encouraging them to come away from the
     turnstiles.

Q. It was only inside the grounds that fans would be
   taken to a detention room if they were drunk, wasn't
   it? - A. I am sorry?

Q. It was only inside the ground that fans would be
   taken to a detention room if they were drunk? - A.
   Yes, and also from outside the ground they would go
   into the detention room.

Q. From outside? At what point outside? - A. You would
   have to go through a concertina door.

Q. You are saying they would be able to be taken to the
   detention room from outside the ground? - A. They
   would have to be taken into the ground to the
   detention room if someone was arrested outside the
   ground.
                                                  L. PROCTOR



Q. Yes, but from what point I am asking please?

     THE CORONER:   Are you asking how would they get into
the ground or how far away from the ground?

      MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes.

     THE CORONER:   I think what Mrs. McBrien is trying to
find out is supposing you arrested a fan at the Penistone
Road/Leppings Lane round about. Would you take them into
the ground or take them to the Police Station? - A. Most
probably if they were arrested away from the ground they
would be taken to a Police Station.

Q. The question Mrs. McBrien is asking is, how close to
   the ground would a fan have to be if he were arrested
   for him to be brought into the ground? For example
   if he was arrested away from the reception area? - A.
   It all depends.  If it is in the immediate vicinity
   of the ground it would all depend on the easiest
   place for the Officer to take him bearing in mind
   that many times a prisoner doesn't want to come with
   you and so you go to the easiest place.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN:  Do you know how many people were
     arrested inside the ground that day? - A. I haven't a
     clue.

Q. You were positioned in the reception area and so was
   it your duty to see that your serial did not allow
   anyone in through the perimeter gates who were the
   worse for drink that day? Was that part of their
   duty at the perimeter gates? - A. If they were drunk
   at the perimeter gates?

Q. Yes. - A. We are in the reception area.

Q. Did you instruct your serial to stop fans for that
   purpose? - A. They are Policemen.  They know when to
   stop fans who are drunk.

Q. Who was doing it though? You were the Sergeant in
   charge of the serial? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you give any instructions to your serial with
   regard to those duties? - A. The only instructions
   given to the serial was by Inspector Sykes at the
   briefing when, because of the numbers who may be in
   drink, if we tried to arrest everyone who was in
                                                             24




                                                     L. PROCTOR


     drink we would have no Policemen outside.   He didn't
     want that situation to arise.

Q. That is why I was wondering had anybody got numbers
   so that we would know what we were dealing with.  If
   we do not know the numbers then we do not know
   whether we had a problem at all? - A. I am the wrong
   Officer to ask about the numbers because I don't
   know.

       THE CORONER:    You mean the number of arrests?

       MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes, it is quite relevant.

     THE CORONER:   I do not think that is going to get us
anywhere, Mrs. McBrien, but he does not know.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I am not sure there was a problem
unless there are actual figures.  It may be just hearsay.

     THE WITNESS: Madam, can I just that when you are
under pressure our only concern was for the safety of fans
at the front. We couldn't start arresting drunk people.
We were just concerned to get the pressure off the fans.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   You just let anything happen? -
     A. No, we didn't just let anything happen. We just
     wanted the pressure off the fans.  People were
     shouting at us, using abuse.  It was something we
     couldn't do anything about because we had got to get
     the pressure off the fans. To be quite honest I was
     afraid that someone would be seriously injured at the
     front of the crowd at the turnstiles, if not killed.

Q. Did you succeed in getting the pressure off the
   crowd? That was your main purpose? - A. We got the
   pressure off the back of the crowd in front of the
   turnstiles but the only way the pressure was released
   was when the gates were opened, C gates, the
   concertina gates, were opened.

Q. That would mean that people who should have been
   arrested were not arrested and the only way to
   deal... - A. I know there were many people there who
   most probably should have been arrested had there
   been Policemen there to do it but the numbers had
   overwhelmed us. You would need an army of Policemen
   under those circumstances.
                                                            25




                                                   L. PROCTOR


Q.   We have no proof of the numbers? - A. You are going
     to have to take my word for what I say unfortunately
     if you don't agree.

     THE CORONER:   It will be the Jury to decide what
value to put on his evidence. He has said it.

Q. Repeat your answer to the question and then we will
   move on. Tell me what you said with regard to your
   judgement as to arrestable offences which were
   committed in your presence? - A. Sorry?

Q. Are you saying that people were committing
   offences? - A. There were people using abuse to us
   who were obviously in drink that would be arrested
   for drunk and disorderly.

Q. But youdid not do so because you were overwhelmed? -
   A. That is correct but having said that, it was
   purely abuse towards us. They weren't fighting with
   us except that when I was on the gate three tried to
   pull me off to let the gates open.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: Do you know why the perimeter
     gates were left open most of the time that day? - A.
     The perimeter gates?

Q. Yes, the main entrance gates before you get to the
   turnstile area? - A. They usually leave the perimeter
   gates for them to get to the turnstiles.

Q . Do you think it may have been better....

       THE CORONER:   No.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   That is an opinion, yes.    Perhaps I
could put it another way.

       THE CORONER:   Yes.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: Would it have been impossible
     for the two gates to be closed and one left open so
     that people would not be going in such large numbers
     through the main gate? - A. It could be done.

Q. You say you were receiving abuse. Do you think this
   was because things had got out of control? People do
   become abusive when they do not know what is
   happening, don't they? - A. When I was receiving
   abuse, I don't know, my opinion - if you will allow
   me to give an opinion - is that the fans wanted to
                                                   L. PROCTOR


     get into the ground. They did not want to be late.
     The mere fact that I closed the perimeter gate on
     them to allow the pressure to be relieved would put
     stress on to them, yes, but the abuse they used I
     just can't believe it.

Q. Do you think it was because they were just running
   out of time and they wanted to get in? - A. I think
   they were impatient.

     THE CORONER:  Stop, stop. We have done enough of
this. Move on to the next question.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Going back to the searching that
     you did, you said you obviously show prejudice
     towards young men? - A. No.

Q. If there was an elderly lady she would get through? -
   A. Yes, I would agree with that. You have to be
   selective.  You cannot search a crowd of many
   thousands and so you have to be selective and
   obviously an old lady is hardly going to cause us a
   lot of trouble.




                              /Q. Would you agree that.
                                                         27



                                            L. PROCTOR


Q.   But would you agree that   many, many young men in this
      country are very upright and honest individuals that
      to search them is really singling them out? - A.
      Unfortunately, there is no way of telling who are the
      good young men and who are the bad young men in a big
      crowd.

Q.   So would you agree it is   not a fair system?

          THE CORONER: No, Mrs. McBrien.  We are dealing
     with an Inquest into the deaths of certain people, not
     with the behaviour or what systems of searching should
     be used, whether everybody should be searched, whether
     age brackets should be instituted.  That is a very
     interesting concept but not for us.  Try another
     question.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:  Would you say that the sheer
     pressure outside the perimeter gates caused the bolt
     to break? - A. To bend.

Q.   It was not just bad behaviour that some individual
      broke that gate? - A. It obviously had to be pressure.

Q.   It was just pressure? - A. It had to be pressure.

Q.   Were you at the 1988 semi-final, Sergeant? - A. I was
      at the 1988 semi-final but I was on a tango mobile
      away from the ground patrolling the roads.

Q.   Were you in the area near the turnstiles in 1989 the
      whole of the time, or most of the time? - A. I was in
      the Reception Area all the time, yes.

Q.   You did say that you did not even see traffic, you did
     not know when the traffic had stopped moving on the —


          THE CORONER: No, what he said was he did not
     notice any traffic.

          THE WITNESS:   I didn't notice any traffic.

          MRS. McBRIEN:  You did not notice any at all.
     That is all. Thank you, Sergeant.

                   Further by THE CORONER

Q.   I want to ask you one or two more questions.   As I
     understand your evidence in response to me and to
      various other people, you were in the Reception Area
      and initially you were facing outward to the crowd
     with your back towards the turnstile area? - A. I was
                                                       2 8




                                          L. PROCTOR


     moving round, you know.  At times we were moving the
     non-ticket holders and that out of the Reception Area.

Q.   At some point, however, you had cause to look towards
     the turnstile area, is that right? - A. That is
     correct.

Q.   You also were looking up towards Catch Bar Lane and
     you saw a lot of people coming down, that is right, is
     it not? - A. Yes.

Q.   Could you see from where you were that people were
     being crushed within the turnstile area? - A. I
     couldn't see any distress from where I was, but there
     appeared to be large numbers packed together, which I
     would call crushed.

Q.   You could see that? - A.   I could see that they were
     packed together.

Q.   With your own eyes? - A. Yes.

Q.   At that stage were you in any better position than
     anybody else who was standing on the ground?  In other
     words, somebody with vision similar to yours, would
     they have been able to see the same scene if they had
     looked in the same direction? - A. Where I was stood,
     as I say I was stood on the top side of the Reception
     Area which gives you a little bit higher view because
     it goes uphill towards the bridge.  There would be
     people, I would think, in better places than me, I
     don't know.

Q.   But were there people around you when you first
     noticed that there was what looked to you as if people
     were being crushed up, or were you completely
     isolated? - A. Do you mean officers?

Q.   No, fans. - A. Yes.   I am sure the fans around me, if
     they had wanted to look that way, would have seen what
     I saw, yes.  I am sorry, I thought you were speaking
     about other officers.

Q.   What I am interested in is what view you had, because
     you were at the back of that crowd initially, were you
     not? - A. It all depends.  If you are on the top side,
     as I say it goes uphill towards the bridge and you
     have a better view from there than you do from the
     bottom.

Q.   You then told me that you had to, I think you used the
     word, fight or struggle your way through the crowd to
     get to the perimeter gates, that is right? - A. It
     didn't happen, I didn't go straight down there.  I was
                                                         29



                                            L. PROCTOR


     dealing with the people around me at that time, and
     Inspector Sykes said, "Can you go down there", and I
     went.

Q.   What I am interested in is why was it thatyou were
     having difficulty getting through  the people toget
     towards the perimeter gate when you eventually went? -
     A. Because they had started to come on the road side
     of the perimeter gates.  I had to get through.   They
     had started packing there and when I got near to the
     perimeter gates I had to force my way through and
     there were horses there as well.

Q.   Was there anything that was compelling those people to
     pack at that stage? - A. The only reason they were
     packing is because they wanted to get in. Time was
     running out.  That is an opinion.

Q.   That is why I am asking you.  That may well be a
     reasonable opinion, but there may be other reasons.
     What I am asking you is did you see any objective
     necessity for people to pack that area? -    A. No.

          THE CORONER: Anybody else want to ask any
     questions?

                 Cross-Examined by MR. H A L E :

Q.   If I may just come back on the suggestions about the
     perimeter gate as a means of holding the crowd back
     and relieving pressure on the turnstile, you agree
     that was a good idea because you tried to    do it? -A.
     The only reservation I have about that is    that itwas
     a good idea, but then it started putting pressure onto
     the gates, so wherever you are you are getting
     pressure.

Q.   That is right, that is what I am coming to.   It has
      been put to you that if you had acted earlier - not
      you and there is no criticism of you - somebody had
      acted earlier, assume just for the sake of figures
      that there were 5,000 people trying to get through the
      turnstiles, if someone had acted earlier, put a
      guillotine across and held them back, there might only
      have been, say, 2,000 trying to get into the
      turnstiles and, therefore, they would have been much
      better off, wouldn't they? - A. Yes, they would have
      been better off.

Q.   But the other 3,000 would then have been at the other
      side of the perimeter gates? - A. They would have been
      at the other side of the perimeter gates.
                                        L. PROCTOR


What would have been the effect of that? - A. They
would have been crushing onto the perimeter gates.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

You were asked whether there was any necessity for
people to go into the area which became packed between
the perimeter gates and the roadway.  Can I put a
different aspect of that to you.  From what you could
see were any positive steps being taken to prevent
people getting near that area, in other words anything
to stop people coming up Leppings Lane, or stop people
coming over the bridge to the turnstile area? - A.
Nothing that I could see.

In other words, there was an unrestricted way for
people to come to the turnstile area? - A. The only
restrictions that there were were the Mounted
Department who were trying to hold them, to keep them
back.

I am not talking now immediately in front of the
perimeter gates which we have heard about. - A. I
can't really tell you what was happening down the
road.  I don't know what was happening down the road.

But, as far as you were concerned, people were coming
to the entrance which was the entrance to get into the
ground? - A. That is correct.

       MR. PAYNE: May I ask a further question arising
from     the questions which you asked, sir?

       THE CORONER: Yes.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Sergeant Proctor, from your position at the back of
the crowd you were   able to see that there was acrush
at the turnstiles?   - A. That is correct.

So bad that you thought you had got to go forward    to
try to relieve it?   - A. That is correct.

So anyone else at the back of the crowd, were they in
the same position to see what you saw? - A. The people
who were around me would be able to see it.

      THE CORONER: Anybody else want to ask anything
else?   (No response). Sergeant Proctor, thank you
very much.   It is highly unlikely that we are going to
need you because I am sure Mr. Scholey will be able to
deal with the bolt, but just in case he cannot, can
you wait until he has finished giving his evidence
                                                       31



                                          L. PROCTOR


    before you leave the precincts of the Court.   We will
    have coffee, quarter-of-an-hour, five-past 11.

                    (Short adjournment)
B




D




H
                                                                32


                                                     D.' M. SCHOLEY



                      DAVID MICHAEL SCHOLEY Sworn

                            By THE CORONER:

B   Q. What is your full name? - A. David Michael Scholey, sir.

    Q. You are PC 1834? - A. That's correct.

    Q. Were you working at the Leppings Lane end of the
         Sheffield Wednesday football ground on the 15th of April,
         1989? - A. I was  sir,

    Q.   You were not actually in Sergeant Proctor's Serial? - A.
         I was in Serial 18 which was Sergeant Morgan's Serial.

    Q. Where was that Serial located? - A. On the turnstiles,
         actually outside the turnstiles.

    Q. Which turnstile area were you in? - A. I am not quite
         sure which number it was because I was taken off it and
         put on coach reception.
D   Q.   So you were actually moved... - A. I was moved away on
         instructions from Inspector Sykes to coach reception.

    Q.   You then went out into what we have been referring to as
         the reception area and dealing with coach reception? - A.
         Yes, I was across the road where the South Yorkshire
         Transport double decker buses were bringing Liverpool
         supporters from the Midland Station.   Our brief was to
         keep the pavements clear where the buses pulled up and
         make sure they disembarked safely.

         From what time to what time were you engaged in that
         activity, about? - A. About half past eleven.

    Q.   Until when? - A. Half past one.

    Q.   What did you do after half   past one? - A. We were
         initially trying to keep the pavements clear on the
         bridge so when the buses came they could unload safely
         without any impedance to anyone else.     After that we
         just generally tried to keep the pavements clear and just
         keep people moving along.

         What time did you have the impression that the crowd
         began to become denser or heavier? - A. Initially when we
         were getting people off the buses and asking them to go
         straight to the ground, some people were crossing the
         road as if they were going to go to the ground and then
         wandering off.   It was a nice sunny   morning. People
         were sat about, sat on the   wall, and I thought it was
         pretty slow until when the train arrived and the crowds




H
                                            D.' M. SCHOLEY


came from the train.   It was still all right then
because I was talking to officers escorting the train
fans in so that means there was no great problem
otherwise I wouldn't have had time to talk to them.   It
was after that that the crowd started to increase
rapidly.

We think we have a photograph of you.   Just look at 314
and if it isn't you... - A. Yes, that's me, sir.

Can we put 314 up?   Is that you? - A. That's me.

The time on that one is 14.27. - A. At that time I had
got time to stand and talk to colleagues who escorted the
fans.

So at that time? - A. There was no great problem.

Let's pick it up at that point.  What happened then as
far as you are concerned? - A. The fans from the train
they were quite orderly, they were in good spirits, they
went to the turnstiles, and from that point onwards they
seem to come from all over the place.   The traffic was
stopped.  I didn't know they had ordered it to stop at
that time, but traffic couldn't have got through anyway
because of the volume of fans coming along Leppings Lane
and also down from the Middlewood Road/Catch Bar Lane
area, very, very dense.   There was sporadic trouble,
little bits of trouble that officers went to sort out.
There was not a great deal you could do about it because
by this time the crowds were building up outside the
turnstiles and if you arrest someone you had got nowhere
to take them.   If you tried taking a prisoner through
the crowd you were going to lose the prisoner so it was a
bit futile.

Officers were trying to keep the roads clear.   Mounted
officers were trying to keep the crowds organised, along
with all the other Serials.

At this time this is obviously the Leppings Lane end of
the concourse area.   We know that because that has
already been explained to us on a previous occasion.
Were you able to see the build up at the turnstiles
yourself? - A. Yes.

What impression did it make on you?   What did you feel
was happening from where you were?   I am not interested
in what you were told afterwards, what you learned.  At
the time what impression did you get? - A. Obviously the
overspill from the turnstiles was now coming out on to
the roadway, well out of the reception area.   The crowds
were that dense.   There was a lot of confusion as well
as to how to get in, where they wanted to be, plus they
                                                           34


                                                 D. M. SCHOLEY


     couldn't get to where they wanted to be.   A lot of
     confusion.

Q. What did you do then? - A. Inspector Sykes came up to me
   and said that I should go and join Sergeant Proctor.   I
   could see Sergeant Proctor's helmet at the perimeter
   fence.

0. So you went up? - A. I made my way through the crowd with
   some difficulty.

Q. Did you manage to get through or did you have
   difficulties? - A. Difficulty getting through but I
   forced my way through and joined Sergeant Proctor on the
   perimeter fence.

Q. Can you remember which gate you went to as far as you
   remember?   Do you know there are three sets? - A. Yes,
   it was the centre one I believe.

Q. It was the centre one? - A. Yes.

Q.   What did you do then? - A. With Sergeant Proctor and the
     help of the mounted officers who reached over from their
     horses we shut the gates, we closed the gates, because
     there they were that packed on the turnstiles, to try and
     relieve the pressure on them from the back.

Q. Did you manage to shut that gate? - A. We managed to shut
   the gates, yes, sir.

Q. I think one of the gates had a bolt located in the
   concrete, is that right? - A. I set that bolt.

Q. You set that.   The other half of the gate didn't have a
   bolt, did it? - A. No, it had a hasp fastening, I
   believe.

Q. Did you get that over or not? - A. I believe so.

Q. You were on the inside or the outside of the gate once it
   was... - A. On the inside.

Q. This was obviously after this picture? -A. Yes, sir.

Q. You can't remember how much after, can you? - A. Ten
   minutes after, perhaps, but I can t really say.

Q.   Tell me whether you recollect, and if you can't recollect
     it I don't want you to say, was a gap formed between the
     perimeter gate and the crowd at the turnstiles? - A.
     There certainly was, sir.
                                                          35


                                                 D.' M. SCHOLEY


Q. You are certain about that? - A. There definitely was
   because I was amazed that they were packed in like a
   rugby scrum trying to get into the turnstiles.    There
   was plenty of room at the back.   There was no pressure
   from the rest of the crowd on them and yet they were
   trying to fight their way in, they were climbing up on
   the roof of the turnstiles.    There were mounted officers
   trying to push them back.   There was an Inspector trying
   to persuade them to move back and they weren't taking any
   notice.   There was no pressure at all.    They had no
   need to crush up to the turnstiles at all.

Q. These are, of course, the people close by you? - A. These
   are the ones already in when we closed the gates, sir.

Q.   People who were climbing over the turnstiles were right
     in the front, weren't they? - A. Yes.

Q. You couldn't actually see what their position was from
   where you were? - A. From where we were we could see the
   crowds in the area we are at behind us. We could see the
   crowd crushing up and we could see the people climbing
   on to the roof of those turnstiles.

Q. The Inspector, was it Inspector Purdy who you... - A. I
   don't know the Inspector's name.

Q.   Was he standing on a railing? - A. He was raised up.   He
     was above the crowd, shouting for all he was worth and
     gesticulating for the crowd to move back from the
     turnstiles.

0. You can see a person shouting, you can see his mouth
   move, but did you hear him? - A. I believe I could hear
   him.   I seem to recall hearing him.

Q. Do you recall hearing any loudspeaker announcement? - A.
   No, unfortunately I don't.

Q. You didn't see the Land Rover either? - A. No. sir,
   because of the crowds in front of me I couldn t see very
   much at all.

Q. Now I want to revert to the other crowd, the ones outside
   the gate now.  When you first shut that there obviously
   was a crowd there because you told me you had to force
   your way through? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. How dense was it when you first managed to shut the gate?
   - A. The thing is, once you have shut that gate it
   doesn't take more than a few seconds for the crowd to
   build up on to the gate.   The people who would otherwise
   have walked through to the turnstiles, suddenly they
                                             D." M. SCHOLEY


couldn't because the gates were closed, so there was a
lot of pressure almost immediately on that gate.

We have heard from one or two other people who were also
on gates who said that they opened them to let ladies
through or children.   Did you have occasion to do that
as far as you remember? - A. I seem to recall opening the
gate once because we had got a young boy on the inside
and his father was on the outside, to let him through,
but I don't think I opened it on any other occasion.
That was only possible because we had got two mounted
officers in front of the gates keeping the pressure off.

That is what I am trying to find out.    Was the pressure
on those perimeter gates continuous or was it not? - A.
The horseman in front of the gates, obviously every time
the horse moved the crowd moved as well.    They tend to
try to keep out of the way of the horses which
momentarily would relieve pressure on the gate.    As soon
as the horse moved to another position the pressure was
back on.

What you are saying is that there were momentary periods
when the pressure was less? - A. Yes, but as time went on
pressure built up.   It was early on that I let this chap
through to join his son.

What happened to the gate in the end? - A. In the end
myself and Sergeant Proctor were leaning against the gate
and it suddenly just sprung open. We were both knocked
out of the way.    Well, certainly I was and Sergeant
Proctor disappeared.    The crowd surged through.   They
were coming through in such a rush, I think they were as
surprised as we were because one or two of them fell
down, some had lost their shoes and we were were picking
them up before they were trampled.    Obviously the people
at the back couldn't see there were people on the floor.
We were pulling them out before they got trampled by
other people trying to get in.

You have explained quite graphically how this gate
opened.   Did the it just burst open because there was
such pressure on it? - A. Yes, sir.

Were there people trying to rattle it or trying to open
it as well, as far as you remember? - A. No, there was no
way anybody could have rattled it because of the pressure
on it, sir.

So they were at that point squashed up against it? - A.
Yes, sir.

For whatever reason? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                            37


                                                   D.‘ M. SCHOLEY


Q.   At some point it just burst open? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   It was like a cork out   of a bottle? - A. That is correct,
     sir.

0. You then noticed that the bolt had bent? - A. After the
   crowd had got through...    The gate had been opened and
   the crowd vanished like somebody letting a plug out and
   the water running through.   I went back with Sergeant
   Proctor and pointed it out to Sergeant Proctor, because I
   wanted to know myself what had gone off, and then I could
   see that the actual bolt fastener was bent, quarter inch
   steel was bent and there was a mark in the tarmac where
   it had bent and dragged itself out as it had been pushed
   along.

Q.   I think we have got an acetate of that now.   Can we put
     it up and we will show it to you and see whether that is
     the one you are talking about. - A. That is the same sort
     of bolt, sir.    I couldn't say it was definitely the one
     but that is identical to the bolt.    That is the same
     sort of bolt I fastened down.




                     Q. From that photo
                                            D. M. SCHOLEY




From that photo you cannot recognise whether that is
the bolt or not? - A. No, sir.

     MR. JONES:    That is C234, sir. I don't know   what
the original reference number is.

     THE CORONER:    Have you got a reference on it, Mr.
Payne?

     MR. PAYNE:     Sir, it is MWL/E11.

     THE CORONER:    I know that you eventually went
into the ground and you were helping with the rescue.
Just tell me this, did you assist from the front or
from the rear of   the pens? - A. When we got there, sir,
I opened the gate to the adjacent pen and I went into
that pen.

Into Pen 2? - A. Yes, into the pen where the fencing
separates the two pens and got people to pass bodies
over to me and carried them to the gate.

You didn't have a radio,   I don't suppose? - A. No, sir.

So you must have got a message from somebody to come
into the ground? - A. Yes, sir.

By the time you got in was the match still in progress?
- A. I can't recall, sir.

You can't recall, and I said you went into Pen 2 but of
course you might not, you might have gone into Pen 5 or
6.  Can you remember which pen you actually went in? -
A. It was the one on the left hand side as you are
looking at the Leppings Lane Stand, left hand side of
the one where the crushing took place.

I don't think we need to explore that aspect with you
because I am interested in the outside as far as you
are concerned. - A. Yes, sir.

             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

From where you were by the perimeter gates could you
see that the crowd by the turnstiles was seriously
crushed? - A. Yes, sir.

Could anyone else at the back of the crowd near you,
were they in a position to see the same thing? - A.
From inside the turnstile, inside the perimeter fence
where I was?

Where you were, yes. - A. I only recall myself and
Sergeant Proctor being there.  I understand there were
                                                         39

                                             D. M. SCHOLEY




   other Officers but there were such numbers in there I
   could not see other Officers.

Q. Could anyone else in the crowd have the same view that
   you had? - A. Yes, they could see clearly what was
   happening in front of them.

Q. Right, now Sergeant Proctor has told the Jury that he
   was appealing to people at the back of the crowd to
   ease back into the space which had been created when
   you shut the gates? - A. That is correct, sir, plus we
   were appealing to the crowd that was pressing against
   the fencing to move back as well.

Q. Did they respond? - A. No, sir.  The ones that were
   crushed against the fence didn't have much option
   actually.

Q. Yes, but I was asking particularly about the people at
   the back of the crowd inside? - A. No, sir, they did
   not respond at all.

Q. What was the behaviour of the crowd in your vicinity at
   that time? - A. They were very abusive; there were
   items being thrown at the Police Officers, the mounted
   Officers; plus the mounted Officers were covered in
   spittle where they had been spat upon.  Most of the
   abuse, I think, from the crowd was simply because they
   were getting crushed and they were in a bad situation
   themselves.  They wanted us to open those gates to
   alleviate the pressure on them, and it was just
   frustration, I think, that brought it on.

Q. Thank you.

                Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Q. Officer, you have been very fair:   the people
   immediately outside the perimeter gates which you had
   closed, they themselves were being crushed, they had no
   option but to stay where they were.   They were just
   stuck there, weren't they? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. The problem was the fact that more and more people were
   joining at the back of them? - A. That was obvious,
   sir.

Q. When earlier on you saw the build up and you turned
   round, and you saw the overspill as you described it,
   that is an overspill which extends - if I can use
   Detective Sergeant Griffiths again with his stick - if
   we start with A-G turnstiles and move it backwards, the
   crowd would go back there through the perimeter gates,
   out of the perimeter gates, overspill over the
                                                            40
                                                 D. M. SCHOLEY




     concourse area and into the roadway? - A. Yes, into the
     roadway, sir.

Q. When you looked that area was absolutely jam packed
   from the turnstile area, stretching back to where you
   have described? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And it was at that stage that you did your honest best,
   I commend you for it, to try and bring some order at
   that stage? - A. When I saw that, sir, I was sent down
   to join Sergeant Proctor.

Q. At that stage, when you were sent down, we had already
   reached the position when it was chaos? - A. It wasn't
   as densely packed - there was still some room in the
   area.

0. An overspill suggests that they can't get through as
   far as they want? - A. They are milling about because
   they can't get to where they want to go plus, as I say,
   some of them were confused about where they needed to
   go.

Q. Of course, but when you looked there was an overspill?
   - A. Yes, sir.

                Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Q. Officer, did Inspector Purdy go to the gap that had
   been created at the back of the turnstiles, to ask the
   people at the back to move back?  Did he move himself?
   - A. Inspector Purdy was, as I recall, if it was
   Inspector Purdy that I have described to you, this
   Inspector was above the crowd, hanging above - he was
   climbed on a rail or something - and was shouting down
   at the crowd for them to move back, because there was
   plenty of room for them to move back.

Q. Yes, but he did not actually get down from that raised
   position and go to the gap at the back, and then ask
   the ones who were very close to him - they would have
   been close to them had he moved there - he could speak
   to them easier, couldn't he?

          THE CORONER:   I think you can ask this Officer
     whether he moved to the back:

Q. Did you see the Inspector move to the gap which was
   created? - A. In only recall seeing the Inspector above
   the crowd, shouting for them to move back because
   people were getting crushed at the front.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Was he mainly speaking to those
     close to him, because there would be a lot of noise,
                                            D. M. SCHOLEY




wouldn't there, near him? - A. Yes, but there wasn't
just Inspector Purdy, there were also mounted Officers
also trying to get the crowd to move back.  There was
nothing to stop them from moving back.  There was
plenty of space behind them.

And they would hear him from where he was? - A. They
would certainly have heard or understood from his
actions what he wanted them to do, plus there were
other Officers, mounted Officers, also trying to get
them to move back.  They just didn't take any notice.

You didn't see any other Officers in that gap at the
back? - A. I don't recall having seen other Officers
but we were pre-occupied at the time.

Do you agree that when people are being crushed they
behave in a completely different way to what they would
do normally.

     THE CORONER:     What is it you are trying to get
at, Mrs. McBrien?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   You said that they were very
abusive, the fans but was it because of what ....

     MR. KING:   To be fair to Mrs. McBrien, she may
not have heard the answer.  The Officer in fact has
been very fair already and indicated his view that it
was the frustration of being crushed and the situation
they were in which probably explains their abuse.

     THE CORONER:   That is right.  That is why I was
trying to find out what Mrs. McBrien was driving at.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, thank you.  I was writing my
notes.  I am awfully sorry, I didn't hear that earlier.

     THE CORONER:   He did give quite a good
explanation about that, or I thought it was a good
explanation anyway.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   It has been given, all right.
Thank you very much, Officer.

      THE CORONER:  Thank you very much.  I don't think
we need to recall Sergeant Proctor, do we, about this
bolt?

     MR. PAYNE:     No.
                                                            42

                                                 A. J. TAYLOR




             ALISTAIR JOHN TAYLOR Called (Sworn)

                        By THE CORONER

Q. Alistair John Taylor,   is that right? - A. That is
   right.

Q. P.C. 607? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. You were deputed to work outside the turnstiles on 15th
   April, 1989? - A. That is correct, at Leppings Lane,
   yes.

Q. In fact, I think you took up a position outside
   turnstile A, is that right? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. When you first took up your position everything was
   fine? - A. Excellent, yes.

Q. About 12 o'clock wasn't it or thereabouts that you
   started? - A. I believe it was before that when the
   turnstiles opened.

0. Initially you were searching people? - A. Yes, we were
   searching just about everybody that was going in.

Q. That was because there weren't very many and you could
   do it, is that right? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. Did you yourself find anything of note in your
   searches? - A. No, not of note as such.  There were a
   lot of people coming up to us with cans of coke and
   things like that, and obviously we instructed them they
   couldn't go into the ground with them.

Q. Soft drinks, in fact? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You made them down them, is that right? - A. Yes, sir,
   if they wanted to or leave them outside.

Q.   Did you notice any of your colleagues having occasion
     to arrest anybody? - A. No, I didn't personally, I was
     just concentrating mainly on the people coming up to
     me.

Q. Okay.    Have you ever done a match before? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q.   Did you do the 1988 match? - A. No, I didn't,   sir.

Q.   I meant the 1988 semi-final. - A. Yes.
                                           A. J. TAYLOR




How many years experience have you got of big matches?
- A. What do you mean when you say big matches? That
was my first semi-final, sir.

So relatively, compared to some of your colleagues,
because of course you are younger, limited experience,
that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, sir.

Did you at some point after 2 have to leave your
position for some reason or another? - A. Yes.
Obviously, like other Officers, I am not aware of the
times but I believe it was about quarter-past-2.

Why did you have to go? What happened? - A. A
supporter came up to me and told me that he had had his
ticket stolen out of his hand as he was queueing up to
come into the turnstiles.  Obviously an excuse could
have been made, it could have just been an excuse.   We
were instructed that nobody got into the ground without
a ticket so I took him to the gymnasium area for the
CID to deal with that.

So you took him in, in effect? - A. Yes, sir.

And the reception area for that purpose was at the
gymnasium? - A. That is right, sir.

That is quite a long way from the turnstile area? - A.
It is, yes.

Once you got there with this man did you then leave him
with the other Officers and return or what did you do?
- A. Yes, I left him there straightaway and returned
straightaway.  I was obviously aware that I had left my
partner at the turnstiles.

You then got back to the turnstiles and how did you get
out? - A. Through Gate C.

Were you able to re-take your position outside
turnstile A at that time? - A. No.  Just before I came
outside I went to Gate B and the steward said, "There
is no way you'll get back out there", and I looked
through the little glass window in the door, in the
concertina door, and saw a mass of people.  Obviously
concerned at that point I went to Gate C and was able
to get out there, but there was no way I could get back
to my turnstile.




                 Q. Gate B, of course
>1

                                                                      44




                                                       A. J. TAYLOR


         Q. Gate B, of course, would be the ideal gate because
            that would have brought you out immediately where you
            wanted to be? - A. Yes, that is right, sir. That is
     B      the one I went in by.

         Q. Are you saying things had changed in the time you had
            been gone? - A. Yes, unbelievable, sir.

         Q.   You came out of Gate C and what did you do, what did
              you see, what did you notice? - A. At that point my
              intention was to get back to my turnstile and
              particularly back to my colleague who was obviously
              in the corner by himself now. There was a mass of
              people crushing at the front of the turnstiles.
              Obviously there was no way at all I could get back
              there.  People were looking worried.  I was concerned
              that at the front of the turnstiles the people were
              being crushed.

         Q. What did you then do? - A. At this point I was at the
            bar that runs from the perimeter gate from the
     D      turnstiles.

         Q. On what I call the wrong side? - A. Yes, sir.

         Q. The River Don side? - A. Yes, the River Don side. A
            senior Officer told me to go to the perimeter gates
            and shut the gate nearest to the river.

         Q. Do you recollect which senior Officer that was? - A.
            No, I do not know who it was, sir.

         Q. You know it was somebody who was senior? - A. I know
            it was somebody who was senior, yes.

         Q. You were deputed to close the gate nearest to the
            river? - A. That is correct, sir.

         Q.   Did you manage to get up to that gate? - A. Yes, at
              that point it was quite easy because the bit I was
              walking on didn't actually lead to the turnstiles
              itself.

         Q. That bit was not particularly crowded? - A. No, it
            wasn't particularly busy at all.

         Q.   When you had got to the gate was it in fact open   at
              that time? - A. The gate was open, yes.

         Q.    Were people coming through it? - A. At that time it
              was obviously quite busy but not particularly busy.




     H
                                         A. J. TAYLOR


It was mainly people who knew where they were going
like employees of Sheffield Wednesday and they were
going through the gate to their particular part.

Of course, it was not in line with the turnstile
area? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

Did you shut it or not? - A. Yes, I shut that gate.

With great effort or with relative ease? It sounds
as though it was fairly easy? - A. At that point it
wasn't too bad to shut.  It wasn't a great struggle.

Having shut it, where did you place yourself? - A. I
was on the outside of the gates, sir, on the Leppings
Lane side rather than the turnstile side and I held
the gate shut.

How did you do it? Were you standing in front of the
gate with your hands behind, or were you with your
back to the crowd, facing them? - A. I believe, if I
remember correctly, it is a double gate and one of
the gates on the right hand side of me as I was
facing Leppings Lane was shut with the bolt on the
door.  I held on to that gate with one hand and
positioned my body so that it was half and half in
the gates and held the other one with my left hand.
As the crowd came up to me I could speak to them
directly.

Just describe to me what happened? I do not suppose
you know what time this was? - A. I had come back.  I
believe it was about half past two at this time but I
can't be exact.

Just describe to me what happened after that? - A.
Just a general build-up of people on to the gate.
The build-up in the centre so far as I was concerned
had stayed the same. There was a mass of people
there and no-one else could get into that part of it.
So as I shut the gate the build-up started to build
up outside the perimeter gates and on to me.  People
became irate that I had shut the gate. They were
abusive towards me, shouting, and a number of people
smelt quite heavily of alcohol.

I am sorry? - A. A number of people smelt quite
heavily of alcohol.  I obviously tried to explain to
them that there was nowhere for them to go if the
gate was open and we were trying to create a
situation where the people at the turnstiles weren't
                                                              46




                                               A. J. TAYLOR


      going to get crushed any further.  Hopefully they
      could make their way through the turnstiles and then
      easing the pressure on everybody in that bit.   Then
B     we could open the perimeter gates and let a few
      through at a time to prevent crushing.

    Q. Whilst you were on this gate did you notice there
       were people who had tickets but were not quite sure
       where they should go? - A. Yes, that happened all the
       day long while I was at the turnstiles. People were
       coming up with their own tickets.

    Q. With the right or the wrong tickets? - A. The wrong
       tickets.  Liverpool fans, who were obvious Liverpool
       fans with Liverpool gear on, with Nottingham Forest
       tickets and other people had tickets and just did not
       know where they were going.

    Q. What happened to them? - A. In the early stages when
       I was at the turnstile I obviously turned away and
       told them where to go with their tickets.  Later on I
D      explained where they should be going but they just
       had great difficulty getting out of the crowd once
       they were in it.  I did explain to them and I think
       they did make their way out, most of them.

    Q. I just want to be quite sure that you have given a
       correct description of the crowd outside when you
       shut the gate because, as I say, my impression from
       what you have told me today is that it was a
       relatively easy thing to do.  I am looking at an
       earlier statement of yours and the impression is that
       you had a bit of a struggle shutting it? - A. No.

    Q. Which is true? - A. It was relatively easy. From
       later on when it was obviously very difficult there
       was a struggle.  There were people coming through
       that gate.  It wasn't a case of just one or two but
       there were large numbers coming through but at that
       point it was a relatively easy task to get the gate
       shut.

    Q. Were you able to keep the gate closed? - A. I was for
       a time, yes.

    Q. Can you estimate for how long? - A. No, I wouldn't
       like to say.  I opened it on one occasion to let a
       pregnant woman and father and son through.

    Q. What happened after that? - A. As time went by there
       was a surge.  I let go of the gate that would open




H
                                                         47




                                           A. J. TAYLOR


  with my left arm and so as the surge came through I
  was pushed behind the gate that was shut obviously
  for my own safety. That eased off and I managed to
  get the gate shut again and then there was a great
  surge and there was no way I could hold the gate. As
  that surge went through everybody just seemed to
  clear and so there was no need to shut the gate
  again. What you are saying is that there was one
  surge which opened the gate? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You managed to shield behind half of it, so to speak?
   - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you manage to shut it again? - A. Yes, I did
   manage to shut it again.

Q. Then there was another surge and did both gates open
   on that occasion again? - A. Just the one, sir.

Q. After that there was nobody there, of course? - A.
   No, it cleared up incredibly quickly.

Q. You could not tell why these surges occurred or could
   you at the time? - A. No, I cannot say for certain
   why the surges occurred.

Q. We can have a pretty good guess but you did not see
   it at the time. You have used the word "surge".
   What do you mean by that? - A. The force, the
   pressure, it seemed to come in a wave from behind and
   the people at the front were just as shocked as me.
   It seemed to come from behind and just the weight of
   people coming at me and the gate just opened it.  It
   did feel as though it was the weight of people from
   behind.  It wasn't just one or two people at the
   front wanting to get through the gate.

Q. Your impression at the time was that this was not the
   people who were really close by you but that whatever
   happened was happening from further back? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. When people were coming through did anybody fall that
   you noticed? - A. In the surges?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes, a number of people fell or stumbled.
   I remember one gentleman fell to the ground
   completely face down. At that point the immediate
   people behind him tried to go round him and I tried
   to make a little deviation by standing in front of
   them but he just didn't seem aware of the amount of
                                                            48




                                                A. J. TAYLOR


     people coming through. He stayed down picking up his
     loose change and things like that. Obviously we were
     shouting to them to calm down and stop running and
     for him to get up and get into the ground if that is
     what he wanted to do.

Q.   Did you at some point then turn round and see one of
     the exit gates opened? - A. Yes, after the second
     surge and everyone had cleared from outside the
     perimeter gates I turned round and everybody had gone
     and Gate C was open at that point.

Q.   You could see it   open? - A. Yes, I could seeit   open.

Q.   Can you remember if it was wide open or just
     partially open? - A. I do not think it was fully
     open.  I think it was quite wide open.

Q. I had better just check about the Land Rover.   Did
   you see the Land Rover? - A. No, I didn't see it.

Q.   Did you hear any messages emanating over the
     loudspeaker systems? - A. Not from the Land Rover.
     When everyone had cleared I heard a tannoy message to
     the Liverpool fans to stop pushing which we thought
     was a bit late because everybody had gone outside.
     Obviously it was referring to people inside.

Q. You do not know that? - A. No, but I believe that to
   be the case.

Q. The first loudspeaker message that you heard was one
   that referred to people pushing and it was after the
   crowd had gone? - A. It was after the crowd had gone,
   but then there was nobody there. There was no noise
   at all then.

Q. That you are sure came over the ground speakers? - A.
   Yes, sir. As certain as I can be, sir.

Q. You did not have a radio and I think we have already
   established that? - A. I didn't have a radio, sir.

Q. Were you notified that you were required in the
   ground as well? - A. Yes, when everyone had cleared
   from outside the ground there was a number of
   Policemen around that area then who obviously came to
   each other and it came over the radio then to those
   Officers who had radios, a request for all Officers
   to get on to the pitch.
                                                          49




                                               A. J. TAYLOR


Q. Did you join them? - A. I certainly did, sir.

Q. Which way did you enter? - A. Through the South
   Stand.

Q. Just tell me this; can you remember when you first
   got on to the pitch whether you could still see any
   players on the pitch? - A. I couldn't see any players
   when I got on to the pitch, sir.

Q. Are you saying that you cannot remember or are you
   saying that you did not see any? Do you see the
   difference? - A. Yes.  It is obviously a long time
   ago and I will say I cannot remember, sir, if I saw
   any players.

Q. You did not actually approach the fencing in fact but
   you stayed on the field and dealt with people on the
   field so far as you were able? - A. Yes. When I got
   there, sir, there were a large number of Policemen
   around the fencing. Obviously if you get too many
   there you are going to be stood around and so I
   stayed on the pitch with people who were injured.

                  Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE:

Q. When the great surge came against the gate that you
   were holding, was there any way that you could hold
   it shut against the pressure of the crowd? - A. No
   way at all, sir.

Q. What would have been needed to hold that crowd out? -
   A. At that point at the centre gates I saw two horses
   moved out of the way by the force of the surge and it
   would have needed hundreds of men I would have
   thought.  It was a great surge.

Q.       THE CORONER:   I think you have   no experience of
     large crowd control, that is right,   is it not? - A. I
     have worked at football matches and   I have been
     involved in football crowds and pop   crowds, sir.

Q.        MR. PAYNE:  I am not asking you for your
     experience but just actually what it was like
     physically to try and hold the gates shut.

     THE CORONER:   That is fair enough.  I accept that
part of the question is fair but I do not want him to say
how it would have been and what should have been done
because he is too young.
                                                           50




                                                A. J. TAYLOR


Q.        MR. PAYNE:  It is just a matter of physically by
     your strength, or somebody's strength, how the gate
     could have been kept shut. That is all I am asking
     you about? - A. As I said, I was aware of the two
     horses that were moved out of the way by the force of
     the surge.

                  Cross-Examined bv MR. KING:

Q. Mr. Taylor, when you came out of Gate C, having been
   inside, and you saw the mass of people by the
   turnstiles, this is before you went to close the
   perimeter gate because you then got the instruction
   to go and do so? - A. That is right.

Q. I just want to have, if I may, your evidence of what
   it was like before you went to close the perimeter
   gates.  If Detective Sergeant Griffiths could take
   his stick again and point to Gate C, you came out of
   Gate C and would walk along the barrier, would you
   not? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Would you be able to see the crowd, therefore,
   extending back from Turnstiles A to G to the
   perimeter gates? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Was that just a great mass of people? - A. It was.

Q. Then, of course, an effort was made to close the
   perimeter gates? - A. That is when I was directed.  I
   don't know if others were there or not at that point.




                                  /Q. Were you able to.
                             A. J. TAYLOR


Were you able to see, as you were walking past that
barrier, whether an effort had yet been made to close
the middle gates? - A. No, I wasn't.  I saw, I think
it was two horses in the crowd and they had obviously
been put there to try and sort it.

But not the gates themselves at that stage? - A. I
can't say if it was.  I didn't see anything.

At that stage then there was just a mass of people
stretching from the perimeter gates to the turnstile
area? - A. Yes.

And behind those people an even greater mass of people
extending backwards? - A. I presume so, sir.
Obviously when you get in a large crowd you can only
see a certain number of people around you.

But clearly the picture was that the purpose of trying
to close the perimeter gates was to put a line through
this great mass of people? - A. Yes, the purpose was
to try and ease the crush at the front of the
turnstiles.

Until that was done, people were just streaming into
the turnstile area? - A. Yes.

         Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN:

Constable, when you were at the turnstile area, did
you notice the bridge area? - A. Yes, I did.

Was there anything in particular that you noticed
about the bridge area? - A. There were groups of
youths congregating on the bridge area.

Did they stay in that area? - A. Occasionally one
youth would come up to us as searching officers at the
turnstiles, be searched, they would go through us and
then go from behind us back to the bridge, back to the
group of youths they were with.

How often did that occur? - A. It happened to me about
three times.  Speaking to other officers, obviously it
is their evidence, but it happened to them as well.

Could you see or observe what the point of all that
was? - A. Initially we didn't think anything of it.
Obviously people can change their minds before they go
into the ground and that is what we thought it was,
but when people were going back to the same groups it
was obvious that there was some motive, whatever that
may have been, I don't know what it was, but we just
                                                       52



                                  A. J. TAYLOR


     presumed they were seeing how well we were searching
     people.

Q.   Can you give us some timing on this, when it was
     occurring? - A. It tended to be at random really.
     There was quite a time limit between each youth coming
     up to us, but it wasn't every 10 minutes, or something
     like that.   It was at random. I believe there were
     probably a number of different groups.

Q.   How many people in total, are you able to help, were
     within these groups? - A. I am sorry, how many could I
     see in the groups?

Q.   How many in total? - A. I would say I remember one
     particular group. There were obviously a number of
     people milling about in that area, I would say groups
     of 12 to 20, I would say.

Q.   The numbers of these groups that you describe, are you
     able to say how many of them? - A. No.  As I say, I
     remember one particular group who came up to me, the
     youths from that group came up to me, but I believe
     there were probably a number of other groups.  As I
     say, it was just a general mass of people, a lot of
     different people milling about on Leppings Lane.

Q.   Did you happen to notice what happened to these people
     who had been standing on the bridge? Was there a time
     when they were no longer there? - A. I have no idea
     what happened to them, to be honest.   Obviously as
     time went on it got busier and we were involved in
     searching people and then I went away with the youth
     who claimed to have his ticket stolen.

Q.   When these young lads came over to you to be searched
     and then went back to their groups, did you notice
     whether they had tickets on them?  Did they proffer a
     ticket? - A. Yes, that was one thing we were doing
     before they went through, at the initial stages,
     asking people to show their tickets to us in order to
     make sure they had got the right tickets before they
     entered the actual turnstile.

Q.   Were they showing their tickets? - A. Those particular
     youths were showing tickets, yes.

                  Further by THE CORONER:

Q.   You can answer this question in relation to yourself.
     When you are allocated to police a football match, you
     are placed into a serial, aren't you? - A. Yes sir.
                                                      53



                                  A. J. TAYLOR


Q.   This is a question which the Jury have asked me to
     ask.  Is it always the same police officers who
     constitute the same serial, or is it entirely random
     and you could be in Serial 1 for one match and Serial
     30 the next time with totally different people? - A.
     No.  Generally speaking, different officers work
     different football matches.  Generally speaking, a
     serial is from one Division, so you will be working
     with officers you do know, but it is not necessarily
     that way.

Q.   So it does not follow that all the people who were in
     your serial would always be together with you? - A. No
     si r .

Q.   But it might well be that they would be from the same
     Division, so you might have met them in other
     circumstances or at lunch? - A. Yes, I know the people
     very well.  I work with them every day, but not
     necessarily at football matches.

          THE CORONER: Anything else you want to ask this
     young man?  (No response) Thank you very much indeed.

          We are going to look at the rest of the video in
     a few minutes, but I think we will rise.   I know it
     sounds as if we are having a lot of rises, but we need
     to because otherwise we will be going on for too long.
     Ladies and gentlemen, it is video time when we come
     back, so I say again to you, as I have said before,
     please do not feel that you must stay.   We have
     explained this all to the Jury before, and they know
     that if you do not stay, you are quite entitled to go
     and it means nothing other than that you have seen the
     video before.

          The only thing is you will want to know who we
     are going to call on Monday, and I do not know whether
     I have a list.  I think we are going to have a little
     bit of difficulty in sorting this out, but the present
     plan is that we are going to have somebody called Ian
     Marsh, Police Constable Best, Police Sergeant France
     and the next two I am a bit doubtful about, but it may
     be Brian Ridge and Robert Cobb.  I am sorry I cannot
     be more helpful with this, but we are having a little
     bit of difficulty with sorting it out at the moment.

          If you want to come back just for a moment or two
     after coffee, I will see whether we can be a little
     more precise.  It means that you have got to wait
     another 10 or 15 minutes, I realise that, but perhaps
     you will drink coffee and it will not be such a
     hardship.
                              A. J. TAYLOR


     Is there anything that you want to say to me
without the Jury being present, because we could do
this now to save you time?

     MR. PAYNE: I do not mind if the Jury are here.   I
would like to just mention the question of exhibits.
You did say earlier that the deadline for the
introduction of further photographs or exhibits would
be at the adjournment of the Court next Wednesday.

     THE CORONER: I think you misunderstood me, Mr.
Payne.  What I meant was the deadline - and even then
I put a caveat in - was for nominations for further
witnesses whom you wished me to consider, not
exhibits, because exhibits we might well want to
introduce as we go along.  So there is no deadline on
that because we do not know what we might need.  What
I was trying to do was get you to compile, if you have
any additional names, those names so that I can
consider them.  I think I did say - I intended to say
- that even if we have past the deadline, if something
crops up and there is a witness who is considered by
any of you as really vital, then I will look at that,
but I do not want to get dozens of them in January
time.

     MR. PAYNE:   Thank you very much.

     THE CORONER:  We will go and have coffee then and
we will be back in quarter-of-an-hour. I think that
seems to be quite a good time.  I do not think we can
do it in much less time really.

  (After a short adjournment the Jury were shown
              the compilation video)

  (The Inquests were adjourned until 10.30 a.m.
            Monday, 17th December 1990)
