                                                                                           M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and tim e raised   2
                                                                       " - \   /   OST                     Num ber



T it le                                              ^                               (S >u r t O o L g j
 include source and any document number i f relevant)             (3^09^.                \ V0 3
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                         Receiver




                                                                                                                         Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                     ssgjT
                                                                                                                     Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                         Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                        SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                     Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      (WEST DISTRICT)



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                   STADIUM DISASTER

              ON THE 15TH APRIL,           1989



              INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


                 JON PAUL GILHOOLEY




                          Before

DR. S.L.   POPPER,    LL.B, B.MED.Sci,         B M , B S , MRCGP

               (Her M a j est y’s C o r o n e r )




                             At

              The Medico-Legal Centre,
                   Watery Street,
                     Sheffield.

                             On

                   26th April,      1990




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L.- Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                    A




                    B


                                                   INDEX

                                                           Pa&5

                        OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER     1


                        DR. L. N. DENMARK Called

                           By The   Coroner                  3
                    D
                        P. GADSBY Called

                           By The   Coroner                  4


                        PET. IMSP. H. LAYTON Called
                    E
                           By The   Coroner                  6




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        26th Aaril,   1990


                            l.IQUiCSI Iit1TO THE DEATii OF JO.. PAUL GILflOOLEY


                              :hi FRASER:   Sir, you will now hear evidence
                        relating, to Jon Paul Gilhooley - Jon Paul, as ha i/as^
                        known to ais family.    His rau?a and1 dan are present, sir,
                        as is the social worker ! :/ho aas assisted them
                    B   throughout the previous year.      I act for the family in
                        a personal capacity but of course, sir, I aa here today
                        as a jnesibar of the Steering Couj.iittee.

                             THE CORONER:   Mr. and Mrs. Gilhooley, can I just
                        say before I start, I know that you refer to your lad
                        as Jon Paul, that is right, isn't it?
                    C
                             MR. R. GILHOOLEY:         Yes.

                             THE CORONER:   And I want to say this, because in
                        a moment or two you will hear that I am going to read
                        something which doesn't refer to him in quite that way.
                        Don't worry, we will correct that, because what I am
                        going to do, I am going to read what happened on 19th
                    D   April in this Court Room, when I dealt with the release
                        of Jon Paul's body, and I like to read it as it is and
                        then if there are any corrections that need to be made
                        I will make them as we go along, but I want you to know
                        that right from the word go.

                             I also want to outline for you the rest of the
                        procedure so that you can understand and follow it, and
                    E   know what to expect.  I am going to read this, then I
                        am going to tell you what the alcohol levels were, and
                        also correct any errors which there may be in this
                        original statement.  Then we are going to listen to Dr.
                        Denmark, who did the post mortem, and when that is
                        concluded we are going to turn to the West Midlands
                        Police Officer who is going to present a summary to me,
                        and then Inspector Layton presents the visual side of
                    F   that summary, and he refers to the plans.  That bit
                        tends to be a bit confusing because of the reference
                        numbers and so on, but just try and follow the words
                        and don't worry about the numbers, and he will, when he
                        has finished talking, come over here and on these big
                        plans, as far as there is something to demonstrate, he
                        will demonstrate it so that we can all see what he has
                        talked about.
                    G
                             Have I made that reasonably clear? This then is a
                        resumed Inquest which was opened on 19th April and on
                        that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin, my Acting Coroner's
                        Officer, said:

                             The body which is the subject of this Inquest has
                             been identified to PS 2358 Cox of the South
                H
                                               -   1   -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             Yorkshire Police as that of Jon Paul Gilhooley, by
                             John Gilhooley, his uncle.  He was ten years of
                             age, having been born on 25th October 1978 at
                             Merseyside.  He lived at             _
                             Liverpool.  He was a schoolboy.  He died at the
                             Northern General Hospital following an incident at
                             the Hillsborough Football Ground, on Saturday 15th
                             April 1989.  PS Cox caused the body to be removed
                             to the Medico-Legal Centre, and there he
                             identified it to Detective Constable Simon
                    B        Weigold, who subsequently identified the same body
                             to Dr. Denmark.  It is the family wish that the
                             body should be cremated."

                        and if I can just deal with the identification, that
                        bit is actually wrong.  Simon Weigold did not identify
                        Jon Paul's body to Dr. Denmark and he has given us a
                        supplementary statement to deal with that.
                    C
                             The other thing that is wrong which I have already
                        alluded to but which I am just going to deal with
                        formally, you recollect I sent you a form and I think
                        it was actually signed by Jon Paul's uncle on 26th
                        April, 1989, because that was our contact point, but
                        what he said was that the name is Jon Paul, J-o-n, that
                    D   is right, isn't, with Paul in the usual way, but they
                        are two words, aren't they, they are not joined, is
                        that right?

                             MR. R. GILHOOLEY:     No, two separate words.

                             THE CORONER:   Two separate words - Gilhooley, the
                        address was correct, and the age, date of birth, place
                    E   of birth and so on was all correct, and he also told us
                        that your name is Ronald Gilhooley, is that right?

                             HR. R. GILHOOLEY:     Yes.

                             THE CORONER:   And mum is Jacqueline Mary
                        Gilhooley, that is right, isn't it?
                    F        MR. R. GILHOOLEY:     Yes.

                             THE CORONER:   And you are a building worker, is
                        that right?

                             MR. R. GILHOOLEY:     Yes.

                             THE CORONER:   I am asking you because we need
                    G   this information in the future possibly.  The blood
                        alcohols were estimated on everybody and were done by
                        Dr. Forrest.  He gave the evidence for everybody on the
                        first day, and in respect of Jon Paul the result was
                        negative.


                H
                                             -   2 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  DR.   L.   N.   DENMARK


                                      DR. LLOYD NEIL DENMARK Called;

                                              By THE CORONER;

                        Q. Dr. Lloyd Neil, isn't it? - A. Lloyd Neil Denmark.

                        Q. You are one of our Leeds Pathologists, aren't you? - A.
                           Yes, Department of Forensic Medicine, University of
                           Leeds.  I am also a Home Office Pathologist.
                    B   Q. Thank you.  You have already heard me say that the
                           identification was not by Simon Weigold.  Can you just
                           tell me how you set your mind at rest that the report
                           which you are now going to present to me relates to
                           this lad, Jon Paul Gilhooley? - A. Yes, he had his name
                           and a number written in felt tip pen on the leg.   I was
                           given a document which had some details about him and I
                           matched those up, and we then also took a photograph to
                    C      make sure that ....

                        Q. Yes.  Just for the sake of the record the number, I
                           think, was number 83, is that   right? Can you have a
                           look at your copy just to make sure?   - A.   Yes, that is
                           correct.

                    D   Q. Yes.  The name that you had was spelt J-o-h-n, but you
                           I take it are now prepared to   accept that   his truename
                           was actually Jon, without the   "H"? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. And one other small point.  There is a typographical
                           error in this report as well - the date of death should
                           be 15th April, shouldn't it? - A. That is correct.

                    E   Q. Could you now then tell me the cause of death and the
                           basis on which you have arrived at it, please? - A. The
                           cause of death was traumatic asphyxia.  This was a well
                           nourished youth.  There was congestion of the upper
                           part of the body, petechial haemorrhages over the face
                           and under the eyes, and there were some scratches and
                           bruising on the body but nothing of great significance.
                           I found no evidence of significant natural disease
                    F      contributing to his death, and in the circumstances
                           .... There was also some evidence of emergency medical
                           treatment.

                        Q. Yes, I was going to ask you about that.  I think needle
                           puncture marks .... - A. Specifically, yes, needle
                           puncture marks here and here .
                    G   Q. And an intravenous catheter was actually still in situ?
                           - A. The catheter was actually in situ.

                        Q. And this was just a normal ten-year-old from a health
                           point of view? - A. Yes.

                        Q. Can you just help me on one point with regard to the
                           identification.  I just want to go back to this
                H
                                                 -   3 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                       DR. L. N. DENMARK
                                               P. GADSBY


business of names on the legs, and so on.  That was
done routinely for everybody wasn't it? - A. As far as
I know, yes.

And that is, in fact, not uncommon practice, isn't it,
because one wants to be certain one is looking at the
right person, doesn't one? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser?

     MR FRASER:   Jon Paul's parents have no questions,
but I am sure if Dr. Denmark would be kind enough to
extend the invitation, which he has previously
extended, to this couple they would warmly welcome the
opportunity to talk to him.

     THE CORONER:   Dr. Denmark, I take it you would be
happy to do so? - A. Certainly.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, Dr. Denmark, when we have
finished, if you want to talk to him will be very
pleased to give you time.

                PETER GADSBY Called;

                    By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   I am Peter Gadsby of the West
Midlands Police, sir.  The circumstances of this case
are that on the morning of Saturday, 19th April 1989


     THE CORONER:   15th. - A. I beg your pardon, 15th
of April, Jon Paul Gilhooley left Liverpool to travel
with his two uncles, Brian Gilhooley and John
Gilhooley, to Sheffield in order to watch the FA Cup
Semi Final football match which was to be played at the
Hillsborough Stadium that day.  He was known to be in
possession of a ticket for the Leppings Lane terraces
and travelled by a mini bus in a party which also
included a Mr. Rodney Jolly.

     Upon their arrival in Sheffield at about 1430
hours Mr. Jolly and Jon Paul Gilhooley walked to the
Stadium where they joined a large crowd outside the
Leppings Lane turnstiles.  They moved away because of
the pressure to the right of the turnstiles towards,
two blue gates which then opened.  Mr. Jolly knew that
this was at about 1450 hours.  They then entered the
ground through this gate, Gate C, and walked down the
tunnel and into enclosure 3.

     Mr. Jolly states that they arrived in enclosure 3
at about 1455 hours and it is therefore virtually
certain that he and Jon Paul entered the stadium at the
opening of Gate C at 1452 hours.
                                                                      P . GADSBY


                             According to Mr. Jolly the pressure in the crowd
                        in the enclosure increased and shortly after 1500 hours
                        there was a sudden surge from the rear which pushed him
                        and Jon Paul forwards, leaving them about three feet
                        away from the front perimeter fence.   Mr. Jolly was
                        holding onto Jon Paul, and he noted that the boy's eyes
                        were becoming glazed but he was at that stage unable to
                        do anything to assist him because he was also trapped
                        himself in the crowd.   At this point Mr. Jolly himself
                        lost consciousness.   He came to on the terrace before
                    B   being carried out onto the pitch but he did not see Jon
                        Paul again.

                             Shortly after 1505 hours, following the severe
                        crushing in the West Stand terracing, Police Inspector
                        Philip Woodward entered enclosure 3, where he saw a
                        number of casualties which included a boy whom he now
                        believes to be Jon Paul.  The Officer is unable to
                    C   recall whether or not he assisted to remove the boy
                        from the enclosure as he assisted a number of people.

                             At about 1510 hours Police Constable 1981 Butler
                        entered the tunnel and saw a boy lying on the ground
                        about half way along.  The Officer carried him out of
                        the tunnel whilst rendering mouth to mouth
                    D   resuscitation.  Police Constable Butler, who now knows
                        that boy to be Jon Paul, states that he placed him into
                        an ambulance where further resuscitation attempts were
                        made by Ambulance Officer Jane Moffatt and Police
                        Constable 2191 Mark Llewellyn.  This was during the
                        journey to the Northern General Hospital.

                             Police Constable Llewellyn saw further attempts to
                    E   revive Jon Paul made at the hospital but these were
                        unsuccessful.   The medical staff involved have not been
                        identified.   Subsequently, Dr. Janet Doore examined Jon
                        Paul and certified life extinct.

                             Mr. Neville Udall, who is the Senior Mortuary
                        Technician, later escorted several bodies back to the
                        Hillsborough Stadium, where they were placed in a
                    F   temporary mortuary in the gymnasium.  Police Sergeant
                        2358 Ian Cox there assumed responsibility for the body
                        of Jon Paul.

                             At 2240 hours Mr. John Gilhooley identified the
                        body of his nephew to Police Sergeant Cox at the
                        temporary mortuary.
                    G        Police Sergeant Cox later escorted the body of Jon
                        Paul to the Medico-Legal Centre and confirmed the
                        identification to Detective Constable Weigold.

                             On Sunday 16th April 1989, Dr. Lloyd Denmark
                        carried out an autopsy and submitted a report giving
                        the cause of death.
                H
                                             -   5 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                            P. GADSBY
                                                                            M. LAYTON


                                There is visual evidence to follow.

                        Q. Just bear with me for one moment.  I think if you just
                           turn to page 11 for a moment? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. That is where Mr. Jolly talks about noticing that poor
                           Jon Paul's eyes were glazing over and that he was
                           losing consciousness himself at that point? - A. He
                           was.
                    B
                        Q. But he says a rather interesting thing.     He says:

                                "I lost consciousness but about that time I have a
                                vague recollection of a Policeman trying to drag
                                Jon out."

                           but we have never been able to find that person? - A.
                           We never have traced that person, no.

                        Q. And the other point I wanted to raise was just a very
                           trivial point.   In paragraph 5 it says, "Shortly after
                           1505 hours ...".   I c a n ’t actually find the time in the
                           statement but he does say, "Shortly after kick-off
                           ...", so I take it it is a construction? - A. That is
                    D      right, sir, yes.

                                THE CORONER:     Mr. Fraser?

                                MR FRASER:     Jon Paul's family have no questions,
                           sir, thank you.

                                THE CORONER:   Any questions?    (Ho response)
                    E      Thank you very much indeed.

                                     DET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                                               By THE CORONER:

                                 THE WITNESS:    Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
                           Inspector, West Midlands Police.    Sir, an examination
                           of video film and photographic evidence has been made
                           and Jon Paul has been identified being carried in the
                           area of the Leppings Lane turnstiles by PC Butler.    He
                           confirms this identification, sir, which is referenced
                           RJH2.   Sir, the running time of that tape and that, as
                           it were, is the time that it was switched on to the
                           time of that particular incident, is 2 hours, 26
                           minutes, 10 seconds approximately.    We believe that the
                    G      tape was switched on at approximately 1245 p.m., but I
                           must stress it is approximate.    Converting that
                           strictly would make it somewhere in the region of 11-
                           minutes-past-3.    PC Butler says that he entered the
                           ground at 10-past I believe, from his statement, so
                           there probably is a slight degree of time difference,
                           but it is certainly sometime after 10-past-3.
                H
                                                  -   6   -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                           M. LAYTON


                        Q. But not as much as one might think, in fact? - A. It
                           may be very relatively short - minutes I would think,
                           sir, yes.

                        Q. Yes. - A. Sir, Mr. Rodney Jolly has identified himself
                           on a photograph - on a number of photographs, in fact -
                           but specifically referring to PR1/21A, and he states
                           that Jon Paul at this time - the photograph is timed at
                           1504 - and he states at this time Jon Paul would have
                           been standing directly in front of him in enclosure
                    B      number 3, although you can't actually see him on the
                           photograph, which I am not surprised.

                        Q. He would be short. - A. Because he is such a small lad.
                           Can I just say on a personal note, sir, I actually met
                           Mr. Jolly and I can say from those photographs that
                           certainly Mr. Jolly's account of being unable to
                           actually do anything at the time does fit in exactly
                    C      with the photographs, the surroundings that he was in.

                        Q. Yes. - A. Sir, Police Inspector Woodward has signed a
                           plan of the terraces indicating the approximate
                           location at which he saw Jon Paul and that plan, sir,
                           is referenced PAW1.

                    D           Sir, can I refer you to a plan which has been
                           given the reference number, perhaps if I can deal with
                           the terrace plan first?

                        Q. Yes, I agree - A. PAW1 is Inspector Woodward's plan.

                        Q. Yes, C122. - A. And sir, a plan which has been given
                           the reference number MWJL151.
                    E
                        Q. Yes, C123.

                              (The witness referred to the large scale plan)

                           - A. Sir, if we can deal with the plan PAW1, that is
                           Inspector Woodward's plan?
                    F   Q. Yes. - A. He has indicated a location for Jon Paul in
                           enclosure number 3 and it is in approximately this
                           location here.  I can tell you from the photographs
                           which Mr. Jolly picked himself out on that he was
                           indicating somewhere in this location h e r e , so very,
                           very close by.

                        Q. Yes. If I can just put the second - you were showing
                    G      Mr. Jolly a little bit nearer the front perimeter
                           fence? - A. Yes, it is roughly in that position there.

                        Q. That is right, almost opposite the gate, half way
                           between the barrier that collapsed and the gate of
                           enclosure 3? - A. Quite so, sir, that is right.   Sir,
                           in relation to the plan which has been given the
                           reference number MWJL151, this refers to the concourse
                H
                                                 -   7 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                               M. LAYTON


area, which   is this area here. T h a t, sir, is the
tunnel that   has been referred to, which was used to
take people   back from the terraces, and the point at
which he is   shown on video film is at that point there.

Yes.  So this was one of the lads, or people, who were
taken out backwards, so to speak? - A. That is right,
sir, yes.

     THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser?

     MR FRASER:     No questions, sir.

     THE CORONER:    Mr. and Mrs. Gilhooley, I am very,
very sorry that you have lost your young lad, little
boy - very, very tragic circumstances for you.    I also
feel I must say I feel very sorry for Mr. Jolly because
it does not seem as if there was anything he could have
done, because in fact he lost consciousness, what more
can you do, but it must still be a pretty hard
situation for him to live with.   But of course the
greater loss is yours because it was your son as
opposed to his.   I am grateful to you for coming.
Thank you very much for listening and paying attention
to what was said.   I am sorry that we have to deal with
some of the technicalities and so on.   It is obviously
very sad whenever we have to deal with a young child
like this.  Thank you.

     We are now going to adjourn for lunch and we will
resume at 2 or thereabouts.  Is that satisfactory to
all of you?


 (The Inquest into the death of JON PAUL GILHOOLEY
       was adjourned to a date to be fixed)
