                                                                                               M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                 Date and tim e raised   H i   c is a o                    Number



T itle   T ^ScjL i^T               C l         iv                                 H<vrrtT=e.                O.~JoCf,0)a
(Incjude source an d a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)

N *■*
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/N o    ____
                                                                                                                           Receiver




                                                                                                                           Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                       Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                           Indexer
 Indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                                  SIO
 Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




                                                                                                                           Indexer
 Further action No(s)


 When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
   HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

           ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


             DAVID WILLIAM MATHER




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                      At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

           Friday, 27th April, 1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR.    D. FRASER          Hillsborough Solicitors’ Group
                          Steering Committee

MR.    S. SMITH           Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN          Trent Regional Health Authority     and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.     GREGORY            Sheffield City Council

MISS     THORPE            Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                Page

OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER                  1


       DR. J.R. SHORTLAND Called

          By The Coroner                          2


       M.R. SAWERS Called

          By The Coroner                          4


       M. LAYTON Called

          By The Coroner                          5


       M.R. SAWERS Recalled

          Further By The Coroner                  5


CLOSING REMARKS BY THE CORONER                    b
                        27th April. 1990
                                 TNQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF DAVID WILLIAM MATHER


                             MR. FRASER:   Sir, you will now hear evidence relating to
                        David Mather. David's mum and a friend and a social worker are
                        in Court this morning, sir. I appear for the family in a
                        personal capacity, but also, of course, through the Hillsborough
                    B   Steering Committee in the usual way.
                             THE CORONER: Good morning, Mrs. Mather.     I will explain to
                        you the procedure so you can follow what is going on, and then we
                        will do it. I am going to read to you the opening which occurred
                        on 19th April, 1989, and then any corrections that need to be
                        made I will deal with.   I will tell you what the blood alcohol
                        level was from the evidence which has already been given. We
                        will then listen to the pathologist, Dr. Shortland, who will tell
                        us what he found. When he has concluded we are going to listen
                        to the presenting officers presenting what they are able to tell
                        me, and Inspector Layton will deal with the visual evidence. He
                        will first of all describe it from the witness box and then when
                        he has done that he will come over here and on this big maps he
                        will show us some of the things which he has been describing so
                    D   you will be able to see what he has been talking about, and so
                        the Jury can see as well.
                             I don't say that every time.  I hope you forgive me, but one
                        of the main reasons for all this is actually so that you can see,
                        because you have probably guessed by now that in many cases the
                        families have already seen it, but you have not.

                    E        Then we will conclude the hearing at this stage,     Is that
                        all clear?
                             Then this is the resumed Inquest which was opened on 19th
                        April, 19S9. On that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting
                        Coroner’s Officer, said:
                                  "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                                  identified to DC 1282 Fox of the South Yorkshire Police
                                  as that of David William Mather by Peter William
                                  Cotton, his uncle. He was 19 years of age, having been
                                  born on 17th October, 1969, a t Liverpool. He was a
                                  single man and he he lived at |
                                         | Liverpool. He was a Post Office counter clerk
                                  by occupation. He died at Hillsborough football ground
                                  following an incident there on Saturday, 15th April,
                    G             1989. DC Fox caused the body to be removed to the
                                  Medico Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                                  Detective Constable Simon Weigold, who subsequently
                                  identified the same body to Dr. Shortland.   It is the
                                  family wish that the body should be cremated".

                             The first error which I am going to mention which I am going
                        to correct, which you won’t even recognise, is in fact that Simon
                H       Weigold did not do the identification in this case. Dr. Shortland


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                       1
                                             DR. J.R. SHORTLAND


will explain to us how the identification was done as far as he
is concerned, and we have got statements from Simon Weigold in
which he corrects the information on which this was based.  i



     We then wrote to a member of the family.  In fact, it was
another uncle called J. Moorcroft. You know who that is, do you?
We sent him a form asking him to check the names and the details,
and he signed that on 26th April, 1989, and he confirmed that
everything I have read out about David was correct and that the
names were right, the date of birth and so on, and the place.
You agree with it, don't you?

     Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol levels, and he gave the
evidence for this on the first day when we resumed, and in the
case of David the result was negative.

       Now we are going to listen to Dr. Shortland.   Dr. Shortland.

                  DR. JOHN RICHARD SHORTLAND Called

                           By The Coroner:

Q.     Dr. Shortland, if you would be kind enough to introduce
     yourself both for the family and for the shorthand writer? -
     A. I am John Richard Shortland, Consultant Histopathologist
     and Senior Lecturer at the University of Sheffield.    I am a
     Bachelor of Science, Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of
     Surgery, Doctor of Philosophy and a Fellow of the Royal
     College of Pathologists.

Q. Just for the record, would you tell me how we know that you
   are talking about David William? - A. Yes, indeed, sir. The
   body of David Mather was not identified to me by Sergeant
   Weigold, but was identified to me by other Police Officers who
   I could not name - I don’t know their names - and also the
   mortuary attendants.  In addition to that there were marks on
   the body to indicate his name and the sequential number that
   that was given. So I am quite convinced and firm in my mind
   that the contents of the report refer to that particular body.

Q. And the sequential number in this case was 56, I believe? -A.
   That is correct, sir, and that is part of my report.  It is
   the external second line down actually.

Q. Thank you. Dr. Shortland, if you would be good enough to give
   us the cause of death and take me through the relevant parts
   of your report in the usual way? - A. Yes. There was evidence
   of severe congestion externally and multiple haemorrhages
   which were also present internally. There was also some
   evidence of damage to one lung and direct damage to the heart
   itself.  I recorded the death in his case of traumatic
   asphyxia, sir.

Q. That means what you are saying is that he was compressed in
   some way some that he could not breathe? - A. Could not
   breathe or get oxygen to his brain.


                                 2
                                                                    DR. J.R. SHORTLAND


                        Q. That, of course, sounds horrific, and of course it was, but I
                           am sure one of the things which will worry mum is the
                           suffering and how long he would have perceived this. - A. Yes.

                        Q. Can you help us on that, please? - A. I can't really be firm
                           on this.  I can only say that one of the features of traumatic
                           asphyxia is a rapid loss of consciousness, and that would have
                           limited, obviously, his distress.
                    B   Q. A lot of your colleagues have suggested that loss of
                           consciousness would have occurred within 10-15 seconds? - A.
                           Which could well be, yes.
                        Q. You would not disagree with that? - A. That is consistent with
                           the reports that have been given of previous cases of
                           traumatic asphyxia
                    C   Q. And there is no reason to think that this lad would have been
                           any different? - A ...... have been any different, no.

                        Q. And a lot of the findings which you have given of petechial
                           haemorrhages and so on, these would all presumably have
                           actually occurred and displayed themselves at the point of
                           time he lost consciousness and thereafter? -A. And thereafter,
                    D      yes .
                        Q. So when we read this we have to bear that in mind? - A.
                           Indeed.
                        Q. That he was actually, almost certainly unconscious? - A. Yes.

                        Q. I am very anxious, and it is no use us telling lies and saying
                    E      that people did not perceive anything, but I don't want us to
                           get it wrong and incur extra stress. -A. Indeed.
                                MR. FRASER:      No questions, sir, thank you.

                                MR. LIMB:     No, thank you, sir.

                                MR. CATCHPOLE:      No, thank you, sir.
                    F
                                THE CORONER:   Dr. Shortland, thank you very much,
                           indeed. Mr. Fraser, do you think Mrs. Mather will want to
                           speak to Dr. Shortland at all?
                                THE WITNESS:   I would be quite happy to do so if she
                           wanted to have a talk afterwards.
                    G           MR. FRASER:      Perhaps I can have a word afterwards, sir.

                                THE CORONER:   If you want to, Dr. Shortland will stay
                           and he will talk to you, if it will help to help you. What we
                           will then do is Dr. Shortland will stay for thenext case  and
                           then he will come and talk to you during giving that. We find
                           that works quite well. Thank you.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                         3
                                           M.R. SAWERS


         PET. INSPECTOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS Called

                      By THE CORONER:

  THE WITNESS:   Matthew Robert Sawers, sir, Inspector, West
Midlands Police.

     THE CORONER:   Whenever you are ready? - A. At about 0915
hours on Saturday, 15th April, 1989, Mrs. Lilian Mather saw
her son, David William Mather, leave the family home with the
intention of travelling to Sheffield. He was known to have a
ticket for the FA Cup Semi Final football match at
Hillsborough Stadium and was to travel in his own car with
friends.

     Alan Woods, Mark Garratt, Alan Benson and Peter
Wilkinson, travelled with David, arriving in Sheffield at
about 11.30 hours. They entered the stadium via the
Leppings lane turnstiles at about 12.30 hours and stood
together in enclosure No. 3. Shortly before the kick off
the group were separated due to the crowd pressure in the
enclosure.

     Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
terracing, Detective Constable Fox saw a man, now known to be
David, lying near to the gymnasium.  The officer was assisted
to carry him into the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had
been set up. It has not been established who carried David
across the pitch..

     At 1600 hours Dr. Curpen examined David in the temporary
mortuary, and certified life extinct.

     At 2150 hours Mrs. Patricia Cotton identified David's
body. This was David's aunt. She identified the body to
Detective Constable Fox at the temporary mortuary. The
officer recalled the time of the identification to be at 0100
hours on Sunday, 16th April. This would appear to be an error
on his part, and Detective Constable Gilbertson who took the
statement from Mrs. Cotton, confirms the time in actual fact
was at 2150 hours, still on Saturday, 15th April.

     Detective Constable Fox later escorted David's body to
the Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
Detective Constable Weigold.

     On Sunday, 16th April, Dr. John Shortland carried out an
autopsy and submitted a report giving his cause of death.

     Found in David's personal effects was a ticket
counterfoil for the match which confirms that he entered via
the turnstiles.

I think this is one one of cases where there is a relative
dearth of information about what happened immediately after at
the Leppings Lane end. That is right, is not it? - A. I am
afraid that is true, sir, yes.
                                                                              M. LAYTON


                                     THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, any questions?

                                     MR. FRASER:    No questions, sir, thank you.
                                           PET. INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                                                       Bv THE CORONER:
                                     THE WITNESS:    Michael Layton, Detective Inspector, West
                    B           Midlands Police. Sir, an examination has been made of the
                                video film and photographic evidence, and in respect of David
                                he has been identified alive in enclosure No. 3. Sir,
                                specifically, if I can refer you to a BBC video tape, he is
                                shown on that tape which is referenced MAP 1, and it is timed
                                at 14.46:20:06. Sir, Mr. James Moorcroft in fact made this
                                identification on the video, and in fact it is his nephew.
                    C           David is his nephew.
                        q   .         THE CORONER:  And that in fact is all there is? - A.
                                Unfortunately, that is the case, sir, as you have already
                                said.
                        Q. In fact, there are very few cases where the video evidence is
                           sparse, but this is one of them, is not it? - A. That is
                    D      right, sir, yes.
                        Q. That is no criticism, because I am absolutely amazed that we
                           have been able to find as much as we have and I expected when
                           we began, but it is hard for the family when that happens. -A.
                           That is right, sir. I am not sure whether in fact Mrs. Mather
                           was in Court on the first day for the first proceedings, but
                           as we have already said we have seen over 600 people to try to
                    E      establish these facts, and in fact are still seeing people
                           now.
                        Q . Indeed, yes. - A. Sir, can I refer you to a plan which has
                                been given the reference number MWJL/49, and.that, sir, is a
                                plan of the terraces.
                        Q. C.133, please. - A. This relates to the identification I have
                    F      just referred to, the timed one on the BBC tape. This is
                           enclosure No. 3, and where we believe David is shown is
                           approximately this location here in enclosure No. 3.

                                     MR. FRASER:    No questions, sir.
                                       PET. INSPECTOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS Recalled
                    G                               Further bv THE CORONER:

                        q .          THE CORONER:   Mr. Sawers, I need your help on one more
                                thing. You may recollect when I read the evidence of the
                                opening I said he was identified by his uncle, Peter William
                                Cotton, and then when Inspector Sawers gave the evidence he
                                referred to his aunt, in fact, Patricia Margaret Cotton.  It
                H               is paragraph 5, page 41. - A. Page 39, sir.



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                             5
                                                                       M.R. SAWERS


                                                                           THE CORONER
                        Q. There is another statement. Can you bear with me. I found it
                           earlier, the uncle and the aunt. Page 30. This is the
                           statement by Robert Anthony Fox. - A. Yes, sir.
                        Q. One of his statements, dated 30th May, and in that he says
                           that the body of David was identified to him in fact at 1
                           a.m., but you have already dealt with that? - A. That is
                    B      correct, sir.
                        Q. And he says, "by his aunt and uncle, Patricia and Peter
                           Cotton"? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

                        Q. I don't know if you have seen it but when he came to the
                           Medico Legal Centre he signed a statement and he happened to
                           pick on uncle as the identifier.  I just wanted to make that
                           clear.  It seems as if auntie and uncle were present.

                                THE CORONER:    That is satisfactory to you, is not it?

                                MR. FRASER:    Yes, sir.

                                THE CORONER:    There are no questions arising out of
                           that, are there?
                    D
                                Mrs. Mather, I am very grateful to you for the
                          opportunity of seeing you here and so that you have been able
                          to listen to what the various people have got to say about your
                          boy.
                                Can you please accept from me that although we are
                           dealing with facts in this Court, which is the nature, if you
                    E      like, of the proceedings, I am very conscious that the person
                           we have been discussing was your lad and the one you loved,
                           and I want you to know that I am aware of that and I am sure
                           so is everybody else, and we feel for you.
                                We are going to rise now. Dr. Shortland will be willing
                           to talk to you. He won't talk to you straight away because we
                           are going to need him in the next Inquest, but he will go out
                           during that an be able to spend time with you. That is
                           satisfactory to you, Dr. Shortland, is not it, and to you, I
                           take it, Mr. Fraser?
                                MR. FRASER:    Certainly, sir, yes.
                               (The Inquest into the death of DAVID WILLIAM MATHER
                                      was adjourned to a date to be fixed)




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
