                                                                                         MI R .15



                                                                               l°v                  Number
                                                                                                              ~^>(a,
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                Date and tim e raised
                                                                                 H
                                                                           ^
Titie                         Q~v       Cr~L-         ^"2*                                               C lQ Q L ^ Q
(Include source an d a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)     £ _ JZ S _ CZ>9c


Receiver's instructions — urgent action - Yes/No
                                                                                                                  Receiver




                                                                                                                   Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated
                                                                                                             ■52^     3—
No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                              Statem ent Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                   Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                         S IO
Examined - furth er action to be taken




                                                                                                                   Indexer
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                 GARY   HARRISON




                    Bef ore

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, B S , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                        On

                20th April,   1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                      INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                            Page N o .


                        Opening Remarks
                    B
                        PROF. LAURENCE HENRY Called
                           By THE CORONER                       2.


                        DET. SGT. JULIE APPLETON Called
                           By THE CORONER                       7.


                        DET. INSP . MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                           By THE CORONER                       8.


                        DET. SGT. JULIE APPLETON Recalled
                    D      By THE CORONER                      11.


                        Closing Remarks                        11   .




                    E




                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        20th April 1990


                                   INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF GARY HARRISON

                              THE CORONER:  I am not going to re-explain what we
                        are going to do because you have already seen the format/
                        but this of course is the Inquest which deals with
                        Gary Harrison and the form will be substantially the same.

                              This Inquest was opened on the 19th April 1989. On
                    B   that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting Coroner s Officer
                        said:
                              "The body which is the subject of this Inquest
                              has been identified to D.C. 1688 Johnson of the
                              South Yorkshire Police as that of Gary Harrison
                              by James Terence Harrison, his brother.  He
                              was 27 years of age having been born on the
                              6tn January 1962 at Liverpool. He was a married
                              man and he lived at
                                      Liverpool.  He was a driver by occupation.
                              He died at Hillsborough Football Ground following
                              an incident there on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.
                              D.C. Johnson caused the body to be removed to the
                              Medico-Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                              Detective Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently
                    D         identified the same body to Prof. Henry.  It is
                              the family wish that the body should be buried."

                        Then we did what we did with everybody, we wrote to people
                        and we had a letter back from Karen Harrison, who is I think
                        Gary's wife, isn't it?

                    E         MR. KIDD:  Sir, I was not following it too closely,
                        but I believe that you said that Gary Harrison's date of
                        birth was in April.
                              THE CORONER:: Yes, I am coming to that.     Sit down and
                        I will explain it to you again.

                               I am reading the opening.   There are mistakes in
                        the openings. We know about the mistakes.     I am now going
                        to deal with those. We knew when we were doing it that if
                        we were going to do it at the speed at which we had to do
                        it in order to release the bodies we were likely to have
                        dates of birth wrong, places of birth wrong, even names
                        wrong to a certain extent, but we thought it was in the
                        interests of the family not to worry too much about the
                        T 's and the I 's because I knew I would have an opportunity
                        at this stage, so now I am coming to do the corrections and
                        then I want you to stand up and confirm whether I have got
                        it right.
                                    What I was about to say was that Karen Harrison on
                         the 27th of April returned a form to us in which she
                         n n n f i rmed the name as Gary Harrison; the address as
                                                             with an 's'. Is that right?
                    H
                                                      1   -



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                   THE CORONER


                               MRS. HARRISON

                               THE CORONER: Without an 's'. -------------------
                         Liverpool. The age as 27 but the date of birth as 1.1.62.
                         That is right, isn't it? You are Karen, are you?

                               MRS. HARRISON:   Yes.
                    B            THE CORONER: And the place of birth as Liverpool.
                         Occupation: driver, and of course married.   Have we gov.
                         it right now the names and those details? Are you happy,
                         M r . Kidd?
                               MR. KIDD:  Sir, yes.  Sir, I believe it is the
                         practice so far in these Inquests if I also formally put
                         myself on the record at this stage.
                                THE CORONER: Yes, indeed you are quite right and
                          I forgot it and would you please do so.

                                MR. KIDD:   In that case I put myself on the record.

                                THE CORONER: You are Mr. Kidd and you are representing
                          Gary Harrison's family.
                D
                                MR. KIDD:  I represent the family of Gary Harrison
                          and I am instructed by Mr. E. Rex Makin.

                                THE CORONER:  I am pleased to welcome you and I
                          apologise that I did not ask you first of all.  I am so
                          used to Mr. Fraser, you see, that I forgot.

                    ^           n o w before I forget something else, we did the
                          blood alcohols on Monday, they were presented to me, and^
                          in the case of Gary Harrison the analysis showed a negative
                          result.
                                There is one other thing I have to say. You may have
                          heard that I read out that the body was identified to
                          Prof. Henry by Simon Weigold.  That is also an error,
                          apart from the date of birth.  It in fact wasn t and we
                          will deal with that as we go along, but it is an error
                          in the opening.
                                Nov/, Professor Henry please. Professor Henry has
                          also taken the oath on a previous occasion so I take it,
                          Mr. Kidd, you are happy with that, aren't you?

                                MR. KIDD:   Sir, yes.


                                            PROF. LAURENCE HENRY Called
                                                  Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q. Now you are Prof. Laurence Henry.        That is’right, isn't it?
                H          - A. That is so, sir.

                                                       -   2   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                             PROF. L. HENRY


                        Q. Prof. Henry, because we have this hiatus with regard to
                           the identification, could you tell me how you satisfied
                           yourself that the lad you are going to talk about is in
                           fact Gary Harrison please? - A. The body was identified
                           to me at the time. There was a certain amount O l docu­
                           mentary evidence accompanying the body. There were also
                           marks of identification on the body and by inspecting
                           these I satisfied myself that this was in fact the body
                    B      of Gary Harrison, case number 3. There was also a
                           Medico-Legal Centre accession number also available.

                        Q. Now having disposed of that can you please give me your
                           cause of death and then deal with it as appropriate and
                           if you would also well, yes, we will deal with the lipids
                           subsequently? — A. Thank you sir. My conclusion in my
                           report to you was that the main cause of death, that is
                           under Section la. was that of traumatic asphyxia.  I
                           based this conclusion upon all of the typical signs of
                           traumatic asphyxia which were- present.'

                                 To summarise some of thes e, without going into too
                           much detail, this was the fact that the head and face
                           were deeply cyanosed and the sicin of the head and face
                           showed a large number of small tiny haemorrhages which
                D          are called petechial haemorrhag es and are characteristic
                           of asphyxia.  The eyes showed a certain amount of swelling
                           and haemorrhage and there was a certain amount of bleeding
                           coming from the mouth.
                                 The examination of the other organs showed these
                           small haemorrhages on the surface of the organs and in
                           the substance of the organs, particularly in the upper
                    E      part of the body.
                                 There was no traumatic injury in the sense of
                           fractures and there was no evidence of internal injury
                           but on external examination there were a number of bruises
                           to be found and I have detailed in my report to you the
                           extent and measurements of those bruises and on the right
                           side of the neck there was a pattern of linear scratches
                           which indicated some degree of external injury but these
                           injuries were all superficial and had not extended to
                           injure any of the internal organs.

                                 The lungs themselves were rather swollen and
                           congested and heavy but were not actually physically,
                           injured and thus I came to the conclusion that the main
                           cause of death was traumatic asphyxia.




                H

                                                  - 3 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                   PROF. L. HENRY



                    A

i




                        B




                        C




                    ®                  I think sir I will just pause at that point.  If
                                 there are any questions I will be happy to answer them and
                                 then I will continue my evidence subsequently.

                            Q.


                        E
                            Q.




                            Q




                        G




                    H

                                                         - 4 -
    J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                PROF. L. HENRY




                    B




                    D




                    E




                    H
                        - 5 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                 PROF. L. HENRY



                A




                    B




                    C

                        Q



                D
                        Q




                    E


                        Q




                                 THE CORONER:   Mr. Kidd, any questions?

                                 MR. KIDD:   No questions sir.

                                  THE CORONER: Any questions from anybody else?
                            (No response)  You have understood?

                                  Professor Henry, I think you have given, if I may say
                            so an exceedingly clear exposition and I am exceedingly
                            grateful for not only your exposition but also for spotting
                            the pathological finding and taking the appropriate steps
                            to investigate it because obviously this could have
                            important implications for other members of the family.
                            Thank you. I am most grateful.
                H
                                                  - 6 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                               D.S. J. APPLETON


                                       DET. SGT. JULIE APPLETON Called
                                                 Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q. If you would give us your name again.  I am sorry about this?
                           - A. Yes, it is Julie Appleton, Detective Sergeant of the
                           West Midlands Police.

                        Q. You have been sworn already? ~ A. I have, ^es sir.
                    B
                        Q. If you could take me through the summary? - A. At about
                           1030 hours on Saturday, 15th April 1989 Thomas Wright
                           saw his stepsons Gary Harrison and Stephen Francis Harrison
                           leave his house with the intention of travelling to Sheffield.
                           Both had tickets for the F .A. Cup Semi-Final football match
                           at Hillsborough and were to travel to Sheffield on a coacn.

                                 At about 1345 hours Brian Joseph Harrison was in a
                           motor vehicle in Leppings Lane, Sheffield, when he.saw his
                           brothers Gary and Stephen standing near to some shops. He
                           was unable to speak to them and did not see them again.

                                 Following   the severe crushing in the Leppings Lane
                           terrace, Police   Constable David Tranter went into Enclosure 2
                D          and assisted to   carry a number of casualties who had been
                           passed over the   dividing fence rrom Enclosure 3.

                        Q. Just stop one second because everybody is lost.  I know why.
                           Look at paragraph 9. We decided that it would make more
                           sense to put that there, which is one of the reasons why
                           we don't want to use the summaries as evidence.  Please,
                           I am sorry to have interrupted you. — A. The Officer
                    E      assisted to carry these people onto the pitch.  Police
                           Constable Tranter believes that Gary was one of these
                           casualties.  Gary was carried to the gymnasium.  However,
                           extensive enquiries have been made and it has not been^
                           possible to establish who carried Gary from the pitch to
                           the gymnasium.
                                 At about 1630 hours Police Constable Christopher Love
                           was directed to the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary
                           had been set up. The Officer assumed responsibility for
                           Gary and he was present when Dr. Edward Anthony Birkby
                           carried out an examination and certified life extinct.

                                  Police Constable Love later escorted the body of
                            Gary to the Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the identi­
                            fication by reference number to Detective Constable Simon
                    G       Weigold.
                                  At 1120 hours on Sunday, 16th April 1989 James
                            Terence Harrison identified the body of his brother to
                            Detective Constable Nicholas Kinsella. This happened at
                            the Medico Legal Centre.
                                  On Sunday, 16th April 1989 Professor Laurence Ilenry
                H           carried out an autopsy and submitted a report giving
                            cause of death.

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                     - 7 -
                                      D.I. M. LAYTON


      Found in the personal effects of Gary was a ticket
counterfoil for the match, but in the circumstances it
cannot be established how or when he entered thestadium,
but it is believed that both Gary and Stephen entered the
ground via a turnstile.

      That ends my evidence, sir.

      THE   CORONER:   Mr. Kidd, any questions?

      MR.   KIDD:   Again I have no questions sir.

      THE CORONER: Any questions from anybody else?
(No response)  It has been.clear to you, hasn't it? Thank
you ever so much.


               DET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                         By THE CORONER:

      THE WITNESS:  Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
West Midlands Police.

      Sir, an examination of visual evidence has been made
and it has been established that Gary was in fact in the
enclosure referred to as number 3.

      Police Constable Tranter has been shown visual
evidence and from photographs of Gary and his clothing
he believes that he assisted in carrying Gary from Enclosure
number 2 having been passed from number 3.

      The Officer has signed a plan of the terraces which
has been given the reference DCT/1.

      Anthony Paul Garratty is a Steward employed by
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. He went onto the pitch
to assist and helped to carry injured and deceased across
the pitch. Having vieedphotographs he has identified
Gary as a person who he checked for signs of life actually
on the pitch.  He did not have any further involvement
with Gary and he signed a plan of the pitch area giving
the approximate position at which he saw Gary.

      I should say that there is an area of conflict there
in respect of where he felt he saw Gary and where
P.C. Tranter has previously indicated.

      The reference number in relation to that plan for
Mr. Garratty is referenced AG/3.

      Mrs. Susan Harrison, sister-in-law of Gary has viewed
a video, as has already been mentioned, and in fact
Mrs. Karen Harrison, Gary's wife has viewed visual evidence.
                                                               D.I. M. LAYTON


                                   Gary and Stephen are in fact shown together on a
                             BBC tape which has been given the reference Map 1, timed
                             at 1450.40.06.
                                   Mrs. Harrison did make a further two possible
                             identifications ....

                        Q.         THE CORONER: Which Mrs. Harrison are we talking
                    B        about? - A. This is Mrs. Karen Harrison, Gary's wife.
                             A further two possible identifications which are referred
                             to in the plans which I will come to in a second sir,
                             but due to the degree of material on the photograph, i.e.
                             the distance and the amount of actual facial area that
                             you can see, we have not been able to be exactly precise.

                                   Sir, if I can perhaps refer to a plan which has
                    C        been given the reference number MWJL/4 which is a plan
                             of the terraces.
                        Q. Can we give that one C32? - A. Sir, that plan shows the
                           identification made by Mrs. Karen Harrison in Enclosure
                           number 3 at the time I have just referred to and it
                           also does in fact indicate the photograph again which I
                           have previously referred to which is an unconfirmed
                D          identification.

                                   Sir, there is a further plan, MWJL/5 which is ....

                        q . 33. -A ....... which is a view of the pitch area.  Sir,
                            that plan in fact just deals with the second possible
                            identification of Gary which unfortunately we have not
                    E       been able to take any further.   It is a photograph showing
                            a person from clothing Mrs. Harrison believes may be Gary
                            but we have not been able to take it any turther.

                                   I don't know sir if you want to refer to the plan
                             by P.C. Tranter at all? That actually shows, sir, as
                             you have heard P.C. Tranter refers to carrying Gary from
                             the dividing fence from 3 to Gate 2, so the little "x's
                    F        going from that dividing fence to Gate 2 actually just
                             show the route that was taken.

                        Q. Let's have it and let's have the other one that we
                           refer to in this case, which is Anthony Garratt, isn't it?
                           Mrs. Tranter's will be C34. That is .... A. DCT/l sir.

                        Q. And the other one will be 35 of course? - A. That is plan
                    G      reference AG/3 sir.

                        Q. Could you just show us? - A. Yes sir.

                                    (The Officer moves to a visual display board)

                              Sir, if I could just deal with the terrace area again.
                              In respect of the identification made on video, as I
                H
                                                    _ 9 _

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                             D.I. M. LAYTON


                          have said Stephen and Gary actually are shown on the same
                          shot standing almost together. That is shown in this
                          area here in Enclosure number 3.

                                As I have previously indicated again, this is on
                          plan reference number MWJL/4, the unconfirmed photograph
                          is actually in this area here.

                    B           Sir, if I can just then deal with the plan referenced
                          DCT/1, which is P.C. Tranter's plan, he feels that he was
                          involved with Gary in this location here which is the
                          dividing fence between Enclosure number 3 and number 2,
                          so from that point he believes that he assisted in carrying
                          him across to Gate number 2.

                        Q. That would fit in reasonably well with the unconfirmed
                           identification, wouldn't it? — A. To some degree, yes sir,
                           that is right and it does accord with what I mentioned
                           yesterday in relation to the transfer of people from
                           different pens that they had originally been in to other
                           pens.
                                 Sir, in relation to AG/3, the position that has been
                           indicated there is here in fact.
                D
                        Q. And the difficulty is reconciling one with the other?
                           A. Yes.
                        Q. But it is very difficult, isn't it, and it is of course
                           recollections as well? ~ A. That is correct sir, yes.

                                 Sir, perhaps I should just finally deal with the
                    E      last plan, MWJL/5. Again it is an unconfirmed photographic
                           identification and it is in this location here au the Spion
                           Kop end of the pitch. As I say that is unfortunately the
                           one where there really is not sufficient detail for us
                           to take it any further.

                        Q. There was just one point I wanted to ask you. There was
                           some query which had been raised with regard to the
                           identification? - A. That is right sir. As I have said
                           already - do you want me to go back to the box?

                        Q. Yes, it is easier because people can hear you. - A . Yes
                           sir, as I have said already both Mrs. Susan Harrison and
                           Mrs. Karen Harrison have both viewed visual evidence.
                           At one stage I believe that Mrs. -Susan Harrison actually
                    G      felt that she had identified Gary on video but we sub­
                           sequently looked at this again and saw Mrs. Karen Harrison
                           and we established in fact it was a mistaken identification
                           in that respect, so the evidence you have heard today is
                           specifically that in relation to identifications which
                           are either unconfirmed but can't be taken any further or
                           both parties are content that it is accurate.

                    H   Q. Well we have already come - you weren't here Mr. Kidd but


                                                  - 10 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                              D.I. M. LAYTON


                          this is a problem which we have been faced with several
                          times. It is all very well saying we should have identi­
                          fications but in the situation it is exceedingly difficult
                          and the families, I think you must have spent a lot of
                          time with them? - A. Both families spent a long time in
                          making every effort to find both.

                                THE CORONER:  Indeed and I know that you and your
                    B     staff have also spent many many hours trying to deal with
                          it but it is exceedingly difficult and one can only do
                          the best one can.

                                Any questions of this witness?

                                MR. KIDD:   Again sir, no questions.

                                THE CORONER: There was just one point.   I need you
                          back, I am sorry.  In fact there were two points but one
                          has escaped me.


                                        DET. SGT. JULIE APPLETON Recalled
                                                 By THE CORONER:
                D
                        Q. You may remember that Prof. Henry in his evidence said that
                           the lipid test was done from the same sample as the ethanol?
                           - A. Yes.

                        Q. Of course in this particular case the ethanol was negative?
                           - A. That is right sir.

                    E   Q. So the convention we have is that we don't deal with the
                           continuity in the negative cases, but would I be right in
                           thinking that in fact there is continuity evidence in all
                           the cases.  If we wanted to we could give the names of the
                           Officers who dealt with the blood samples? - A. Yes, that
                           is right.

                        Q. Not that it makes very much difference but just to time
                           what Prof. Henry said? - A. Yes.

                                 THE CORONER: Thank you very much,     You are content
                           with that, aren't you?

                                 Well ladies and gentlemen, that is the evidence we
                           are going to take in this case.
                    G            I have already spoken to your sister-in-law but
                           of course exactly the same applies to you.  I am very
                           very sorry that you have had this terrible loss and for
                           all of you, as I have said, to your sister, to Susan,
                           I am very sorry that this tragedy has struck the family,
                           this double tragedy in fact.

                H                                  - 11 -


J, L, Harpham Ltd
                                                           THE CORONER


                              You have heard what Prof. Henry says that if you want
                        to talk to him so that you can understand this business
                        with the lipids better he is very willing to talk to you.
                        I felt it was right to bring it out because I wanted to
                        be sure that everybody understood this because it might,
                        it might not be, but it could be very important to other
                        people in the extended family and obviously we want you
                        to have the benefit of that.
                    B
                                       (The Inquest into the death of
                                                GARY HARRISON
                                    was adjourned to a date to be fixed)


                    c



                D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H                                  12 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
