                                                           8th November      90


         SLP/JT.



         Mr. R. Edey,




         Dear Mr. Edey,

         Thank you for your letter of the 5th of November with enclosures,


         Yours sincerely,




         S .L .Popp er ,
         H.M.Coroner.




BACABY
                                                        5th November, 1990.

Dr. Popper, LIB., B.Med.Sci., Biil., MRCGP.,
Office of H.M. Coroner for South Yorkshire (West District)
Medico-legal Centre,
Watery Street,
Sheffield, S3 7ET




Dear Dr. Popper,
                   Re: The Hillsborough Disaster.
       I enclose herewith copies of letters I have today written
to the Lord Chancellor, the DPP and The Times, for your information.
I shall be telling the Court that it would be against the public
interest for the inquest to resume on an adversarial basis by way
of a surrogate trial.   The relatives want "to have a go" at the
police and that should be done in the civil courts and not at an
inquest into the deaths of the victims.
                                Yours sincerely,



                                ROY EDEY.
V




                                                             5th November, 1990.

    The Lord Chancellor,
    The House of Lords,
    London, SW1.


    Dear Lord Chancellor,

                       Re: Unlawful killing verifricts at Inquests.

           I enclose herewith a copy of a letter to The Times which they
    may or may not publish. Would you please let me know, if possible by
    return, whether you intend to amend Rule k2 of the Coroners Rules 1984
    as suggested.

           On the 12th November I am bringing an application for leave
    for judicial review in the High Court of the Director of Public
    Prosecution's decision not to prosecute for the Hillsborough disaster.
    I am confident that leave will be granted. Unfortunately the Crown is
    due to resume the inquest into the 95 victims of that disaster on the
    19th November. If, as I hope, the DPP has to reconsider his decision
    the adjourned inquest should stay adjourned pending a decision whether
    a prosecution will ensue.

           If I fail then an even more difficult situation will probably
    arise. I am told the relatives have instructed leading counsel to
    endeavour to obtain an unlawful killing verdict. The enclosed cutting
    from Saturday's Times is relevant.   If they succeed there will be
    enormous pressure for a prosecution. The DPP will be unable to act
    as he has made it very clear in a letter to me that he does not believe
    there is sufficient evidence to mount a prosecution with a realistic
    prospect of a conviction.

           The conflict will bring the law into even greater disrepute than
    it is already as a result of unlawful killing verdicts by inquest juries.
    Such a hiatus should be avoided at all costs in the public interest. I
    shall be glad to hear from you upon this important matter if possible
    before the 12th November, but in any event, as soon as possible.

           I enclose a copy of a letter I have written to the Coroner. I
    also enclose a copy of an article of mine published in The Times on the
    25th September.

                                   Yours sincerely,



                                   RGY-EDEY.
                                                        5th November, 1990*


Alan David Green Esq., QC.,
Director of Public Prosecutions,
4/12 Queen Anne’s Gate,
London, W1A 9AZ



Dear Mr. Green,

                   Re; The Hillsborough Disaster.

       I enclose herewith a copy of a letter I have today written
to the Lord Chancellor, with a copy of the letter written to the
Times referred to therein, for your information.    I also enclose
a copy of a letter I have written to the Coroner.   Copies of these
letters will also be placed before the Court prior to the hearing
on the 12th November.
                   Yours sincerely,
                                                            5th November, 1990*


The Editor,
The Times,
1 Pennington Street,
London, El.


Dear Sir,

       The Coroner for East Kent told his jury at the inquest into
the Zeebrugge disaster that in order to return a verdict of unlawful
killing they had to be satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt that the
act or omission of an individual caused substantially one or more of
the deaths and that that individual was guilty of gross negligence.
The jury returned a verdict of unlawful killing. So did the inquest
jury into the Clapham train disaster.

       Those accused of manslaughter at Zeebrugge have been acquitted
of manslaughter charges through insufficient evidence. Nobody is to be
put on trial for the deaths at Clapham in view of the Director of Public
Prosecution’s decision that there is insufficient evidence to prosecute.
There have been many other individual findings of unlawful killing by
inquest verdicts which have not resulted in prosecution. The unlawful
killing verdict is meaningless. Only the police and prosecuting
authorities can determine whether crime has been committed and who should
or should not stand trial.

       Steps should be taken to ensure that the power to return an
unlawful killing verdict at an inquest is abolished. This can be done
immediately by Statutory Instrument by the Lord Chancellor. Rule 4-2
of the Coroners' Rules 1984 which reads at present -

"No verdict shall be   framed in         sucha way     astoappeartodetermine
 any question of:-

       a) criminal liability on the part of a named person,
                                   or
       b) civil liability."

should be amended to read:-

"No verdict shall be framed in      sucha way          astoappeartodetermine
 any question of criminal or civil liability."

       I have asked the Lord Chancellor to do this forthwith in the
public interest so that the present conflict is resolved, and in the interests
of the proper administration of justice.

                                   Yours faithfully.



                               -« y 5M E D E Y .
    Disaster Mfieers
    denied legalcosts
   POLICE facing legal action         cision. My view is that the
   over the Hillsborough tragedy      officers were performing pub­
   will not have legal costs paid     lic duty on the day o f the
   by their police authority.         Hillsborough tragedy. What­
      Relatives o f some o f the 95   ever actions or decisions they
   people who died in the             made ■ were therefore un­
   disaster have threatened to        equivocally in the public do­
   sue officers involved after a      main. My request for assis­
   decision by the Director o f       tance with funding does not
   Public Prosecutions not to         relate to some activity in their
   prosecute.                         private lives but their action
      South Yorkshire police au­      as public servants acting in
   thority met yesterday to dis­      good faith in the most trying
   cuss the issue and said that the   o f circumstances.
   situation did not meet Home           “It is a legitimate use o f
   Office guidelines on legal         public funds to allow such
   assistance to officers. A          officers adequate legal repres­
   spokesman said: “We have           entation at the inquest hear­
 i had the public enquiry, and we     ings to ensure that the fullest
; have had the criminal in-           and fairest body Of evidence is.
i vestigation by the Police Com-      available,” he said.
| plaints Authority which found
<there was insufficient evi­
   dence to take any prosecutions
   against these officers.”
      Richard Wells, chief con­
   stable o f South Yorkshire,
   who had asked for help in
   paying for legal representa­
   tions o f officers at forthcom­
   ing inquests into the deaths,
   yesterday criticised the police
   authority’s refusal to help.
      Mr Wells said that his
   officers would be less well
   represented than others at the
   inquests, which are to begin in
   Sheffield later this month. “It
   would be hard to pretend that
   I am not very disappointed at      W ells: “Officers likely to be
   our police authority’s de­            less well represented”
          Inquests are still able to decide criminal responsibility for deaths. This power should be removed ;


             Stop the killing accusations
         T T nlawful killing was the c o m m it people t o stand trial       “unlawful killing”. Coroners for the death is not in the                      who died in Saudi Arabia,
          I    I verdict returned last for murder and manslaughter,          and their juries are not the public interest There are                        brought another change m the
     ?; s         week by the jury at the It was not before time. Be-        proper forum to consider other examples. . In 1987 four                       law in recent years, requiring
      i inquest into the deaths o f 35 tween 1961 and 1^70, 105              criminal responsibility for people died in a train that                       coroners to hold mquests^on
         people in the Qapham rail people were committed for                 death. This should be left to plunged into the River Towy                     those who die abroad. This,
    I <ji$»sier. Yet, by law, they trial solely on a coroner’s               the police and prosecuting in Wales when a bridge col-                        however, has only caused
         were unable to name who they inquisition and no con vie-            authorities. They have to de- lapsed through severe flood-                    more confusion,
         think was to blame.                  tions were recorded on the      cide whether there is a reason- ing. The inquest verdict was                      Last July an inquest held       Lucan: named as murderer
    r ; ASi long ago as 1936, a coroner’s inquisition alone.                  able prospect o f conviction, unlawful killing. The Director                  that a football supporter was not acted in this matter. An
       i government committee              bn For instance, after the 1957    and, if so, to bring a defendant o f Public Prosecutions later                unlawfully killed in Koblenz, inquest should be confined to
         coronfers recommended            the Lewisham rail disaster, in      to trial.                        announced he would not pros-                 West Germany. In August a identifying the deceased, the
     rj abolition o f the duty o f an which 100 died, the train                   Findings o f unlawful killing ecute for manslaughter.                     Southampton inquest retum- cause o f death and when and
         inqUest tb consider criminal driver had a manslaughter                by coroners’ courts are                                                      ed the same verdict on a 20- where death occurred. Coro­
       jresponsibility f o r death and to verdict returned against h i m       meaningless in the context o f                 ne cause celibre was          y e a r-o ld student in Greece. In ners should still, be em­
         hold committal proceedings by the inquest jury. When he               criminal responsibility. BarryI        1 t h e d e a th o f R o b e r to    September a n inquest in T or- ; powered to probe deaths in
      ' o n coroner’s inquisitions. The appeared at the Central Crim-          Prosser died in prison. Mag-                   Calvi, found hanging         quay returned the same ver- prison, in police custody and
i    * Brodrick Committee in 1971 inal Court no evidence was                 istrates found insufficient evi- from Blackfiriars Bridge. The                diet on a 39-year-old mother in disasters so that they can
       ; againi called for the abolition offered against him.                dence for three prison officers inquest returned a suicide                    o f two in South Africa.            make recommendations to
    . ' o f this procedure. Yet it is           The change in the law did     to stand trial. The Director o f verdict. The family were not                 > Criminal trials in such cases prevent similar fatalities. The
         perpetuated in the Coroner’s not follow the 1936 recom-             Public Prosecutions ruled out content and obtained consent                    cannot be mounted in Britain government should legislate
      v Act 1988 as verdicts o f unlaw- mendations, endorsed by the          further action. There was then for a fresh inquest, which                     and it is hard to see what is . to abolish the inquest juries’
         ful killing are still permitted.     Brodrick Committee. Coro-      an inquest finding o f unlawful returned an open verdict. Last                achieved by such proceedings.: I verdict that imputes criminal­
            Lord Lucan was the last ners’ inquisitions could still           killing and a bill o f indictment y e a r an I t a lia n c o u r t decided    Inquests even had to be held ity by allowing a finding o f
         person to be named by a consider criminal respon-                     was obtained. The three were Signor Calvi had been mur-                     on the bodies o f sem cem en unlawful killing.
     ‘ coroner’s jury as having sibility for death but were                    tried and acquitted.               d e r e d . There w e r e C a lls from   returned for bunal after the
     ' committed murder. The law prohibited from naming any-                     The conflict 'between an the family for a third inquest.                   Falklands conflict.       i ^                    R o y Ed e y
     t Was phaioged in 1976 so that body they considered cul-                 unlawful killing verdict and           The persistence o f Ronald                 Itis beycmd iiiy comprehen- • The author is a solicitors’
     V icoroners ;lost the power, to.. pablei-Their verdict had to be         nobody being held responsible Smith, the father o f th^ nurse                 sion why the government has managing clerk.          \ '■ . .




                                                                    •                                                                       •
 iy t < h , . e 9 £ ^
                                                                                                                                                          \lA
L o fl-o

 ~ s
               ^ ^ 6            Kc, C o c C D O K                         H'ft'b                     r\)o-T                                           tH6


 ^5 v><0vc-vpvw                 ^tL^>v£A*i>                 fo su u ifw ^ o                       X t             VS     S~ti       uu           V 'z.Jw ^o^



 HE,           V^tuc,            Pv'bV'v        Tue             Cfcvirv_-r                       ~T0                <^£Co^Si               v€S*~          ~r H€>        \


 0£cvSlc^                        of:                            O                       tnso~v                    -Co             ? aos e c ^ e           ,        IF       -VNe

 Covj^V^                    PvG-cu.6,£/b             YVg_                   ,           ra , ,
                                                                                        CA <b Vc                  1 W I .H               ^o«_ T M 6              \v'OCJaLvc,i£‘~ fT 'b


 '°°/                                           ?<-*ce                o «               V^\u\'VO                                            * ocas^rt                       'S

« - a # £ 0 .                   U fe

                                                                                    ^                ^                                          « T - ,e ^       vo<o            To

           w r>--i:v<_(_<£_            vr^>     'tl\£.              9>a.£s<i            o^o                  -2^g        t    , _
                                                                                                             ^ -b       S     £ f t e ^     e r .,



Vf     ''tko      w>ou.uo                u^Ke          ~Co
                                                                                                V O .v~ tv\         W  v v-v.
                                                                                                                    v^.\            V4 t
                                                                                                                                    n           cf^\x>b        q ,g-

CDW-cftC-t•£. G                      o <\5
                                                                                                                       oxvs         r v o A jO ftN            S b C S -rv o ^ e ^



                                C\     ftv'-v       Avv>0




                                                                                t       c        U       -    K     ^    a               o . b o i ^ f '
       *u ,                      (      U7UJUA                      (yO



     V' i u s -         ^                ^                  W                   _                             j     v         p      a      k      <^-\U£l


                                     CVfi^yfejcnrv.         .
       k\ ^Wv-eiXlo^                            A     S ) . P . p ‘                 " X o                d o c ^ - ^ 5                     Q ^ - ^ e -


       lks_         U v l U            & 6a ~ c I       0^                                  '




     ''W * ^                W        acx^                                                                                     < V )°fD '
    <




t
02/11 '90   11:59   Q1609                                     MEDICO LGL CNTER   ®001



                                                       ACTIVITY REPORT



                    TRANSMISSION                  OK




                    TRANSACTION              =                0410

                     . . O N N h C T l ON   n .               0213 596 735

                     vO W F C T lO N        !i;                      C3

                     ' i ik !    i I Mi                       11 02 i 1: 5 S

                     ( S \G t    TIM E                          00 32

                     F \GES                                     1
                                                           22nd October      90




         SLP/JT.




         Mr. R. Edey,




♦        I_________ I
         Dear Hr. Edey,

         Thank you very much for your letter of the 14th of October with enclosure.




         Yours sincerely,




         S.L.Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.




BACAAB
                                                     l4th October, 1 9 90 .


Dr. S.L.Popper, LIB.,B.Med.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
Office of H.M. Coroner for South Yorkshire,
(West District,
Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
Sheffield, S3 ?ET.


Dear Dr. Popper,

                   Re: THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER.

      I enclose herewith a copy of an application I have lodged in
the High Court today concerning my application for leave for judicial
review of the decision of the DPP not to prosecute for the Hillsborough
disaster. I thought it right that you should be kept informed of what
I am endeavouring to do in this matter and the reasons why I am doing it.
I think it is important that the Divisional Court should have the
opportunity of reviewing that decision in the light of the evidence.

     The main cause of the disaster was not as Lord Justice Taylor
said the behaviour of the police. Neither was it that there was no
system at all to control the capacity of the holding pens as started
at Manchester Crown Court earlier this month by Mr. Richard Payne, QC
on behalf of the South Yorkshire police. The deaths occurred because
there was no access to the pitch in an emergency. For that reason alone
(and there are many others) the Directors of Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club and the Club (if considered appropriate) should be /brought to trial
to face a charge of manslaughter.

                               Yours sincerely,
                                                      co 2069/90
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
QUEENS BENCH DIVISION
CROWN OFFICE LIST.




THE. QUEEN V DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS.
Ex Parte    EDEY R.


The Hon. Mr. Justice McCullough.


Your Lordship,
     The earliest available date for the hearing by the Divisional
Court of my renewed application for leave to apply for judicial review
in the Crown Office as things stand at present is the 12th November.

      I therefore, request that you should consider ordering an earlier
date for the hearing. The treason for this request is that Dr. Popper
adjourned the inquest into the deaths of the 9 5 victims until a decision
over prosecution was made. The inquest is due to resume on the 19th
November.

     I think there are strong grounds for my challenge to the DPP's
decision. I will be submitting that there is overwhelming evidence
to support a charge of manslaughter against the Directors of Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club and that the decision not to prosecute is bad
in law. You, of course, have not had the opportunity of hearing
the arguments I will be putting to the Divisional Court.

     The Public Prosecutor said originally there was insufficient
evidence to prosecute for the Zeebrugge disaster. He subsequently
overturned his own decision! Just as a ship going to sea with its
doors open and sinking causing heavy loss of life constitutes a prima
facie case of manslaughter so, in my opinion, does operating an unsafe
system at a football ground with no hope of escape from perimeter fencing
in an emergency.

      I see the Court's function as supervisory. I would have thought
that only the DPP can overturn his own decision. The Court, however,
if so minded can require him to look at his decision again as a matter of
public policy and, in the public interest, if they think his decision is
wrong.

     I know that Counsel for the relatives is instructed to endeavour to
obtain a verdict of unlawful killing at the resumed inquest. The inquest
would prejudge and prejudice a fair trial. The Clapham Junction rail
disaster inquest recently returned a verdict of unlawful killing. The
DPP immediately said unless further evidence was forthcoming he would take
no action.   Such conflict between inquest verdicts of criminality and


                                                               Contd. over
The Hon. Mr. Justice McCullough.
                                                                       co 2069/90



£   T h l T T J t 0! S   the+;dminis^ t i o n Of justice into disrepute,
facie case of                                       Clearly shows *


as s o o r T a s ^      abl® t0 pronounce uP°n my application
inquest. I would resLc+Jfii'8 Sh^rt        the resumption of the
f S an e a r l i e r ^ S n r n ^ o L - S y0U  JSSUe a Judicial A c t i o n
i.e. three weeks before th^ °n          + ’<^     than Sfy* the 29th October,
basis.                   6 the inquest 18 due t 0 « « « 0 on a public interest


w   Ji ?fVe S6nt a COpy of this application to Dr. Popper for his
information and enclose a copy of my covering letter.

                                Yours sincerely




                                ROY EDEY
                                          2nd October      90


SLP/PAD


Mr. Roy Edey,




Dear Mr. 2 & e y ,
Ret HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

Thank you for your letter of 14th September enclosing a copy of the
letter you wrote to Mr. Green. I am not privy to the decision of
the Director of Public Prosecutions in response to your letter nor
indeed to what action if any you in fact will take as a result of
this.

I am proceeding on the basis that I am resuming the inquests as
announced.
I draw your attention to my letter of 10th April 1990 and my letter
of 15th May 1990 in particular the last paragraph of this letter. I
note that you indicated you may wftsh to re-apply to ask me to call
you as a witness at the resumed inquest.
In order to avoid unnecessary correspondence I think I should make
it clear that nothing has changed as far as I am concerned and I am
still not minded to call you as a witness.



Yours sincerely.


S. Xi. POPPER
H. M. CORONER
                                                                   l*fth September, I99O.


Dr. S.L. Popper, U.B., B.Med.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.,
Office of H.M. Coroner for South Yorkshire. (West District)
Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
Sheffield, S3 7ET.


Dear Dr. Popper,

                     Res        THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER.

       I enclose herewith a copy of a letter I have written to Mr. A.D.
Green, Q.C., the Director of Public Prosecutions upon his decision not
to prosecute for the Hillsborough disaster.

        You will see that I contend that this decision is perversa
against the weight of the evidence.    Depending upon the outcome of his
reconsideration and/or any Court proceedings I may wish to renew my
application to be called at the renewed inquest. If your decision is
still against me I will seek judicial review of it if I consider it to
be necessary.

       The Coroners' Rules place upon you a duty to refer to appropriate
bodies ways and means of preventing a like disaster. My letter to you
of the 22nd April sets out in great detail how the disaster can and
should have been prevented. It is, in my submission, your duty to hear
my submissions in open court to prevent as far as possible another tragedy
occurring.

       What I have said is, of course, only applicable if criminal
proceedings are not instituted. I have never been in any doubt that the
disaster was caused by gross negligence amounting to manslaughter.

               ,_____Ya h Txa     wfta’w al if________________ ^




                     ROY EDEY.
                                                        l4th September, 1990.


Allan David Green Esq., QC
The Director of Public Prosecutions,
4/12 Queen Anne's Gate,
London, SW1H 9AZ


Dear Mr. Green,

                   Re: THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER.

       The Directors of the Club and/or Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
knew, or should have known, the following when the disaster occurred at
their ground on the lSth April, 1 9 8 9 .

1.      That despite the 1981 incident and the overcrowding of the
       Leppings Lane terraces in I987 and 1988 nothing had been
       done to ensure immediate access to the pitch in an emergency
       contrary to Paragraph 215 of the Government's Green Guide
       and Recommendation 35 °? M^. Justice Popplewell's Final Report
       following the Bradford fire.

2.      That at an F.A. Gup semi-final at Hillsborough in I98 I there was
       crushing at the Leppings Lane terraces; that 250 spectators had
       to go on to the pitch to escape the crush, and that there were
       38 casualties which included broken legs, arms and ribs. (Paras
       123 and 124 of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report (hereinafter referred
       to as "TIR”.)

3       That Liverpool Football Club maintained that their supporters could
       not be safely accommodated on the Leppings Lane terraces. (Para. 36
       of TIR.)

4.       That the pens were uncomfortably over crowded at Cup semi-finals
        in 1987 and 1 9 8 8 . (Para 215 of TIR)

5.       That the police were only prepared to police the match with
        Liverpool supporters being allocated the Leppings Lane terraces.
        (Para. 21 of TIR.)
A.D. Green Esq., QC
Director of Public Prosecutions.                       14.9.1990.



10.    That no account was taken of the sub division of the terraces
       by way of amendment of the Safety Certificate. (Para. 121 of TIR.)

11.    That there was no monitoring of the numbers entering the individual
       pens. (Paras!. 134 and 135 of TIR.)

12.    That there was no stewarding of the terraces contrary to Para. 195
       of the Government's Green Guide. (Para. 167 of TIR.)

13.    That a number of deaths were caused by the collapse of a crush
       barrier corroded with rust. (Para. 237 and 240 of TIR.)

       In my opinion the above constitutes a formidable prima facie case
of gross negligence amounting to manslaughter to go before judge and jury
for determination. It is my contention that your decision not to prosecute
for the 9 5 deaths involved or any of them is perverse and against the weight
of evidence.

       I feel sure you should reconsider your decision in the light of this
letter. Unless you advise me within the next seven days you will do so and
let me have your reconsidered decision, I hereby give you notice that I
intend to take the matter to the High Court and to seek judicial review of
your decision not to prosecute in this matter.

       Could I please hear from you as soon as possible.

                    Yours sincerely,___________



                    ROY EDEY.
FILE NOTE 28.9.90                                              fn

                                                     C,/.                  ^ —•
Long conversation with David Purchon regarding accomodation and
finance.  The substance of it was as follows:-
1.   He confirmed that the Chair had refused to accept the minute by
     Roger Michie at the Policy Committee.  They knew about it
     because something had gone through at an earlier occasion, but
     as far as he was concerned he had no authority to exceed the
     budget and if we wanted to      expenditure he felt that I
     should incur on the basis of my statutory powers and then be
     reimbursed.

2.   I explained that this was not acceptable to me.    This was a
     complete departure from my normal practice, if we were going to
     apply th^s^tjhgn it would have to apply generally, but in view
     of the CU^eom^^J^inancial state at the Council I would not be
     prepared to (=HiGQuragc expenditure unless I had an assurance
     that it would be met by the Council.    In any event I had no
     cash to pay up front, the Council would have to provide an
     impressed account which is the normal practice, bearing in mind
     that they would then loose the interest on this money I could not
     see the advantage.

3*   We discussed the Medico-Legal Centre.           I outlined to him why I
     didn't think it was suitable in particular that it was too small
     that we had 95 bereaved families, even it all of them didn't
     come in we should have to allow for between 40 and 60 to turn up
     i.e. two or three members of say 1/5 of the bereaved plus the
     interested parties, plus press, plus the public, plus the jury
     and plus all the other people who are entitled to be there.           It
     was obvious that there wasn't enough room.           His response was that
     in some respects the Council were always faced with this, they
     were dealing with 1000 ^ d u n d a n c i e s at the moment, all of these
     people would be entitled to attend, but they still met in
     committee rooms which would not accomodate them.           He confirmed
     that none of these people would be entitled to speak.            I pointed
     out to him that all the interested parties were entitled to speak
     either directly or through their legal representatives.           I said
     there was still quite a lot of doubt as to how many Lawyers would
     come and indeed whether the bereaved would be legally represented
     as a block, if they weren't they might well turn up on their own
     to ask questions.   A ^inario which would create terrible problems
     legistically.  Davijs^ agreed that this would be a problem but he
     said the Council on the whole were in such dire straights at the
     moment that they weren't really that concerned about the inquests
     and how they should be run.

4.   He confirmed that it would be very wise to obtain confirmation
     from the Council that they would foot the bill because he felt
     that if there was any loop holes, given the financial state,
     they would seek to use them.

     I said that this just confirmed what I had said in the beginning
     namely that I wasn't going to change the whole system of financing
     at this stage and that I would have to have proper assurances with
     regard to finance.

5.   He said he had done his best, it was really now a matter for the
     Chief executive and the Policy Committee to take appropriate
     decisions.
                                                                                                                                                                             ‘.'V-
                                                            t;-:™                                                                                                             , ■!**
                                                                                               THE TIMES TIIeSDAY SEPTEMBER 25 1990
                                    yA
                                                                        responsibility for deaths/This powershouldberem oved




                                    commit people to stand trial      “unlawful killing”. Coroners        for the death is not in the who died in Saudi Arabia,-
         nlawful killing was the
                                                                                                          public interest. There are S brought another change in the
U        verdict returned last
         week bjf the jury at the
inquest into the deaths o f 35
people in the Clapham rail
                                    for murder and manslaughter.
                                    It was not before time. Be­
                                    tween 1961 and 1970, 105
                                    people were committed for
                                                                      and their juries are not the
                                                                      proper * forum to consider
                                                                      criminal responsibility for
                                                                      death. This should be left to
                                                                                                          other examples. In 1987 four law in recent years, requiring
                                                                                                          people died in a train that coroners to hold inquests on
                                                                                                          plunged into the River Towy those who die abroad. This,
                                    trial solely on a coroner’s       the police and prosecuting          in Wales when a bridge col­ however, has only caused
disaster. Yet, by law, they                                                                               lapsed through severe flood­ more confusion.
were unable to name who they        inquisition and no convic­        authorities. They have to de­                                                                          Lucan: named as murderer
                                                                                                          ing. The inquest verdict was       Last July an inquest held
                                    tions were recorded on the        cide whether there is a reason­
think was to blame.;                                                                                      unlawful killing. The Director that a football supporter was       not acted in this tnatter. An
    As long ago , as 1936, a        coroner’s inquisition alone.      able prospect o f conviction,
                                       For instance, after the 1957   and, if so, to bring a defendant    o f Public Prosecutions later unlawfully killed in Koblenz,        inquest should be confined to
 government committee on
 coroners recommended the           Lewisham rail disaster, in        to trial.                           announced he would not pros­ West Germany. In August a             identifying the deceased, the
                                                                                                          ecute for manslaughter.      ;   Southampton inquest return­       cause o f death and when and
 abolition o f the duty o f an      which 100 died, the train            Findings o f unlawful killing
                                                                                                                                           ed the, same verdict on a 20-     where death occurred. Coro­
 inquest to consider criminal       driver had a manslaughter         by coroners’ courts are
                                                                                                                  ne cause celtbre was year-old student in Greece. In        ners should still be em­

                                                                                                          O
 responsibility for death and to    verdict returned against him      meaningless in the context o f
                                    by the inquest jury. When he      criminal responsibility. Barry              the death o f Roberto , September an inquest in Tor­       powered to probe deaths in
 hold Committal prowediftgs                                                                                       G ilvi, found hanging quay returned the same ver­
 on coroner’s inquisitions.,The     appeared at the Central Crim­     Prosser died in prison. Mag­                                                                           prison, in police custody and
                                    inal Court no evidence was        istrates found insufficient evi­    from Blackfriars Bridge. ,The dict on a 39*year-old mother         in disasters so that they can
 Brodrick Committee in 1971
                                    offered against him.              dence for three prison officers     inquest returned a suicide o f two in South Africa.                make recommendations to
 again called for the abolition                                                                                                              Criminal trials in such cases
                                                                      to stand trial. The Director o f    verdict. The family were not                                       prevent similar fatalities. The
 o f this procedure. 'Yet it is       ’t h e change in the law did
                                                                      Public Prosecutions ruled out       content and obtained consent cannot be mounted in Britain          government should legislate
 perpetuated in the Coroner’s       not follow the 1936 recom­                                             for a fresh inquest,_ which and it is hard to see what is
 Act 1988 as verdicts o f unlaw­    mendations, endorsed by the       further action. There was then                                                                         to abolish the inquest juries’
                                                                      an inquest finding o f unlawful      returned an open verdict. Last achieved by such proceedings.      verdict that imputes criminal­
 ful killing are still permitted.    Brodrick Committee. Coro­
                                                                      killing and a bill o f indictment    year an Italian court decided Inquests even haa to be held        ity by allowing a finding o f
    Lord Lucan was the last          ners’ inquisitions could still
                                                                      was obtained. The three were         Signor Calvi had been mur­ on the bodies o f servicemen           unlawful killing.
 person to be named by a             consider criminal respon­
                                                                      tried and acquitted.                 dered. There were calls from returned for b u r ia l after the
 coroner’s jury as having            sibility for death but were                                           the family for a third inquest. Falklands conflict.                         '
                                                                                                                                                                                       :'5,:;?"koY'feDEY
 committed murder. The law           prohibited from naming any­         The conflict between an                                             It is beyond my comprehen­      •     author is a solicitors'
                                                                      unlawful killing verdict and            The persistence o f Ronald                                     managing clerk.            r
  was changed iii, 1976 sci, that    body they considered cul­                                             Smith, the father o f the nurse sion why the government has
                                     pable; Their verdict had to-be    nobody being held responsible
 cdronere*Ae$t#ier p p w it to
FILE NOTE DATED 8.9.90.

Mervyn Jones rang.     I told him that Sheila Coleman had been

on the phone and that I asked Linda to give her a message

to say a. that she should contact him and b. that she

could write if she wanted to either to me or to him.         He

confirmed that he would like Stan to deal with the

operational side and Sue to deal with the bricks and mortar

so to speak as otherwise there might be some confusion and

overload.     We also agreed that there was no reason why he

should come on Friday and indeed it was sensible that he

wasn't present at every meeting as he was obviously heavily

committed in other directions as well.

He told me that in the Telegraph it is reported that Mr.

Edey had commenced proceedings against the Attorney General

asking for Judicial Review of his decision.     Mr.   Edey

expressing the view that he thought the Club should be

prosecuted.     We decided that it didn't really make any

difference as far as the Inquests were concerned.      First of

all he had'nt succeeded yet and if he didn't it wouldn't

make any difference.     If he did before we started, that the

D.P.P. would want to await the outcome of the proceedings

before reviewing his decision anyway.




LESABI
                                                                      1 June     90


             Mr. R. Edey,




             Dear Mr. Edey,

             Thank you for your letter of the 22 May.

             With great respect, I am sorry to have to say that you appear again to be
             mistaken in your understanding of the position.
§   >
             I repeat, that it is for you to obtain appropriate legal advice, but I would
             recommend that you have a look at the provisions of Sections 15 - 17 of the
             Interpretation Act 1978 (see Coroners' Act 1988 Section 36 (6)).

             You may also find it helpful if you have a look at Section 11 of the
             Coroners’ Act 1988, paying particular attention to Sub Sections 2 and 5.

             I can see no reason for re-considering my position which I have already made
             clear in earlier letters.

             I would however ask you to think very carefully about what I have indicated
             to you in this and previous correspondence before taking any further steps.


             Yours sincerely,




             S.L.Popper,
             H.M.Coroner.




    REVAAO
                                         15th . May    1990
SLP/PAD


Mr. R. Edey,




Dear Mr. E^r&ey,

Thank you for your letter of 22nd April.

I know that we have been on touch with you but I am sorry that
it has not been possible to reply at an earlier date.

With very great respect you are mistaken regarding the powers
that the Coroners Jury have in relation to the addition of a
rider to their verdict.

It is a matter of course for you to obtain appropriate legal
advice on this matter but on this occasion in order to assist
you I would draw your attention to the following:

If you look at the Coroner’s Rules 1984 (SI 1984number  52)
you will see that in appendix 2 there is a pro-forma inquisition
and various verdicts are suggested.

You will find that the verdict recorded by Sir Montigue Levine
falls within those terms.

I also draw your   attention to Rules36, 41 and 42    of   the Coroner's
Rules which deal   with this point.

You may also find it helpful to look at R.v.HM Coroner for the
Eastern District of the Metropolitan County of West Yorkshire
ex part© National Union of Mineworkers Yorkshire Area, dated
18th October 1985 and R. v. Shrewsbury Coroners Court ex parte
British Parachute Association dated 31st July 1987, both cases
in the Queen's Bench Division and both reported in the Justice
of The Peace reports.

I hope that when you have had an opportunity of studying these
cases and references you will agree that there is no possibility
for the addition of a rider.
                                           15th May 1990

SLP/PAD


MR. R. Eadey (continued)


For the reasons I have already alluded to in my letter of 10th
April I am not minded to consider you as a witness in any
resumption of the inquests into the deaths of the 95 persons
who died at the Hillsborough Football Stadium.



Yours sincerely,




S. L. POPPER
H. M. CORONER
/
                                                       22nd April, 1 9 9 0 .

    S : . S*L - p°PP®r . Ll.fl. ,B.Med.Sci. ,B.M.,B,S., M.R.C.G.P.,
    Office of H.M. Coroner for South Yorkshire (West District)
    Medico-Legal Centre,
    Watery Street,
    Sheffield, S3 7ET.

    Dear Dr. Popper,

                       Re The Hillsborough Disaster,

        Thank you for your letter of the 10th April, the contents of which
    I note.    I am surprised at what you write in the third paragraph of your
    letter. Could I please be given your statutory authority for making that
    statement?

        It does not accord with the inquest held into the death of Germain Alexander
    in Brixton Prison, held by Sir Montague Levine, the Southwark Coroner, and
    concluded the day after you wrote your letter, i.e. the 11th April. His jury
    added a rider to the verdict of death by natural causes that the death was
    "aggravated by lack of care." I enclose newspaper reports for your
    consideration.

        That inquest fell squarely within Section 8 (3 ) (a) of the Coroner’s
    Act, 1 9 88 , whereas the inquest you are holding into the deaths at Hillsborough
    Stadium on the 15th April, 1 9 8 9 , f«uUs squarely within sub-clause (d) of that
    Section. There would be no point in sub-clauses (a) (b) and (d) if juries
    were precluded from adding riders to their verdicts. It is for that reason
    that I submit I am a competent witness to be called and should be looked upon
    as an expert witness to put before your jury the fact that there could be a
    recurrence of such deaths as there have been in the past unless lessons are
    learned and steps taken to prevent another disaster occurring.

        Furthermore, the deaths you sire enquiring into should not have occurred.
    They were entirely preventable^ Sheffield Wednesday Football Club knew, or
    should have known:-

    (a) That at an F.A. Cup semi-final at Hillsborough in 1981 there was
        crushing at the I&ppings Lane terraces? that 250 spectators had to go
        on to the pitch to escape the crush, and that there were 38 casualties
        which included broken legs arms and ribs.

    (b) That the Football Association and Liverpool Football Club maintained
        that Liverpool supporters could not be safely accommodated on the
        lappings Lane terraces on the 15th April, 1 9 8 9 .

    (c) That the pens were uncomfortably crowded at cup semi-finals in
        1987 and 1 9 88 .

    (d) That the Police were only prepared to police the match with Liverpool
        supporters being allocated the Lappings Lane terraces.
Dr. S.L.Popper.              Continuation.                       22nd April, 1990.


(e) That the decision nevertheless to hold the match at Hillsborough
    was their own.

(f) That that decision meant that less than 25% of Liverpool's average
    gate could be accommodated.

(g) That there were only seven turnstiles to admit 10,100 spectators
    against 42 turnstiles to admit 21,000 Nottingham Forest spectators
    at the other end of the ground.

(h) Thatthere had been no reduction made in. the 10,100 capacity as
    recommended by the police after the I98I incident.

(i) That no account had been taken of the sub division* of the terraces
    by way of amendment of the Safety Certificate.

(j) That there was no monitoring of the numbers entering the individual
    pens.

(k) That there was no stewarding of the terraces as required by the
    Government's Green Guide.

(l) That crush barriers were corroded with rust and collapsed as a result
    of overcrowding causing a number of deaths.

(m) That despite the 1981 incident and the Bradford fire, nothing had been
    done to ensure immediate access to the pitch in an emergency in accordance
    with Paragraph 215 of the Government's Green Guide and Mr. Justice
    Popplewell's report.

    For these reasons the Club showed a lack of care to those they had
invited into their ground as paying guests, and in particular to those who
lost their lives in this disaster.

    The negligence goes further and involves the Government. They had every
opportunity, after the tragic fire at Bradford City Football Ground, (which
again was entirely preventable) of ensuring that grounds were made safe for
spectators.

    They failed abysmally for the following reasons

(a) Under the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sports Act 1987 Itijfcmandatory
    conditions laid down in the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 to ^ Pu^ in
    safety certificates by local authorities were done away with and nothing
    was put in their place.

(b) No regulations to make provision for safety at sports grounds pursuant to
    Section 6 (2) of the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 were made or have been
    made by the Home Secretary.

(c) No statutory means of enforcement of safety provisions over local authorities
    have been taken.

(d) Existing legislation as regards safety certificates is deficient for the
    following reasons

    (i) There is no time limit within which a local authority has to
        issue a certificate.
Dr. S.L. Popper.             Gontinueation.                     22nd April, 1990.



    (ii) The penal sanction imposed by Section 12 of the 1975 Act
         is inoperative if application has been made by the Club
         for a Certificate.

    (iii) There is nothing to stop the Club admitting spectators
         without having a Safety Certificate. (Sheffield United did
         so between 1985 and 1 9 89 .)

(d) The issue of a certificate does not necessarily mean the ground
    is safe.

(e) Local Authorities are left to their own devices and given carte
    blance as to the contents and issue of a certificate.

(f) Certificates do not have to be reissued annually as recommended
    by Mr. Justice Popplewell after the Bradford fire and Lord Justice
    Taylor after Hillsborough.

(g) Instead of taking control to ensure so far as possible another tragedy
    does not occur the response to Lord Justice Ikylor's recommendations is
    that Local Authorities will be urged to comply on a piecemeal basis
    which has never worked and has already led to four fatal disasters
    involving more than 250 deaths.

    I enclose transcripts of the judgments of Lord Justices Glidewell
and Mann and Sir Denys Buckley upon the question of the Home Secretary
making regulations which I took to the Court of Appeal. I also enclose
a copy of the transcript of Mr. Justice Otton's judgment as to an inspection
of the grounds being made on behalf of the Home Secretary. I am also taking
this aspect of things to the Court of Appeal.

    These are enclosed for two reasons. I think you will agree that the
comments of the judges substantiate my request to be called as an expert
witness. None of the judges has denied that the Home Secretary could make
regulations or have the grounds inspected. Indeed, there is statutory
authority for both these things to be done. Had the grounds been inspected
after Bedford, the matters to which I have drawn attention would have been
discovered from the Club's records and an inspection of the ground. Had the
grounds been inspected subsequent to Hillsborough, the "near miss" situations
at Preston North End, Coventry City and particularly, Middlesborough grounds
could have been avoided.

    Following the pleasure boat disaster on the Thames, the Government
Minister immediately made voluntary safety regulations to do his utmost
to ensure that another disaster did. not occur. These regulations became
statutory iStediately prior to Easter.

    The Government has done nothing to ensure the safety of football spectators
despite all the disasters which have occurred. $?our jury should have the facts
placed before them so that they have the opportunity of adding a rider to
their verdict, as occurred on the 11th April at Southwark Coroners Court.
I submit this is entirely appropriate in the context of the coronal inquiry
it is your duty to conduct.
                             -4-


Dr. S.L. Popper.            Gontinueation                       22nd April, 1990,



    Regardless of whether the Director of Public Prosecutions considers
anybody should be charged in the criminal courts and appreciating that,
if charges are laid, the inquests could not be concluded until the courts
had reached a decision on the criminality involved, I maintain that when
that stage is reached your duty is clear. In the public interest you then
have to take cognisance of Section 8 (3) (d) of the Coroner's Act I988
and resume the inquisition along the lines indicated in this letter. To
prevent a recurrence so far as possible is the most important function you
have to perform.   I would wish to invite you to ask your jury to consider
adding a rider in the following terms:-

    "That those who died dfcL through lack of care by Sheffield
     Wednesday Football Club and that the deaths were aggravated by the
     negligence and incompetence of attention to the safety of spectators
     on the part of the Home Secretary and the Government."

    Such a rider would be fully justified for the reasons set out in this
letter. Only a verdict in these terms will ensure that such a disaster
never occurs again.

    If you propose not to proceed in this way and not to call me as a
witness, would you please let me know as soon as possible. If your decision
goes against me I will, in the public interest, challenge it in the High
Court by way of judicial review.

                            Yours sincerely,




                              ROY EDEY.
                                        I         inquest was told th a t no
             ApJJU
                                                    of m ental illness was
                                            ™a e during two court appear­
                                            ances by A lexander after
                                                                                       Prisoner vtfio
                                        onSDecCe4arreitelathishome                     died of heart
                                        causing „ ■            charged with
   Review of                                                                            attack had
   treatment                                                                            80 injuries
                                       S . t a X ° r Uh in the prison h°s-                 By John Steele
                                       warrippc o b5lng ^ s tr a in e d by
   in custody                                   ~ a doctor was called
                                      and offered advice over
                                      rnr°n e' ^ a t bothers m e” the
                                                                                        Courts Correspondent
                                                                                     A CORONER called for an
                                                                                       nquiry yesterday into the
   demanded                           coroner said. “ W hat

                                        ; , Set 3 doctor out in
                                                                         ?           treatm en t of p sy ch ia tric
                                                                                     patients in jail and police cells
                                                                                    after a verdict of “death by nat­
        By Quentin Cowdry             n ght and you d o n 't have
           Home Affairs                                                             ural causes aggravated by lack
                                      S tate registered n u rse”’                   rI v *3"5 ,was recorded on a
           Correspondent                                                            cnxton prison inmate.
   A CORONER called yester­          'whAn
                                      i g £ u2 UUJLers
                                                ! s £ in£n o S   !                  Hp„eK  nnxai n Alexander, 58, of
   day for a far-reaching Home                               t gear                          M ead, Alpha Road,
   Office review of the treatment    cW
                                      p|,e° ^ becam e violent in his                Edmonton, north London, had
   in custody of offenders with                                                    80 injuries, mainly cuts and
   psychiatric disorders.            H e was l a t e f p r o n o M c e d ^ a d     t /b f i r S: r hj s body- He also
     Sir Montague Levine,                                                          Wth K ^lUred,SPine 3nd tWO
   Southwark coroner, said there     Hospital.              g s C o lle g e        his th™ ♦        i 1 knocked down
                                                                                   “is throat and were only dis­
   was a need for an “urgent                                                       covered during the post-mor-
  review” of psychiatric treat­                                                    tem examination. .
  ment in prisons.
     He also urged the Home                                                       Snn'ti, M° ? tague Devine, the
                                                                                  oouthwark coroner, said he
  Office to review the way acute                                                  a u L ja th e r . a P P a lle d ” that
  psychiatric emergencies were                                                    Alexander, who had been men­
  handled in jails and to investi­                                                tally ill since 1983, was held in
  gate the possibility of ad­                                                    pnson rather than hosp,ta“
  missions to hospital direct                                                    after being arrested.
  from police stations.                                                             An inquest in Southwark this
     His recommendations came                                                                  d that A^exander ,
                                                                                 died from acute cardiac arrest
  after the jury at Southwark                                                    brought on by stress or a g ita ­
  Coroner’s Court returned a                                                     tion on Dec 6,1989. He was the I
  verdict that Mr Germain
  Alexander, aged 58, who fell ill                                               3“'“yea rnXtF
                                                                                     year.   F°ellow
                                                                                               nn riSOnperrist0odnieerisn
  at Brixton prison, south                                                       claimed at the inquest that he
  London, last December, died                                                    h.1t th en badlJ beaten bv staff
 of natural causes aggravated                                                    but this was denied bv orison
 by lack of care. Mr Alexander                                                   officers. The doctor whS car
 had a history of mental illness.                                               n e d out the post-m ortem
    During the nine-day inquest                                                 examination said the injuries
 it was alleged that Mr Alexan­                                                 were not consistent with his
                                                                                having been beaten up.
 der, of Edmonton, north
 London, who had been                                                              The coroner said he viewed
                                                                                some aspects of the inquest
 arrested for assaulting police                                           tv- with much “disquiet and con­
officers, had been beaten by                                                   cern. He said: “There is need
policemen and by Brixton                                                       tor an im m ediate inquiry
prison officers.                                                               regarding the dealing with
    The post-mortem examina­                                                   acute psychiatric patients in
tion showed that he had                                                        pnson, especially during the
suffered a fractured spine and                                                f'fhth ou rs.” The inquest was
that two teeth had been                                                       told that doctors would not
knocked into the back of his                                                  a“ end emergency night cases
throat. His body had dozens                                                   at Bnxton prison.
of cuts and bruises.                                                             He added: “There is need for
                                                                              an inquiry into the availability
    Dr Vesna Djurovic, who                                                   of dealing with acute psychiat-
conducted the examination,
said his injuries had not been                                               n«c e? ^ gencies and for the
                                                                             s io n J tn ll y  ,a c u t e admis­
fatal and that he died of acute                                              sions to hospitals from police
cardiac arrest brought on by
extreme agitation or stress.                                                  Ir!a ° ?S ln thC Metropolitan
                                                   22nd April, 1990.

Dr. S.L. Popper, L1,B.,B.Med.Sci.,B.M.,B.S., M.R.C.G.P.,
Office of H.M. Coroner for South Yorkshire (West District)
Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
Sheffield, S3 7ET.

Dear Dr. Popper,

                   Re The Hillsborough Disaster.

    Thank you for your letter of the 10th April, the contents of which
I note.    I am surprised at what you write in the third paragraph of your
letter. Could I please be given your statutory authority for making that
statement?

    It does not accord with the inquest held into the death of Germain Alexander
in Brixton Prison, held by Sir Montague Levine, the Southwark Coroner, and
concluded the day after you wrote your letter, i.e. the 11th April. His jury
added a rider to the verdict of death by natural causes that the death was
"aggravated by lack of care." I enclose newspaper reports for your
consideration.

    That inquest fell squarely within Section 8 (3 ) (a) of the Coroner's
Act, 1 988, whereas the inquest you are holding into the deaths at Hillsborough
Stadium on the 15th April, 1989 , fall* squarely within sub-clause (d) of that
Section. There would be no point in sub-clauses (a) (b) and (d) if juries
were precluded from adding riders to their verdicts. It is for that reason
that I submit I am a competent witness to be called and should be looked upon
as an expert witness to put before your jury the fact that there could be a
recurrence of such deaths as there have been in the past unless lessons are
learned and steps taken to prevent another disaster occurring.

    Furthermore, the deaths you are enquiring into should not have occurred.
They were entirely preventable-. Sheffield Wednesday Football Club knew, or
should have knowns-

(a) That at an F.A. Cup sett-final at Hillsborough in 1981 there was
    crushing at the lappings Lane terraces; that 250 spectators had to go
    on to the pitch to escape the crush, and that there were 38 casualties
    which included broken legs arms and ribs.

(b) That the Football Association and Liverpool Football Club maintained
    that Liverpool supporters could not be safely accommodated on the
    lappings Lane terraces on the 15th April, 1 9 8 9 .

(c) That the pens were uncomfortably crowded at cup semi-finals in
    198? and 1 9 8 8 .

(d) That the Police were only prepared to police the match with Liverpool
    supporters being allocated the Lappings Lane terraces.
Dr. S.L.Popper.             Continuation.                        22nd April, 1990.


(e) That the decision nevertheless to hold the match at Hillsborough
    was their own.

(f) That that decision meant that less than 25% of Liverpool's average
    gate could be accommodated.

(g) That there were only seven turnstiles to admit 10,100 spectators
    against 42 turnstiles to admit 21,000 Nottingham Forest spectators
    at the other end of the ground.

(h) Thatthere had been no reduction made in the 10,100 capacity as
    recommended by the police after the 1981 incident.

(i) That no account had been taken of the sub division*? of the terraces
    by way of amendment of the Safety Certificate.

(j) That there was no monitoring of the numbers entering the individual
    pens.

(k) That there was no stewarding of the terraces as required by the
    Government's Green Guide.

(l) That crush barriers were corroded with rust and collapsed as a result
    of overcrowding causing a number of deaths.

(m) That despite the 1981 incident*and the Bradford fire, nothing had been
    done to ensure immediate access to the pitch in an emergency in accordance
    with Paragraph 215 of the Government's Green Guide and Mr. Justice
    Popplewell's report.

    For these reasons the Club showed a lack of care to those they had
invited into their ground as paying guests, and in particular to those who
lost their lives in this disaster.

    The negligence goes further and involves the Government. They had every
opportunity, after the tragic fire at Bradford City Football Ground, (which
again was entirely preventable) of ensuring that grounds were made safe for
spectators.

    They failed abysmally for the following reasonss-

(a) Under the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sports Act 198 ? Atofcmtedatory
    conditions laid down in the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 to be put in
    safety certificates by local authorities were done away with and nothing
    was put in their place.

(b) No regulations to make provision for safety at sports grounds pursuant to
    Section 6 (2) of the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 were made or have been
    made by the Home Secretary.

(c) No statutory means of enforcement of safety provisions over local authorities
    have been taken.

(d) Existing legislation as regards safety certificates is deficient for the
    following reasonst-

    (i) There is no time limit within which a local authority has to
        issue a certificate.
Dr. S.L. Popper.             Continueation.                      22nd April, I990



    (ii) The penal sanction imposed by Section 12 of the 1975 Act
         is inoperative if application has been made by the Club
         for a Certificate.

    (iii) There is nothing to stop the Club admitting spectators
         without having a Safety Certificate. (Sheffield United did
         so between 1985 and I989 .)

(d) The issue of a certificate does not necessarily mean the ground
    is safe.

(e) Local Authorities are left to their own devices and given carte
    blance as to the contents and issue of a certificate.

(f) Certificates do not have to be reissued annually as recommended
    by Mr. Justice Popplewell after the Bradford fire and Lord Justice
    Taylor after Hillsborough.

(g) Instead of taking control to ensure so far as possible another tragedy
    does not occur the response to Lord Justice l&ylor's recommendations is
    that Local Authorities will be urged to comply on a piecemeal basis
    which has never worked and has already led to four fatal disasters
    involving more than 250 deaths.

     I enclose transcripts of the judgments of Lord Justices Glidewell
and Mann and Sir Denys Buckley upon the question of the Home Secretary
making regulations which I took to the Court of Appeal. I also enclose
a copjr of the transcript of Mr. Justice Otton's judgment as to an inspection
of the grounds being made on behalf of the Home Secretary. I am also taking
this aspect of things to the Court of Appeal.

    These are enclosed for two reasons. I think you will agree that the
comments of the judges substantiate my request to be called as an expert
witness. None of the judges has denied that the Home Secretary could make
regulations or have the grounds inspected. Indeed, there is statutory
authority for both these things to be done. Had the grounds been inspected
after Bradford, the matters to which I have drawn attention would have been
discovered from the Club's records and an inspection of the ground. Had the
grounds been inspected subsequent to Hillsborough, the "near miss” situations
at Preston North End, Coventry City and particularly, Middlesborough grounds
could have been avoided.

    Following the pleasure boat disaster on the Thames, the Government
Minister immediately made voluntary safety regulations to do his utmost
to ensure that another disaster did not occur. These regulations became
statutory Mediately prior to Easter.

    The Government has done nothing to ensure the safety of football spectators
despite all the disasters which have occurred, j^our jury should have the facts
placed before them so that they have the opportunity of adding a rider to
their verdict, as occurred on the 11th April at Southwark Coroners Court.
I submit this is entirely appropriate in the context of the coronal inquiry
it is your duty to conduct.
Dr. S.L. Popper.            Continueation                       22nd April, 1990.



    Regardless of whether the Director of Public Prosecutions considers
anybody should be charged in the criminal courts and appreciating that,
if charges are laid, the inquests could not be concluded until the courts
had reached a decision on the criminality involved, I maintain that when
that stage is reached your duty is clear. In the public interest you then
have to take cognisance of Section 8 (3) (d) of the Coroner's Act 1988
and resume the inquisition along the lines indicated in this letter. To
prevent a recurrence so far as possible is the most important function you
have to perform.   I would wish to invite you to ask your jury to consider
adding a rider in the following termss-

    "That those who died dfa through lack of care by Sheffield
     Wednesday Football Club and that the deaths were aggravated by the
     negligence and incompetence of attention to the safety of spectators
     on the part of the Home Secretary and the Government."

    Such a rider would be fully justified for the reasons set out in this
letter. Only a verdict in these terms will ensure that such a disaster
never occurs again.

    If you propose not to proceed in this way and not to call me as a
witness, would you please let me know as soon as possible. If your decision
goes against me I will, in the public interest, challenge it in the High
Court by way of judicial review.

                            Yours sincerely,
       >H& i                                The inquest was told that nn
                                         “ ention of mental illness was
                                                  during two court appear­
                                         ances by Alexander after he
                                                                                       who
                                        was twjce arrested at Ws home
                                        on Dec 4 and charged with
                                                                              died of heart
  Review of
                                        causing gnevous bodily harm
                                       and assaulting police officers.
                                                                               attack had
                                       . ^ t e r . S i r Montague was told
                                                                               80 Injuries
  treatment                            that when A lexander was
                                      rpital
                                          t T after
                                               aS£ ° Ubeing
                                                        K “ the prison hos­
                                                             restrained bv         By John Steele
                                                                                Courts Correspondent
  in custody                          aid ! 2/ 0advice
                                       2 offered 0]” was
                                                       overcalled
                                                              the
                                     l Phone. That bothers me” the
                                                                           A CORONER called for an
                                                                           inquiry yesterday into the
  demanded                             coroner said. “What sort of
                                      “h oTs p i t'a 00
                                                     l s you have Tifyyou
                                      nfnht g ,a doctor out in the
                                                                      oJ
                                                                           trea tm en t o f p sy ch ia tric
                                                                          1patients
                                                                             panentsinInjail
                                                                                        j a i land
                                                                           after avverdict
                                                                          afte,ra
                                                                                                andpolice
                                                                                                    policecells
                                                                                                            cells
                                                                                            of “death by nat-
                                                                                    erdictof“deathbynat-
      By Quentin Cowdry               c l f f i an.d y°u don’t have a     u[ al causes aggravated by lack
          Home Affairs                state registered nurse”?            of
                                                                           -- care” was recorded    1CI.Uon
                                                                                                          1U a
         Correspondent                   A lexander was rem oved          Bnxtnn
                                                                          xsnxton nric™
                                                                                    prison inmate.
                                        o m h i e ™»li *_________ ,
 A CORONER called yester­           ' f ^ his cell to a S o c ia l’S         Germain Alexander, 58, of
 day for a far-reaching Home            , r°om by officers in riot gear   High M ead, Alpha Road,
 Office review of the treatment                                           Edmonton, north London, had
                                    cell in the early hours of Dec 6      80 injuries, mainly cuts and
 in custody of offenders with       He was later pronounced dead          abrasions, on his body. He also
 psychiatric disorders.                                                   had a fractured spine and two
   Sir Montague Levine,             arrTva|S^t ^ eart attack on teeth            had been knocked down
 Southwark corona-, said there      HospitaV       KlDgS C o l,e « e     his throat and were only dis­
 was a need for an “urgent                                               covered during the post-mor­
 review” of psychiatric treat­                                           tem examination. .
 ment in prisons.                                                           Sir Montague Levine, the
   He also urged the Home                                                i>outhwark coroner, said he
 Office to review the way acute                                          was “rather appalled” that
 psychiatric emergencies were                                            Alexander, who had been men­
 handled in jails and to investi­                                       tally ill since 1983, was held in
                                                                        prison rather than hospital
gate the possibility of ad­                                             after being arrested.
 missions to hospital direct
from police stations.                                                      An inquest in Southwark this
                                                                        week heard that Alexander
   His recommendations came                                             died from acute cardiac arrest
after the jury at Southwark                                             Drought on by stress or agita­
Coroner’s Court returned a                                              tion on Dec 6,1989. He was the
 verdict that Mr Germain                                                ninth Brixton prisoner to die in
 Alexander, aged 58, who fell ill                                       a year. F ello w p riso n ers
at Brixton prison, south                                               F*aj® ed at the inquest that he
London, last December, died                                            had been badly beaten bv staff
of natural causes aggravated                                                            dJenied      Prison
by lack of care. Mr Alexander                                          officers. The doctor who car­
had a history of mental illness.                                       ried out the post-m ortem
                                                                       examination said the injuries
   During the nine-day inquest                                         were not consistent with his
it was alleged that Mr Alexan­                                         having been beaten up.
der, of Edmonton, north                                                   The coroner said he viewed
London, who had been                                                   some aspects of the inquest
arrested for assaulting police                                         with much “disquiet and con­
officers, had been beaten by                                          cern.” He said: “There is need
policemen and by Brixton                                              for an im m ediate inquiry
prison officers.                                                      regarding the dealing with
   The post-mortem examina­                                           acute psychiatric patients in
                                                                      prison, especially during the
tion showed that he had                                               night hours.” The inquest was
suffered a fractured spine and                                        told that doctors would not
that two teeth had been                                               attend emergency night cases
knocked into the back o f his                                        at Brixton prison.
throat. His body had dozens                                              He added: “There is need for
of cuts and bruises.                                                 an inquiry into the availability
   Dr Vesna Djurovic, who                                            of dealing with acute psychiat-
conducted the examination,                                           nc emergencies and for the
said his injuries had not been                                       possibility for acute admis­
fatal and that he died of acute                                      sions to hospitals from police
cardiac arrest brought on by                                         stations in the Metropolitan
                                                                     area.
extreme agitation or stress.
             V      . ^ e b M               o


**ho 4 ^ b olU fc/ '%j&XsJ
           tLfi_ ( -s ~\\sOst—€   \

  .-^o .
       u ^ noI f
               OT   Kx   fi   U o .'rl ,P
                                                10th May

'JT.




:ftr« R. Edey,




Dear Mr. Edey,

Further to my last letter, the Coroner is away for a few
days on holiday, but he will be writing to you upon hi8
return.

Yours iftaerely,




Secretary to H.M.Goroner.
                                              1st May      90.




Mr. R. Edey,




Bear Mr. Edey,

The Coroner has asked me to say that he will he replying
to your letter and regrets the delay*


Yours sincerely.



Secretary to H.M.Qoroaer,
                                                  10th A pril         90.
    SLP/JT.

 H p « R« Bday,




 Dear Hr. Bdey,

 Sai

 Thank you far your letter of the 4th of April.

              tb!wtSv? l ?        taken in writing to m         and
 aa obliged for the Mndli of papers enclosed.

S i V y * * . ? * th® r«*w^tion next w»ek, the interested parties
S d J S « T i i SS**          ®°°!f of      i»q«i5T Which Will be
mAOTfcaicwB at this particular tiae and it would* apart from all
                         “•* *• appaeopriata to oall you as a witness


1(5*1* fiBe J° S?1?* 0Ut **** Jurl*s **• ao longer allowed to
add a rider to thair w d i e t .

                     t***70'1 * * *      the inference from what
L              bitten, that I would be prepared to call you to
                 ** •“y,suitable subsequent hearings (if any).
Iwant to aaka it quit* clear that fro® a consideration of
the papers which you enclose, it doas not appear to ae that
3t m a r e a properly interested party nor that the evidence that
^    w « M aj*aar to wish to give would be appropriate in the
context of a ooronal inquiry.

Wh4J?           «4*k « » t an Inquest is the oorreot form. I
*£?+»!*+     F * ^ T#           great deal of work and effort,
and that you ha*e bean able to put before Lord Juatioe Taylor
and others, your views of what you feel might assist in the
reduction of the risfcaof a recurrence of a siailar disaster.
Toura sincerely,



S.L.Popper,
4 April 1990


Dr S I Popper
Her Majesty's Coroner
Coroner's Court
Sheffield
Yorks


Dear Dr Popper

Re: The Hillsborough Disaster

I understand you are to open the inquests into the 95 people who died
in the Hillsborough Disaster on the 18th April. I hope you will consider
me a competent witness within Section 11 (2) of the Coroners Act 1988
to be called and examined as a witness having knowledge of the facts
as to how the disaster occurred and should have been avoided. I think
it is particularly important that your jury should have such information
bearing in mind in Section 8 (3) (d) of the Acta Parliament requires
you to summon a jury where "the death occurred in circumstances the continuance
or possible recurrence of which is prejudicial to the health or safety
of the public or any section of the public".

Hillsborough was the fifth major disaster at a British FootballLeague
Club ground. It was the third disaster involving deaths through crushing
since 1946. In that year 33 people were crushed to death at Bolton Wanderers
ground and in 1971 a 66 people were crushed to death at Ibrox Park. Lord
Justice Taylor in his Final Report drew attention to an incident at
Middlesborough's ground eight months after Hillsborough where more than
2000 Leeds spectators were crushed behind perimeter fencing with no means
of escape in an emergency. Spectators had to be taken to hospital.
Lord Justice Taylor said it was horribly reminiscent of Hillsborough.
It was as if Hillsborough had never occurred.

On the 21st ISbvortaeCA last a I appeared in the High Court to ask Mr Justice
Simon Brown to require the Home Secretary to make regulations making
provision for securing safety at sports grounds pursuant to Section 6
(2) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975. I told the judge that
there was nothing to stop another disaster occurring at any time. Less
than three weeks later the Middlesborough incident occurred. The Home
Secretary has made no safety regulations despite Lord Justice Taylor
recommending that he should do so.

After the terrible fire at Bradford in 1985 and before introducing legislation,
i.e. The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sports Act 1987 the Government
had every opportunity of reviewing safety at the Football League grounds.
Had they done so they would have seen the report which Lord Justice
Taylor saw and reported upon in his Interim Report. That showed that
    2



    in 1981 at Hillsborough there was severe crushing involving broken arms,
    legs and ribs and that 250 people had to escape on to the pitch. There
    was also crushing in the pens in 1988 and 1989. The Home Secretary,
    under Section 11 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 can order an
    independent investigation of sports grounds on his behalf. That power
    was not invoked by Mr Douglas Hurd.

    In a separate legal action I have recently asked Mr Justice Otten to
    require the Home Secretary to arraange for an inspection to establish
    whether grounds are safe to his satisfaction. I will be sending you
    a transcript of his judgement when I receive it shortly. I am taking
    the matter to the Court of Appeal and enclose the documentation together
    with a copy of the submissions I will be making. I also enclose a copy
    of my file as regards the criminality of the incident so far as Sheffield
    Wednesday Football Club is concerned.

    There could be another disaster at any time. There is no time limit
    on the issue of a Safety Certificate (Sheffield United applied for one
    in 1985 and it had still not been issued in August 1989). The issue
»   of a Safety Certificate does not mean the ground is safe. Provided a
    club has applied for a Safety Certificate to the Local Authority it cannot
    have committed an offence. Neither is the Local Authority penalised
    for not issuing the Certificate. The Safety Certificate does not have
    to be re-issued annually as recommended by Mr Justice Popplewell after
    Bradford and Lord Justice Taylor. It is not unlawful to continue to
    admit spectators to a ground which is unsafe.

    In his safety recommendations in his Final Report, Lord Justice Taylor
    included these words in brackets again and again, "if this has not been
    done following the interim report". He does not know whether and to
    what extent his recommendations have been followed. Neither does the
    Government and, in particular, the Home Secretary. I hope you will agree
    that your jury should be made fully aware of the position from the point
    of view of adding any rider to their verdict.

    I notice that Section 11 (2) of the Coroners Act 1988 states "The coroner
    shall, at the first sitting of the inquest, examine on oath etc". That
    is why I am writing to you at this stage. I apologise to have done so
    at such length but you will appreciate that having involved myself since
    the tragic death of two local girls, Victoria and Sarah Hicks, at Hillsborough,
    I am determined so far as humanly possible to see that such a disaster
    never happens again.

    Yours sincerely




    Roy Edey



    Enc
X- L     d                                                                    hi   -




       FILE MOTE DATED 27.4.90.


       Dr. Khapman rang in the evening.   He apparently had had a letter from
       Mr. Edey which was in fact a copy of the letter addressed to the
       Attorney General saying that Dr. Knapman was falling into the
       same error as I had fallen in to, and that it was hardly surprising
       as both he and I had no legal qualifications. Would the Attorney
       General please ensure that we were put right.
       Dr. Knapman was a little bit upset that his authorship and qualification
       was not recognised and said that he had faxed the letter to me (which
       I have not received) from Mr. Edey and asked when I reply would I
       please deal with this point as appropriate.


       He Ire ry briefly discussed the Marchioness in Section 16.   I just said
       that I thought that it raised some very interesting points and which
       I had noted and which he had.   The reason as a result what he was
       intending to do raised some very interesting and difficult problems.
  r                                                 k




FILE NOTE DATED 1 8 . 4 . 9 0 . at about 9.40a.m.




Telephone message from a lady at the Memorial Hall that a

Mr. Edey had rung Dr. Forrest saying that he insisted that

somebody speak to him, otherwise he was going to the

Attorney General to have the proceedings declared illegal,

void and improper, or words to that effe ct.            I asked

Mr.Jones to arrange for someone from West Midlands Police

to speak to Mr. Edey to find out exactly what it is that he

is after and to remind Mr. Edey of the feelings of the

families, who of course are already on their way to

Sheffield.    On the other hand, to make it absolutely clear

that Mr.Edey is entirely free to do whatever he may wish.

Mr. Edey is obviously wanting to take proceedings under

Section 11(2) which provides that theCoroner shall at first

sit in the Inquest to examine the evidence                nlny

             on oath .   Apart from the fact that this is not

the first sitting, he has to persuade the AttorneyGeneral

that under Section 3 (1) (b) that theCoroner refuses to

hold an inquest which ought to be held.       The alternative

under Section 3 (1)      (b) which provides that when an

inquest has been held, as this has not in fact taken place




POPACX
                      -   2   -




I cannot see how the Attorney General can act, but we will

see.




POPACX
4 April 1990


Dr S I Popper
Her Majesty's Coroner
Coroner's Court
Sheffield
Yorks


Dear Dr Popper

Re: The Hillsborough Disaster

I understand you are to open the inquests into the 95 people who died
in the Hillsborough Disaster on the 18th April. I hope you will consider
me a competent witness within Section 11 (2) of the Coroners Act 1988
to be called and examined as a witness having knowledge of the facts
as to how the disaster occurred and should have been avoided. I think
it is particularly important that your jury should have such information
bearing in mind in Section 8 (3) (d) of the Act, Parliament requires
you to summon a jury where "the death occurred in circumstances the continuance
or possible recurrence of which is prejudicial to the health or safety
of the public or any section of the public".

Hillsborough was the fifth major disaster at a British Football League
Club ground. It was the third disaster involving deaths through crushing
since 1946. In that year 33 people were crushed to death at Bolton Wanderers
ground and in 1971, 66 people were crushed to death at Ibrox Park. Lord
Justice Taylor in his Final Report drew attention to an incident at
Middlesborough1s ground eight months after Hillsborough where more than
2000 Leeds spectators were crushed behind perimeter fencing with no means
of escape in an emergency. Spectators had to be taken to hospital.
Lord Justice Taylor said it was horribly reminiscent of Hillsborough.
It was as if Hillsborough had never occurred.

On the 21st NcMaiber, last/ I appeared in the High Court to ask Mr Justice
Simon Brown to require the Home Secretary to make regulations making
provision for securing safety at sports grounds pursuant to Section 6
(2) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975. I told the judge that
there was nothing to stop another disaster occurring at any time. Less
than three weeks later the Middlesborough incident occurred. The Home
Secretary has made no safety regulations despite Lord Justice Taylor
recommending that he should do so.

After the terrible fire at Bradford in 1985 and before introducing legislation,
i.e. The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sports Act 1987 the Government
had every opportunity of reviewing safety at the Football League grounds.
Had they done so they would have seen the report which Lord Justice
Taylor saw and reported upon in his Interim Report. That showed that
    *




        in 1981 at Hillsborough there was severe crushing involving broken arms,
        legs and ribs and that 250 people had to escape on to the pitch. There
        was also crushing in the pens in 1988 and 1989. The Home Secretary,
        under Section 11 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 can order an
        independent investigation of sports grounds on his behalf. That power
        was not invoked by Mr Douglas Hurd.

        In a separate legal action I have recently asked Mr Justice Otten to
        require the Home Secretary to arraange for an inspection to establish
        whether grounds are safe to his satisfaction. I will be sending you
        a transcript of his judgement when I receive it shortly. I am taking
        the matter to the Court of Appeal and enclose the documentation together
        with a copy of the submissions I will be making. I also enclose a copy
        of my file as regards the criminality of the incident so far as Sheffield
        Wednesday Football Club is concerned.

        There could be another disaster at any time. There is no time limit

%       on the issue of a Safety Certificate (Sheffield United applied for one
        in 1985 and it had still not been issued in August 1989). The issue
        of a Safety Certificate does not mean the ground is safe. Provided a
        club has applied for a Safety Certificate to the Local Authority it cannot
        have committed an offence. Neither is the Local Authority penalised
        for not issuing the Certificate. The Safety Certificate does not have
        to be re-issued annually as recommended by Mr Justice Popplewell after
        Bradford and Lord Justice Taylor. It is not unlawful to continue to
        admit spectators to a ground which is unsafe.

        In his safety recommendations in his Final Report, Lord Justice Taylor
        included these words in brackets again and again, "if this has not been
        done following the interim report". He does not know whether and to
        what extent his recommendations have been followed. Neither does the
        Government and, in particular, the Home Secretary. I hope you will agree
        that your jury should be made fully aware of the position from the point
        of view of adding any rider to their verdict.

        I notice that Section 11 (2) of the Coroners Act 1988 states "The coroner
        shall, at the first sitting of the inquest, examine on oath etc". That
%       is why I am writing to you at this stage. I apologise to have done so
        at such length but you will appreciate that having involved myself since
        the tragic death of two local girls, Victoria and Sarah Hicks, at Hillsborough,
        I am determined so far as humanly possible to see that such a disaster
        never happens again.

        Yours sincerely




        Roy Edey



        Enc
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                                    CQ/117/90

   Q U E E N >S BENCH DIVISION

                                                Royal Courts of Justice

                                                Friday,   23rd March 1990

                                  Before:


                            M R JUSTICE OTTON




                            Crown Office List



                                 THE QUEEN

                                   _ v —

          THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                            Ex parte ROY EDEY




(Transcript of the Shorthand Notes of Marten Walsh Cherer
 Limited, Pemberton House, East Harding Street, London EC4A 3AS.
 Telephone Number: 01-583 7635.  Shorthand Writers to the Court.)




THE APPLICANT appeared in person.




                             J U D G M E N T
                           AS Al'jrROVZD BY THE JUDGE
MR JUSTICE OTTON:   This is a renewed application by Mr Roy Edey

    who seeks leave to bring judicial      review proceedings against

    the Home Secretary.     He describes himself as a sports

    spectator and a football supporter who is concerned about what

    he sees as the lack of safety precautions and measures at

    sports grounds and in particular at Association Football

    grounds.

          He is not alone in having such feelings.        He must share

    that anxiety along with thousands and thousands of persons in

    this country.   He tells me,      (and I accept it from him because

    he is a former member of the legal profession)       that he has the

    support of the British Safety Council       in his efforts to

    galvanise football administrators and all those       responsible

    for safety at football grounds into some positive action.

          He has been before the Courts on a previous occasion

    when he has sought to obtain relief and positive action under

    section 6 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.        The

    matter came before Simon Brown J, at first instance,who

    dismissed his application.        He then appealed to the Court of

    Appeal and on 26th February 1990 the Court of Appeal dismissed

    the appeal.

          In the meantime,     Mr Edey has mounted another ground of

    attack.    He is seeking relief from the court under section 11

    of the same Act.      He seeks judicial   review in respect of the

    Home Secretary's letter of 28th December 1989 in reply to Mr

    Edey's letter of 15th December 1989        It is not necessary for



                                  1
 the purposes of this application for me to read those letters.

The essence of the application is that Mr Edey seeks leave to

appiy for a Order of the Court to require the Secretary of

State to arrange for an independent inspection of all 92

Football League Club Grounds without delay to establish

whether the safety of spectators is ensured to his

satisfaction.

      The grounds on which relief is sought have been

succinctly set out on form 86A and they have been skillfully

and courteously expanded by Mr Edey in his submissions before

me this morning.    in effect,   he argues that an independent

investigation of all 92 Football League Clubs in England and

Wales by the Home Secretary is imperative in the interests of

the safety of sports spectators.     Football League Clubs seem

unable to cope and local authorities are proving to be just as

inadequate in this connection.

      He says that there have been five major disasters at

British Football League grounds and if leave were granted it

is his intention to bring before the court details of three,

what he calls,   'near-miss disasters'   at British Football

League grounds since the Hillsborough disaster which occurred

in April 1989.

      He contends that the Home Secretary must exercise his

discretion and invoke his powers under section 11 of the Act

as the only way it can be established on a national basis

whether sports grounds are safe; the Home Secretary is failing
in his statutory duty by not doing so.

      It is, necessary to look at the precise language of

section 11, which provides:

                  "A person authorised by



                  (a)     the local authority;



                  (b)    the chief officer of police;



                  (c)    the building authority;     or



                  (d)    the Secretary of State,



                  may"    —   I pause to emphasise the word "may"

                  —     "on production if so required of his

                  authority,       enter a sports ground at any

                  reasonable time,       and make such inspection of

                  it and such enquiries relating to it as he

                  considers necessary for the purposes of this Act,

                  and in particular may examine record of attendance

                  at the ground and records relating to the

                  maintenance of safety at        the ground,   and take

                  copies of such records."



      I must bear in mind, of course,        that the purpose of the

Act as stated:   the headnote is to make provision for safety at



                               3
sports stadia and other grounds.       However,   the question arises

whether this court has any power to require the Home Secretary

to exercise the powers given to him under that section.          It is

to be noted that the Home Secretary or the Home Office

itself,   is not required to carry out such inspections but the

section empowers the Home Secretary to authorise a person

other then himself to carry out such inspections.

      Mr Edey realistically acknowledges that it would be

impractical for the Home Secretary himself to carry out such

inspections but contends he should require competent         persons

to be authorised to carry out such an inspection.        As he puts

it in his affidavit:

                  "... the Home Secretary has failed to give me an

                  assurance that he will at least have had

                  carried out" —     he would wish me to emphasise

                  the word "had" —     "an independent inspection

                  of the 92 Football League Grounds by the 14th

                  January 1990, or by any other date"       as he is

                  empowered to do this under section 11 of the

                  Act.

      I have considered all the papers which Mr Edey has

lodged with the court which include both the interim and final

reports of Taylor L.J on the Hillsborough disaster,        the

correspondence,   between Mr Edey and the Home Office and in

particular the submissions that were lodged by Mr Edey when he

recently conducted his case before the Court of Appeal.          At



                            4
        \




            paragraph 10 of his submissions he states as follows:

            "without regulations under section 6(2)    the safety legislation

            enacted by Parliament is meaningless.     It is to be hoped thaC

            it can be cured by regulations.   The reasons for this

    B       contention are as follows:

                  (a)   There is no time limit on the issue of a safety

                  certificate by a local authority.



    C             (b)   The issue of a safety certificate does not mean

                  that the ground is safe.



                  (c)   Provided a club has applied for its safety
    D             certificate to the local authority it cannot have

                  conwnited an offence under section 12(3).



                  (d)   It is not unlawful to continue to admit spectators
    E             to a ground which is unsafe.



                  (e)   The safety certificate does not have to be

                  re-issued annually by the local authority".
    F

            At paragraph 11 he states that "the public interest demands


i



                 As I say, those sentiments are shared by many and in my
                                                              S'
            view the anxiety which Mr Edey displays is manidest,




    H                                 5
well-intentioned and entirely genuine.

         However,   the difficulty which Mr Edey faces by coming

before me today is the language of section 11 itself.         First

of all,    the section requires a person to be authorised to

carry out such an inspection.       When such a person has been

authorised he is entitled (but not obliged)        to enter a sports

ground,    to carry out such an inspection and to examine records

etc.     The word "may"   , in my judgment,   in this context cannot

possibly be construed as meaning "must" so as to impose a

positive duty upon the Secretary of State which can be

enforced through the Courts.

         In -Short, this court has no power to require the

Minister of State either to authorise a person to carry out

such an inspection or to require the Secretary of State to

ensure that a person who has been so authorised does carry out

or has carried out such an inspection.        Much as I would like

to help Mr Edey, as he put it, to "find a peg iji which to hang

his case"     I regret I cannot do so under section 11 as he

would wish me to do.

        It may be that he regards the Home Secretary,      as he put

it,    "as being in grave dereliction of his duties to ensure

that sports stadia are safe for those resorting to them,         bit
the e x i s t i n g legislation is insufficient to ensure this

safety".

        I cannot use that description of the apparent reluctance

by the Home Secretary,     as Mr Edey see's it to allow Mr Edey to
proceed by way o£ judicial review of the Hone Secretary's

decision in his letter.       For those reasons I must reject the

application.   Thank you, Mr Edey.




                          7
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                                 CQ/117/90
   QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION

                                             Royal Courts of Justice

                                             Friday.   23rd March 1990

                               Before:


                        M R JUSTICE OTTON




                        Crown Office List



                             THE QUEEN

                               - v —

         THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                        Ex parte ROY EDEY




(Transcript of the Shorthand Notes of M a rten W alsh Cherer
 Limited, Pemberton House, East Harding Street, London EC4A 3A S .
 Telephone Number: 01-583 7635.  Shorthand Writers to the Court.)




THE APPLICANT appeared in person.




                         J U D G M E N T
                       AS APPR O V E D BY THE JUDGE
MR JUSTICE OTTON:        This is a renewed application by Mr Roy Edey

    who seeks leave to bring judicial review proceedings against

    the Home Secretary.        He describes himself as a sports

    spectator and a football supporter who is concerned about what

    he sees as the lack of safety precautions and measures at

    sports grounds and in particular at Asso ciation Football

    grounds.

             He is not alone in having such feelings.           He must share

    that anxiety along with thousands and thousands of persons in

    this country.        He tells me,       (and I accept it from him because

    he is a former member of the legal profession)             that he has the

    support of the British Safety Council in his efforts to

    galvanise football administrators and all those responsible

    for safety at football grounds into some positive action.

             He has been before the Courts on a previous occasion

    when he has sought to obtain relief and positive action under

    section 6 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.              The

    matter came before Simon Brown J, at first instance,who

    dismissed his application.              He then appealed to the Court of

    Appeal and on 26th February 1990 the Court of Appeal dismissed

     the a p p e a l .

              In the meantime, Mr Edey has mounted another ground of

     attack.      He is seeking relief from the court under section 11

     of the same Act.        He seeks judicial review in respect of the

     Home Secretary's letter of 28th December 1989 in reply to Mr

     Edey's letter of 15th December 1989             It is not necessary for



                                        1
the purposes of this application for me to read those letters.

The essence of the application     is that Mr Edey seeks leave to

apply for a Order of the Court     to require the   Secretary of

State to arrange for an independent inspection of all 92

Football League Club Grounds without delay to establish

whether the safety of spectators is ensured to his

satisfaction.

      The grounds on which relief is sought have been

succinctly set out on form 8 6 A and they have been skillfully

and courteously expanded by Mr Edey in his submissions before

me this morning,    in effect, he argues that an independent

investigation of all 92 Football League Clubs in England and

Wales by the Home Secretary is imperative in the interests of

the safety of sports spectators.     Football League Clubs seem

unable to cope and local authorities are proving to be just as

inadequate in this connection.

      He says that there have been five major disasters at

British Football League grounds and if leave were granted it

is his intention to bring before the court details of three,

what he calls,   'near-miss disasters'   at British Football

League grounds since the Hillsborough disaster which occurred

in April 1989.

      He contends that the Home Secretary must exercise his

discretion and invoke his powers under section 11 of the Act

as the only way it can be established on a national basis

whether sports grounds are safe; the Home Secretary is failing
 m   his statutory duty by not doing so.

        It is, necessary to look at the precise language of
 section 11, which provides:

                   "A person authorised by



                   (a)    the local authority;



                   (b)    the chief officer of police;



                   (c)    the building authority;   or



                   (d)    the Secretary of State,



                  may"        1 pause to emphasise the word "may"

                         on production if so required of his

                  authority,   enter a sports ground at any

                  reasonable time, and make such inspection of

                  it and such enquiries relating to it as he

                  considers necessary for the purposes of this Act,

                  and in particular may examine      record of attendance

                  at the ground and records relating to the

                  maintenance of safety at       the ground, and take

                  copies of such records."



      I must bear in mind,     of course,   that the purpose of the

Act as stated:   the headnote is to make provision for safety at
sports stadia and other grounds.       However,   the question arises

whether this court has any power to require the Home Secretary

to exercise the powers given to him under that section.         It is

to be noted that the Home Secretary or the Home Office

itself,   is not required to carry out such inspections but the

section empowers the Home Secretary to authorise a person

other then himself to carry out such inspections.

      Mr Edey realistically acknowledges that it would be

impractical for the Home Secretary himself to carry out such

inspections but contends he should require competent         persons

to be authorised to carry out such an inspection.        As he puts

it in his affidavit:

                  "... the Home Secretary has failed to give me an

                  assurance that he will at least have had

                  carried out" —     he would wish me to emphasise

                  the word "had" —     "an independent inspection

                  of the 92 Football League Grounds by the 14th

                  January 1990, or by any other date"      as he is

                  empowered to do this under section 11 of the

                  Act.

      I have considered all the papers which Mr Edey has

lodged with the court which include both the interim and final

reports of Taylor L.J on the Hillsborough disaster,       the

correspondence,   between Mr Edey and the Home Office and in

particular the submissions that were lodged by Mr Edey when he

recently conducted his case before the Court of Appeal.         At
paragraph 10 of his submissions he states as follows:

 "without regulations under section 6(2)    the safety legislation

enacted by Parliament is meaningless.      It is to be hoped that

it can be cured by regulations.     The reasons for this

contention are as follows:

       (a)   There is no time limit on the issue of a safety

       certificate by a local authority.



       (b)   The issue of a safety certificate does not mean

       that the ground is safe.



       (c)   Provided a club has applied for its safety

       certificate to the local authority it cannot have

       commited an offence under section 12(3).



       (d)   It is not unlawful to continue to admit spectators

       to a ground which is unsafe.



       (e)   The safety certificate does not have to be

       re-issued annually by the local authority".



At paragraph 11 he states that "the public interest demands

that



       As I say,   those sentiments are shared by many and in my

view the anxiety which Mr Edey displays is manifest,
 well-intentioned and entirely genuine.

         However,   the difficulty which Mr Edey faces by coming

 before me today is the language of section 11 itself.        First

 of all,    the section requires a person to be authorised to

 carry out such an inspection,       when such a person has been

 authorised he is entitled (but not obliged)       to enter a sports

 ground,    to carry out such an inspection and to examine records

 etc.   The word "may"   , in my judgment,   in this context cannot

possibly be construed as meaning "must" so as to impose a

positive duty upon the Secretary of State which can be

enforced through the Courts.

        In 5hort,   this court has no power to require the

Minister of State either to authorise a person to carry out

such an inspection or to require the Secretary of State to

ensure that a person who has been so authorised does carry out

or has carried out such an inspection.        Much as I would like

to help Mr Edey,     as he put it,   to "find a peg ±ji which to hang

his case"     I regret I cannot do so under section 11 as he
would wish me to do.

        It may be that he regards the Home Secretary,     as he put

it,   "as being in grave dereliction of his duties to ensure

that sports stadia are safe for those resorting to them, b£t

the exist/ing legislation is insufficient to ensure this
safety".

        I cannot use that description of the apparent reluctance

by the Home Secretary,    as Mr Edey see's it to allow Mr Edey to



                             6
    proceed by way of judicial review of the Home Secretary's

    decision in his letter.   For those reasons I must reject the

    application.   Thank you, Mr Edey.



B




D




G




                              7
H
I will be wishing to make the following submissions to the Court


1.   Section 11 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 empowers (inter
      alia) the Home Secretary to authorise inspection of a sports ground
      and make such inquiries relating to it as he considers necessary
      for the purposes of the Act in order to establish whether the ground
      conforms to proper safety standards.

2.   That the Home Secretary can and should instruct subordinate civil
     servants employed within the Home Office or professional safety
     experts on a contractual basis to carry out an official investigation
     on his behalf of the 92 Football League Club grounds to ascertain
     whether they are safe within the meaning of the Safety of Sports
     Grounds Act 1975.

3.   That such inspections are already carried out by Home Office officials
      on an informal and meaningless basis as set out in paragraph 9
      of my affidavit dated 18th January 1990 (inadvertently dated 1989).

4.   That this application has the support of the British Safety Council
     who would be willing to assist the Home Secretary by entering into
     a contractual relationship with the Home Office for their safety
     experts to carry out an appropriate independent investigation for
     the Home Secretary. Their Director General, Mr James Tye will
     be in court to confirm the Council's willingness to give this assistance
     should the Court so require.

5.   There have been five disasters at British football grounds since
     1923 involving heavy loss of life and serious injuries culminating
     in the disaster at Hillsborough Stadium on 15th April 1989 when
     95 people lost their lives and over 700 were injured.

6.   There have been three "near miss" disasters at Preston North End,
     Coventry City and Middlesborough football grounds since the
     Hillsborough Disaster, details of which I have placed before the
     Court.

7.   It is a miracle that nobody was killed or seriously injured at
     Middlesborough. More than 2000 spectators from Leeds were densely
     packed in terraces behind perimeter fencing with no access to the
     pitch. Lord Justice Taylor says in his Final Report at Paragraph
     166 that it was horribly reminiscent of Hillsborough.

8.   Paragraph 167 of the Taylor report sets out in graphic detail the
      Middlesborough incident. I believe Paragraph 169 says it all.
      "This incident and its aftermath prompt the query; does there have
      to be a disaster or near disaster at each ground to trigger radical
      action. I hope not".

9.   The Home Secretary is charged by Parliament with making provision
      for securing safety at sports grounds. It is wholly unacceptable
      that eight months after the Hillsborough disaster the ground at
      Middlesborough was such a hazard to spectators.

10. Both Mr Justice Popplewell and the Government's Green Guide to
     Safety at Sports Grounds stress the importance of access to the
     pitch from perimeter fencing being available in an emergency. One
     would have thought that in any event it was a matter of common sense.
ASSN,

          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE
          COURT OF APPEAL (CIVIL D I V I S I O N )
          ON APPEAL FROM THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
          QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION       '
          TMR. JUSTICE SIMON BROWN)



                                                         Royal Courts of J u s t i c e .

                                                         Monday,   26th February.     1990

     B                                          Before:

                                      LORD JUSTICE GLIDEWELL

                                         LORD JUSTICE MANN

                                         SIR DENYS BUCKLEY




                                             THE QUEEN

   D                                                V.

                       THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                        Ex parte ROY EDEY




          ouanfurl?                 the Shorthand Notes of the Association of Official
          S h o r t h a n d w n t e r s Ltd., Room 392, Royal Courts of Justice and
          2 New Square, Lincoln's Inn, London, W.C.2).




         THE APPLICANT appeared in person.




                                         J U D G M E N T

                                             (a p p r o v e d )




 H
a SSN.




             LORD JUSTICE GLIDEWELL:           I will ask Lord Justice Mann to deliver

                the first judgment.

             LORD JUSTICE MANN:        There is before the court an application for

                judicial review.        The applicant is Mr. Edey, who has appeared

                in person.      He has presented his case with great skill,
         B
                fluency and courtesy,          and the court is grateful to him.         The

                substance of his case is a failure by the Secretary of State

                for the Home Department to make regulations concerning safety

                at sports g r o u n d s .

                      The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 provides in

                section 6(1):

                       "The Secretary of State may by regulations -

         D             (a) prescribe the procedure          (subject to the provisions

                            of this Act) for the issue,            amendment,   replacement,

                            transfer and cancellation of safety certificates

                            and the particulars to be given in application for

                            their issue,       amendment,   replacement or transfer;



                Subsection     (2) provides:

                       "The Secretary of State may by regulations make p ro­

                      visions for securing safety at sports grounds."

                      The complaint is that no such regulations have been made.

                It is, however,       to be observed that there is no duty to make

                regulations.       The discretion to make them is put upon the

                Secretary of State.            It does not seem to me that the court can

                require the discretion so imposed to be exercised.                  If the

                Secretary of State is in default,                that is a matter for

                Parliament;       it is not a matter for this court.
         H
                       Accordingly,         I do not see how this court can make a


                                                            2.
   mandatory order requiring the making of regulations under

   section 6. Upon that ground,           which is a short one,   I would

   reject this application,           notwithstanding the arguments so

   skilfully presented by the applicant.

SIR DENYS BUCKLEY:         I agree.    The matter has been put in two

  ways:      first,     on the construction of the section;       secondly,

  it is said that the need for the exercise of this power vested

  in the Secretary of State is such that it is unreasonable in

  a Wednesbury sense for him not to exercise the power to make

  r e g u l a tio ns.

          On the first ground it seems to me impossible to read

  section 6 in a way which gives it a mandatory operation,

  placing a duty upon the Secretary of State to make regulations.

  The word used is "may" by regulations take the steps described.

  The language clearly,        to my mind,       is inconsistent with an

  intention in Parliament to impose an obligatory duty on the

  Secretary of State to make any regulations.

         The scheme of the Act also enables those who grant

  certificates under the section to impose terms,              and it may be

  that the Secretary of State has taken the view that it is

  better that the matter should be dealt with by the local

  authorities granting the certificates than by an overriding

  set of regulations propounded by the Secretary of State himself.

  Precisely what considerations have actuated the Secretary of

  State in abstaining from himself making regulations I do not

  think it is necessary to inquire, because I do not consider

  that it could be said that the decision so to act could be so

  irrational as to make that action unreasonable on Wednesbury
  principles.


                                            3.
ASSN,




                  For these reasons I also reach the conclusion - and

           I may say, having regard to the way in which the matter has

          been put forward by the appellant I do so with some regret -

           that this appeal must fail.

    g   LORD JUSTICE GLIDEWELL:     I also agree.   The safety of sports

          grounds in general and football grounds in particular is of

          course very much to the fore of the public consciousness

          since the Hillsborough disaster of last year,        as from time to

          time it has been over the past 40 years.        Mr. Edey is

           clearly seeking to act in the public interest in bringing

          to the attention of the court the apparent failure by the

          Home Secretary to exercise the powers       to make regulations

    D     which he and his predecessors have now had for something

          approaching 15 years.     That Mr. Edey is entirely public-spirited, and

          that he is as skilled in the legislation relating to sports

          grounds as he is in presenting his case to us,        I have no doubt.

          But,   as my Lords have said,   it is quite clear that the power

          in section 6(2)   is not a duty;    it is merely a discretionary

          power to make regulations.      Although it is apparent that in

          some instances local authorities have not exercised the powers

          that they have as fully as they might have done,        nevertheless

          I cannot conceive of a court on the material before us coming

          to the conclusion that the Home Secretary was irrational in

          not making regulations.

                 It follows that if we were to grant Mr. Edey leave so that

          this matter could be canvassed,    in the end we would only be

         condemning him to failure with the consequent risk of costs.

         He must have faced that prospect because he is very conscious

         of what follows, but for my part, while grateful to him for


                                              4.
bringing this matter to the court's attention,          I have no doubt

at aH »   in agreement with my Lords,    that this application must

fail.     it is therefore dismissed.

                       (Order:   Application r e f u s e d )
ASSN,

        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE
        COURT OF APPEAL (CIVIL D I V I S I O N )
        ON APPEAL FROM THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
        QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
        (MR. JUSTICE SIMON BROWN)


                                                  Royal Courts of J u s t i c e .

                                                  Monday,   26th February.     1990


    B                                    Before:

                                 LORD JUSTICE GLIDEWELL

                                   LORD JUSTICE MANN

                                   SIR DENYS BUCKLEY




                                       THE QUEEN

    D                                        v.

                    THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                   Ex parte ROY EDEY




        (Transcript of the Shorthand Notes of the Association of Official
         Shorthandwriters Ltd., Room 392, Royal Courts of Justice, and
         2 New Square, Lincoln's Inn, L o n d o n , W . C .2).




        THE APPLICANT appeared in person.




                                    J U D G M E N T

                                       (a p p r o v e d )




  H
                                            l.
ASSN.




        LORD JUSTICE GLIDEWELL:     I will ask Lord Justice Mann to deliver

           the first judgment.

        LORD JUSTICE MANN:    There is before the court an application for

           judicial review.    The applicant is Mr. Edey, who has appeared

    B     in person.     He has presented his case with great skill,

          fluency and courtesy,     and the court is grateful to him.          The

          substance of his case is a failure by the Secretary of State

          for the Home Department to make regulations concerning safety

          at sports grounds.

                The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 provides in

          section 6(1):

                "The Secretary of State may by regulations -

    D           (a) prescribe the procedure       (subject to the provisions

                    of this Act) for the issue,          amendment,   replacement,

                    transfer and cancellation of safety certificates

                    and the particulars to be given in application for

                    their issue,    amendment,    replacement or transfer;



          Subsection    (2) provides:

               "The Secretary of State may by regulations make pr o­

               visions for securing safety at sports grounds."

               The complaint is that no such regulations have been made.

          It i s , h o w e v e r , to be observed that there is no duty to make

          regulations.     The discretion to make them is put upon the

          Secretary of State.      It does not seem to me that the court can

          require the discretion so imposed to be exercised.             If the

          Secretary of State is in default,           that is a matter for

   H      Parliament;     it is not a matter for this court.

               Accordingly,    I do not see how this court can make a


                                                 2.
-;> N .




             mandatory order requiring the making of regulations under

             section 6. Upon that ground, which is a short one,          I would

             reject this application,        notwithstanding the arguments so

             skilfully presented by the applicant.

          SIR DENYS BUCKLEY:      I agree.    The matter has been put in two
      B
            ways:     first,   on the construction of the section;       secondly,

            it is said that the need for the exercise of this power vested

            in the Secretary of State is such that it is unreasonable in

            a Wednesbury sense for him not to exercise the power to make

            regulations.

                    On the first ground it seems to me impossible to read

            section 6 in a way which gives it a mandatory operation,

      D     placing a duty upon the Secretary of State to make regulations.

            The word used is "may" by regulations take the steps described.

            The language clearly,     to my mind,       is inconsistent with an

            intention in Parliament to impose an obligatory duty on the

            Secretary of State to make any regulations.

                 The scheme of the Act also enables those who grant

            certificates under the section to impose t e r m s , and it may be

            that the Secretary of State has taken the view that it is

            better that the matter should be dealt with by the local

            authorities granting the certificates than by an overriding

            set of regulations propounded by the Secretary of State himself

            Precisely what considerations have actuated the Secretary of

            State in abstaining from himself making regulations I do not

            think it is necessary to inquire, because I do not consider

            that it could be said that the decision so to act could be so

            irrational as to make that action unreasonable on Wednesbury
    H
            principles.


                                                   3.
ASSN.




                     For these reasons I also reach the conclusion - and

               I may say, having regard to the way in which the matter has

              been put forward by the appellant I do so with some regret -

              that this appeal must fail,

        g   LORD JUSTICE GLIDEWELL:    I also agree.    The safety of sports

              grounds in general and football grounds in particular is of

              course very much to the fore of the public consciousness

              since the Hillsborough disaster of last year,        as from time to

              time it has been over the past 40 years.        Mr. Edey is

               clearly seeking to act in the public interest in bringing

              to the attention of the court the apparent failure by the

              Home Secretary to exercise the powers       to make regulations

    D          which he and his predecessors have now had for something

               approaching 15 years.    That Mr. Edey is entirely public-spirited, and

              that he is as skilled in the legislation relating to sports

              grounds as he is in presenting his case to u s , I have no doubt.

              But,   as my Lords have said,   it is quite clear that the power

              in section 6(2) is not a duty;      it is merely a discretionary

              power to make regulations.      Although it is apparent that in

              some instances local authorities have not exercised the powers

              that they have as fully as they might have done, nevertheless

              I cannot conceive of a court on the material before us coming

              to the conclusion that the Home Secretary was irrational in

              not making regulations.

                     It follows that if we were to grant Mr. Edey leave so that

              this matter could be canvassed,     in the end we would only be

              condemning him to failure with the consequent risk of costs.

   U          He must have faced that prospect because he is very conscious

              of what follows, but for my part, while grateful to him for


                                                  4.
bringing this matter to the court's attention,          I have no doubt

at all,   in agreement with my Lords, that this application must

fail.     it is therefore dismissed.

                       (Order:   Application r e f u s e d )




                                   5.
        11.   The near disasters which have occurred since April of last year
              show only too clearly that local authorities cannot be relied upon
              to carry out their statutory duty of inspection to ensure the safety
              of spectators.

        12. Another disaster could occur at any time. Yet it is in the Home
            Secretary's power to ensure that it does not. Nobody knows on a
            nationwide basis which of the 92 Football League Clubs are safe
            and which are unsafe.

        13.   In his safety recommendations in his Final Report Lord Justice Taylor
              included these words in brackets again and again, "if this has not
              been done following the interim report". He does not know whether
              and to what extent his recommendations have been followed. Neither
              does the Government and, in particular, the Home Secretary.

        14.   In an interview at the Home Office I was told by an official that
              he visited grounds monitoring safety provisions and so did other
              colleagues. This, I was told was done on an informal basis and
    .         I could not be given any information as to what grounds were visited
/             and when as no official records were kept. The Court may think
‘             that to proceed in such a way is quite meaningless.

        15.   Yet the Home Secretary through his own independent investigation
              can establish whether grounds are safe and if they are not he can
              inform the local authority what needs to be done to make them safe
              and direct that it be done in order to fulfil his statutory duty
              to provide safety for spectators.

        16.   I entirely accept that Section 11is discretionary and would only
              become operative in wholly exceptional circumstances. The disasters
              and near disasters which have occurred at British League Football
              Grounds with monotonous regularity provide compelling reasons for
              this statutory power to be invoked and I submit that for the Home
              Secretary to fail to act could beconstrued as illegal and/or irrational
              and/or constitute procedural impropriety, (1985 (1 AC) C.C.S.U.
              v Minister for Civil Services) and Wednesbury unreasonableness.

        17.   I would also rely upon The Master of the Rolls judgement reported
              in the New Law journal (22nd December 1989 Edition) at Page 1751
              Reg v Home Secretary ex P. Brind and Ors, where he said that the
              Court has a supervisory role and will intervene only in the event
              that the Home Secretary reaches an untenable decision in the sense
              that he can be shown to have taken account of matters which are
              irrelevant or failed to take account of matters which are relevant.
              That the latter has occurred is only too apparent.

        18.   The public interest demands that the Home Secretary takes account
              of the disasters and near disasters which have occurred and are
              occurring in order to prevent further tragedies and possible loss
              of life and/or serious injury.

        19.   In all the circumstances I shall ask the Court to order the Home
              Secretary to at once authorise persons on his behalf to inspect
              the 92 Football League grounds and to carry out such inquiries as
              he considers necessary for the purposes of the Safety of Sports
              Grounds Act 1975 as laid down by Section 11 of that Act.
 H a m m o nd Su d d a r d s
                         S O L I C I T O R S
 ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY            PETER C. METCALF             RICHARD BURNS             CONSULTANTS:                 EMPIRE HOUSE
 D. TREVOR LEWIS              CHRISTOPHER W. JONES         DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE      ROGER W. SUDDARDS c be       10 PICCADILLY
 MICHAEL E. GREGSON           ANDREW R. JORDAN             J. PATRICK MITCHELL       SIR DESMOND HEAP             BRADFORD BD1 3LR
 JOHN D. DE MAIN              SIMON R. B. STELL            CHRISTOPHER MARKS         IAN W. WHITSON
 MICHAEL L SHEPHERD           SIMON R. INMAN               MICHAEL S. HENLEY                                      TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
 PETER N. WILBRAHAM           RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH        ROSAMOND J. MARSHALL SMITH                             TELEX 517201
 J. RICHARD ARCHER            JOHN G. BECKETT              PHILIP W. HARLING
 BARBARA W. FRANCE            G. N. IAN GREENFIELD                                                                D .X NO. 11720
                                                           WILLIAM N. DOWNS
 C.   NOEL HUTTON             STEPHEN GALE                 LUCC! DAMMONE                                          FAX (0274) 737547
 JOHN H. G. HELLER            MARK W. HILTON               ANDREW H. McDOUGALL
 IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH          RONALD S. DRAKE



OUR REF.           PCM/PAB                     YOUR REF.                                           d a te    4th January,             1990



 Dear Sir,

 Hillsborough

As you may be aware, this firm is acting on behalf of the South
Yorkshire Police in connection with civil matters arising out of
the Hillsborough stadium disaster.

In that connection, we were interested to see your letter to the
Editor of The Times published on 21st December, 1989.

It is part of our clients' case that, whatever may have been the
shortcomings of the Police on the day, the configuration and
structure of the ground and its safety apparatus was very
significantly causative of the tragedy.

For that reason, we were particularly interested in the comments
which you made in your letter and we wonder whether these were made
in some professional capacity and/or as a result of particular
knowledge of the Hillsborough ground prior to the disaster.

In either event, it might be that we would wish to call you as a
witness at a subsequent civil hearing or, alternatively, to bring
your evidence to the attention of H.M. Coroner.

We should be interested to hear from you, either by letter or by
telephone to our Mr. Metcalf.


Yours f a ih-hfni




R. Edey Esq.,




LEEDS OFFICES:       BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4 /5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
                     JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868

                                THIS FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY IN THE CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS
 h s .12.28/edey.dm


cfe*    HOME OFFICE
        Queen Anne’s Gate London SW lH 9A T
                                                leO
                                      Direct line  l
                                                  01-2*3  3099
                                     Switchboard 01 -a*} vxc
                                                  373

                                                        Your reference
 H r R Edev
                                                        Our reference

                                                        ££P/89 35/48/109

                                                        28 December 1989




 Dear Mr Edey

 I have been asked to reply to your letter of 15 December to the
 Home Secretary about inspections at major sports grounds.

 The Home Secretary was of course aware of the Middlesbrough
 incident and you may by now have seen that he has indicated, in
 reply to a Parliamentary Question from Mr Derek Fatchett MP, that
 he has asked for a report.

 As to the other matters you raise, I do not think there is
 anything which I can usefully add to the extensive information
 already provided to you about the operation of the Safety of
 Sports Grounds Act 1975.

 I am not able to provide the confirmation you seek.

                                                   Yours sincerely




                                                   D J MOULD
                                                   (Fire and Emergency
                                                   Planning Department)
                 Scottish Education Department           New St Andrew’s House
                                                         Edinburgh EH1 3SY




IN D Cf E NS     Room No.                                Telephone Direct Dialling 031-244
                                                         Switchboard 031-556 8400
                                                         GTN7188
Roy Edey Esq                                             Telex 727301
                                                         Fax 031-244 4785

                                                         Your ref




                                                         Date       2-0 December 1989
                                                         Please reply to The Secretary



I refer to your 2 recent letters to the Lord Advocate calling upon him to
exercise powers of inspections of all major sports grounds in Scotland.
As this matters falls within the responsibility of the Secretary of State, I
have been asked to reply.

I assume that your letter of 16 November refers to the powers of entry
and inspection in Section 11 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
Section 11(d) of that Act, ie the designation of a person authorised by
’’the Secretary of State” was repealed for Scotland only by the Local
Government and Planning (Scotland) Act 1982 (reference Chapter 43,
section 66(2) Schedule 4, Part IT). Accordingly, the Secretary of State
has no statutory power to act as you suggest.

However, the Secretary of State does retain a considerable interest in
safety at sports grounds.       For example, immediately following the
publication of Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Report on the Hillsborough
Stadium disaster, the Department wrote to all local authorities in Scotland
urging them to take the required action without delay to implement the
Inquiry’s recommendations to improve safety arrangements. Other letters
were sent to the Scottish Football and Highland League clubs and to the
Scottish Rugby Union to inform them that the Secretary of State expected
them to cooperate fully in the implementation of the recommendations.
Overall, the clear signal was that the Secretary of State wished all
parties concerned with the safety of sports grounds in Scotland to
implement the Report’s recommendation with equal vigour and with all
possible sDeed.




alan           mcpherson




F 0 2 0 2 9 0 5 .129
48    Review of arrest procedures
49. Postponement of kick-offs (interim recommendation 29).
50. Early kick-offs and Sunday fixtures.
51. Control room facilities.
52. Training of senior officers.
53. Charges for police services.
These recommendations, some of which are repeated from the
Interim Report are directed primarily to Chief Police Officers
and police authorities. The Government supports the proposal for
senior officer training and the objective to improve
effectiveness of policing at football matches. The Government
agrees that the cost of policing inside grounds should be met in
full by clubs and will consider providing guidance to police
authorities after consultation with relevant representative
associations, to ensure consistency of practice.
COMMUNICATIONS (Recommendations 54-58)
54.   Radio communications (interim recommendation 31, amended).
55.   Provision of a command channel.
56.   Land lines (interim recommendation 32).
57.   Public address (interim recommendation 33).
58.   Illuminated advertising (interim recommendation 34: advice
      on hand signals withdrawn).
These are largely repeated from the Interim Report which the^
Goverainent-Jias already urged^clubs, local authorities and police"
to implement._ Chief Officers will also be encouraged to use an
addrEionaT7~^iscrete channel of communications for police match
commanders.

CO-ORDINATION OF EMERGENCY SERVICES (Recommendations 59-63)
59.   Co-ordination (interim recommendation 35).
60.   Pre match briefing (interim recommendation 36).
61.   Communication with emergency services.
62.   Arrival of emergency vehicles (interim recommendation 37).
63.   Briefing of police officers (interim recommendation 38).
These recommendations are intended to ensure full co-ordination
and co-operation of the emergency services and are substantially
those covered in the Interim Report which the Government has
already endorsed. The Government will urge all__those concerned
17.   Emergency gates in perimeter fences.
18.   Marking of emergency gates (interim recommendation 7).
19.   Gates normally to be Kept open during matches            (interim
      recommendation 8, revised).
20.   Manning    of    emergency      gates      (replaces      interim
      recommendation 9).
21.   Cutting equipment (interim recommendation 10).
The Government supports the recommendations on perimeter fencing.
Local authorities will be urged to amend safety certificates to
include requirements so as to implement recommendations 14, 15,
17   and  to  note   recommendation  19 which    varies   interim
recommendation 8.   The revised recommendations on closure and
manning of gates in perimeter fences at football grounds will be
drawn to the attention of local authorities, clubs and police.

CRUSH BARRIERS (Recommendations 22, 23)
22.   Inspection (interim recommendation 11).
23.   Review of layout (interim recommendation 12).
These are repeated from the Interim Report.        They have already
been commended to local authorities.

SAFETY CERTIFICATES (Recommendations 24-31)
24.   Mandatory conditions in safety certificates.
25.   Variation from terms of safety certificates.
26.   Terms of safety certificates.
27.   Review of safety certificates (interim recommendation 13).
28.Issue of certificates     to    grounds    without   them   (interim
recommendation 14).
29.   Annual   review of    certificates;   annual        renewal   of
      certificates (interim recommendation 15).
30.   Review of arrangements for issuing certificates (interim
      recommendation 16).
31.   Local authority advisory groups (interim recommendation 17,
      revised).

The Government agrees with the aims of these recommendations.
An order under S.15A of the 1975 Act will be made to implement
recommendation 24. Consideration will also be given to including
within the scope of such an Order provisions which will require
terms and conditions addressing other aspects of safety to be
included in safety certificates.
Initial response by the Government to recommendations contained
in the Taylor report.

ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION (Recommendation 1-4)
1.   General recommendation in respect of all sports grounds
     designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
2.   To apply to all UEFA "high risk" matches from Autumn 1993.
3.   To apply by 20% stages between now and Autumn 1994 to
          Football league, Divisions 1 and 2
          Scottish football league, Premier Division
          National stadia.
4.   To apply by 10% stages between now and Autumn 1999 to all
     other matches played at designated grounds.
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle and
expects to apply it in the case of UEFA high risk matches, the
4 Divisions of the football league, and the national stadia as
recommended.

The application of the recommendation to Scotland and to other
sports cannot be achieved under the Football Spectators Act 1989
but the Government will in any case wish to discuss it with the
sporting authorities concerned. Designated sports grounds under
the 1975 Act include cricket, rugby union and rugby league
grounds which are not all enclosed grounds and which it may not
be practicable to deal with in this way.


ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL (Recommendation 5)
The Government supports Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation
that the football league and Football Association should
establish an Advisory Design Council on stadium design.



NATIONAL INSPECTORATE AND REVIEW BODY (Recommendation 6)
     (a)   The Football Licensing Authority should be created to
           review the discharge of functions by local authorities.
     (b)   The powers of the Authority should be extended to other
           sports and other sports venues.
The Government supports the recommendation that safety
certification of designated grounds should be centrally reviewed
and proposes to bring into force relevant provisions of Part I
of the Football Spectators Act to create and empower the Football
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM INQUIRY

Initial response by the Government to the recommendations in the
final report of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry into the
Hillsborough stadium diaster.

In his statement on 29 January, the Home Secretary indicated that
he would place in the Library a schedule setting out the
Government's initial response to the recommendations of Lord
Justice Taylor's final report. The schedule is annexed.




29 January 1990
this power if it emerged that this would be helpful, but it could not be
aimed at individual clubs; it would still depend on implementation by local
authorities, and I doubt at present if it would add anything practical. But
I am keeping a close eye on the possibility.

        Whether further measures are necessary to secure improvements in
public safety at sports grounds will be a matter for decision when Lord
Justice Taylor has published his final report.
15th December 1989




The Rt Hon David Waddington PC MP
The Home Office
Queen Annes Gate
London SW1H 9AT


Re: Safety at Sports Grounds

Dear Home Secretary,

I refer to my letter of the 16th November 1989 and your reply of
the 29th November 1989.

Last Saturday there was a crushing incident involving spectators
being taken to hospital at a game between Middlesborough and
Leeds United at Ayresome Park.  I enclose reports of that
incident in cuttings from "The Times" of M o nday and Thursday of
this week.

This is the third "near miss" disaster at British football
grounds since the Hillsborough disaster in April.   My letter of
the 25th September to your predecessor draws attention to these
incidents.  I also refer in particular to m y letter of the 24th
August.  It is relevant to Saturday's incident.

You have the right and the duty, under Section 11 of the Safety
of Sports Grounds Act 197 5, to call for an independent
investigation of all sports grounds to ensure they are safe.  It
is a discretionary power and after five m aj or disasters at
British football grounds since 1923 it is a power which must be
exercised so far as League football grounds are concerned.

Middlesborough are due to host Everton in the third round of the
FA Cup on 6th January.  Torquay United are due to host West Ham
United on that day and a Safety Certificate for their ground is
still being negotiated between the Club a n d the County Council.
I have seen a South Yorkshire Police report showing that three
months after the start of the football season B a r n s l e y ’s ground
does not conform to proper safety standards.    You should arrange
for your own inspection of all grounds hosting FA Cup matches
prior to 6th January.

Only an independent investigation by you will ascertain whether
grounds are safe.  Football club management has always been
irresponsible and quite frankly local authorities are manifestly
seen to be inadequate to fulfill their proper functions in this
connection.

I now have to tell you that unless you can confirm that you will
                                                                                ST

                     PuArt'--




                                                        7 December 1989

The Editor
The Tiroes

Dear Sir

I asked the Hone Secretary to arrange for an independent inspection of
all major sports grounds to ascertain whether they are safe, prior to
Christinas. He has felt unable to give roe such an assurance. He has the
power to do so under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975. Had this
power been invoked after the disastrous fire at Bradford in 1985, there
would have been no disaster at Hillsborough. Inspection would have shown
there was no access to the pitch in an emergency, that crush barriers
were corroded with rust, and that there was inadequate turnstile facility
at the Leppings Lane terraces. Is it not scandalous that after five disasters
at British football grounds the Minister responsible has not thought fit
to inspect grounds either prior to or in the aftermath of Hillsborough.

There have been at least two incidents since Hillsborough which could have
resulted in disaster. At Preston North End a fire was started on the
terraces and at Coventry City there was turnstile crushing because some
crush barriers were not operating. I have discovered that at least one
of the 92 Football League Clubs - Torquay United - is still operating
without a Safety Certificate. I have seen a very recent report of the
South Yorkshire police clearly showing that Barnsley United football ground
does not meet proper safety requirements.

In the New Year I will be submitting to the Court of Appeal that without
safety regulations being made by the Home Secretary the legislation enacted
by Parliament is st-present ineffective and inoperative. You were kind
enough to publish my letter in August accusing the Home Secretary of gross
dereliction of duty in this connection. That charge is repeated.

Yours faithfully




ROY EDEY
    hs.11.29/edeyl.peb

          H O M E O F F IC E
          Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
8                                      D irect lin e 01-213       ^73      3099
                                     Sw itchboard 01-213 3000



                                                              Please reply to The Under Secretary of State
    Mr R Edev                                                 Your reference

                                                              Our reference
                                                                                FEP/89 35/48/109
                                                              Date
                                                                              29 November 1989




    Dear Mr Edey
    I have been asked to reply to your letter of 16 November to the
    Home Secretary about inspections of major sports grounds.
    The contents of your letter have been noted. There is little
    that I can add to the information already provided to you about
    the operation of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975. I cannot
    therefore give you the assurances you seek.
                                                         Yours sincerely




                                                         D J MOULD
                                                         (Fire and Emergency
                                                         Planning Department)
fit* IU~.                    lA!W.fUwa|c^s.^                P-Ct.j          M'f*
        ihwsL

 ^.V'*

                        ^     &I&'1                                   Cy^JL^


                   —-       C/M.   ,* ^ |-S rv . -A ^ v v   i^, oj}     CVvsC*   ^

^          ^ c ^ c U v *                                    ^                          /) ^

’^ T ' '                    <^Orvw*tfU A p vtfe. I W ^ U ,                       «/)    i/fc /i



                            ,%Lr*Jj- i U t j v W                iXvU'vA S^XfsnC*

T ^        ^                               , J,                      fvjvwosAZA; olCfcJU
7   ^          ^    ^          ^      < W         e,            ^ ^vii^.




                                     (*         £**/,)
TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 13,1990

                                                                                                 P icture: ASSOCIATED PRESS




 E cho o f H illsb o ro u g h : Thp srnnp at O rlan do s f a w 1 m Sm voto n>hnm m o nnn^io i.
HPS                                                                           OBSERVER        Thursday, April 20, 1989 Page 3


                   TRAGEDY ON THE TERRACES: LESSONS WE MUST LfeARN




      iho stark face of Hillsborough. Fans are crushed against the barrier as they fight for life
IVQ                                                                                                            TED DfTCHBURN




        ^ A F E ta ttle W s of the law: a frightened child is taken to safety by police

  Children saved in soccer crush                                                                          __   11_________ «M «
                                                                   to th e w a itin g a rm s o f p o lice on th e oth er sid e,
  TW ENTY aoccer fan s w ere Injured In a crow d                   w h ere o ffice rs gave first-aid. F ive P*op**’
  crush a t a to p lea gu e m atch yesterd ay.                     In clu d in g a lO v e a r o ld b o y , w ere r o s h r t to
       L a te a r r iv a ls a t t h e g a m e b e tw e e n         h o sp ita l su fferin g from cru sh In ju ries to th e ir
  M id dlesbrough and L eed s U n ited                              c h e sts and sto m a ch s. N on e w as s e r i o u s l j hurt-
  th e v isito rs' e n clo su re,                                        T he D ivision T w o m a tch , at M id d les­
  •r a in s t b a rriers Ui an a lm o st c h illin g rep eat o f   b ro u gh ’s A yresom e P ark, w as sto p p ed f o r 10
  t o e ca u se o f th e H illsb orou gh d isa ster.                m in u te s m idw ay through th e first half- S om e
                                                                    angry fan s b la m ed p o lice for herd in g su p p o rt­
       F righ ten ed ch ild ren w ere carried o v e r th e
                                                                    e rs Into an already pack ed area.
  b ea d s o f Ia n s and lifte d over secu rity barriers
 police set
 up inquiry                                     Demand lor closure
 into crowd
  incident                       »•
       By Martin Searby
Cleveland police are to hold an
in q u iry in to in c id e n ts a t
Ayresom e Parle where five                                                                 By M artin Searby
people, three o f them children,                                                    on CLapham also included a          effectively dose the ground.
were taken to hospital, and 10               _The Football Supporters’                                                     Initial responses from Lord
• th e n required treatment, dar­            **Association is to ask Cleve-         later accident at Purley.
ing M iddlesbrough's second di­                                                                                         Taylor’s office to the request
                                             - land council to withdraw                 “We are incensed that foot­     for him to become involved
vision n a tc h w ith Leeds United
on Saturday.
                                             S."Middlesbrough’s safety certifi-     ball supporters;, have been         are understood to be
     The game w as held np for 15            " cate. It also wants the second                  of        the trouble    favourable.
 m isntes a s spectator* were res­           ^division dub to be prosecuted          when all the evidence points
cued from a pen in the sooth-east                 following problems at the          elsewhere. The police officer         “Not long after 95 people
corner o f the ground used to                »--game with Leeds United last          in charge has admitted that        lost their lives and hundreds
a c c o m m o d a te t h e L e e d s         - Saturday when 17 people were          around 60 people were put          were injured, we are faced
 followers.                                  ^injured.                               into the area reserved for         with a similar sort of situation
     Roy Schofield, the treasurer                                                                                       where luckily only a few
 o f Leeds Supporters’ Club, yes­                    The association is also ask-    Leeds supporters, but the law
 terday accused M iddlesbrough                                                       says that if just one person is    people were injured. An exam­
                                             ~ ing Lord Justice Taylor to visit      present over the limit the club    ple has to be made because
• f failing to implement m easures              'the North East and hold an
 recommended in the interim                                                          is liable to prosecution.          dubs simply are not taking
 report made by Lord Justice                      inquiry into last week’s events                                       any notice of the interim
                                              iuat Ayresome Park, so that the           “Leeds supporters were ac­
 Taylor following the inquiry into
                                                                                     cused of buying tickets for         report made by the judge,”
 d ie Hillsborough tragedy.              \    .^.findings can be included in his                                         Wright said.
     “ Our people were very dis­                  final report on the                wrong portions of the ground
 tressed,” Schofield said. “There             •• Hillsborough tragedy.               but we have evidence that the         “For instance, he recom­
 was no exit in the perimeter                                                        club sold handfuls of tickets to    mended that if areas of the
 fence, and the gates in the side             i Chris Wright, a spokesman            touts who then took them to         ground were unsafe for child­
 fencing were kicked. T he worst                   for the association, said: “We    Iffds gnd sold them in the          ren it should state so un­
 aspect w as the discovery that an             «~feef that Lord Justice Taylor
 ill-fitting plastic com ice barely                                                 .pubs."                              ambiguously on the tickets.
                                               -yfan play an important part
 covered spikes the size o f join­
                                              Z since his remit was not just to         The association, given sta­      That did not happen here and
 ers’ nails. Anybody dragged over                                                                                        our members were extremely
 the fence, or trying to clim b it to          * look into what happened at          tus by the Taylor inquiry, has
.escape the crush, could have                    •the FA Cup semi-final. There       demanded that it takes part in      angry when they read in their
  been impaled.”                               4 are precedents; Lord Scarman,       any investigation and if it does    Monday evening papers that
      C hief Superintendent Terry               ' inquiring into the Brixton         not receive a favourable reply      tbe police had blamed the fens
 Tasker, who w as in charge of                  ' riots, also included a report      by this afternoon will take         for causing the trouble when
  more than 200 police on duty at
                                                   into what happened at Bristol     steps to ask Cleveland council      the opposite is the case. The
  the game, said: “It is the first
                                                   and the train disaster inquiry     to take action which would         ground is dangerous.”
  tim e since the Taylor report that
  th e capacity o f that section o f the
  ground has been tested. W e will
  immediately exam ine bow it
  happened but, in my view, things
  might have been worse if there
  had not been a perimeter fence.”
      Problems arose when police
  led som e 200 Leeds supporters,
  who bought tickets for other
  parts o f tbe ground, into the
  section, which is registered to
   hold 2,108 and for which a ll
  tickets had been sold.
      B ill Fotherby, the Leeds
   managing director, was watch­
   ing the m atch w ith 2 £ 0 0
   supporters, who could not get
   tickets, on closed circuit tele­
   vision a t EUand Road in Leeds.
 . H e said: “ W e saw on our screens
   that supporters in tbe com er
   were overcrowded and could not
   get o u t Our minds went straight
    back to Hillsborough."
       Howard W ilkinson, the Leeds
   manager, was the first to react to
   the incident. “After what has
    happened, nothing could be too
    trivial to demand som ething was
    done,” he said. “ I shouted at the
    crowd to calm down, be still and
    be patient-"
       A ll the injured were allowed
    hom e a fte r tr ea tm e n t a t
    M id d le sb r o u g h    G en eral
    H ospital.
                                                                      7
arrange for independent inspection of all League football grounds
by 14th January next I will seek judicial review of your failure
to do what I consider to be your clear duty.  I would, of course,
expect you to require local authorities to close grounds which
are not safe and to issue Prohibition Notices in respect of any
unsafe accommodation until it is made safe.

People should not have been hurt last Saturday.       I appreciate
that.you have only recen t ly ass um e d office but the penultimate
paragraph of my letter of the 24th August holds good and in all
the circumstances I have sent a copy of this letter to the Prime
Minister and Lord Justice Taylor.

Your sincerely




Encs

cc to The Rt Hon Mrs Margaret Thatcher
cc to The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
                             From   T   he   P   r iv a t e   S ecretary




                                                                                 H   ome    O   f fic e
                                                                               Q l 'E E N A N N E S G A TE
                                                                                L O N D O N S W IH 9 A T




                                                                                 3 October 1989




 O   e ^ r      N r      £




        Thank you for your letter of 25 September to the Home Secretary.
I am sorry that you were not satisfied with my letter of 18 September. You
say that it is simply not good enough to place the responsibility for safety
of spectators at football grounds on local authorities, but I have to point
out that that is how the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 is drafted.

         The statutory power under section 6(2) of the 1975 Act does not enable
the Secretary of State to make regulations which would add to the provisions
of the Act, for example authorising him to oversee safety certificates. That
is why, as I have explained, the Government is seeking appropriate powers for
the proposed Football Licensing Authority in its Football Spectators Bill.

        I should like to assure you again about the Home Secretary's concern
over safety at football grounds and the importance that he attaches to a
proper response by local authorities and clubs for the recommendations
contained in Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report.    That response is being
carefully monitored and in the light of it and of the final report of the
Taylor inquiry, consideration will be given to the need for any further
action.

        When you spoke to me on the telephone you asked me about the status
of the proposed Football Licensing Authority. Present proposals are that the
FLA will be an independent non-departmental public body. Appointments to the
FLA will be made by the Secretary of State for Environment in consultation
with the Home Secretary in respect of those appointments which have a bearing
on the authority's safety role.




                                                               MISS C J BANNISTER
7.      The incident at Middlesborough in December 1989 had the same
scenario as at Hillsborough on the 15th April 1989 and could have
had the same tragic consequences for the reasons stated above.
8.      Inspection on behalf of the Home Secretary is imperative and
extremely urgent.
9.      I was informed by Mr D.J. Mould at a meeting at the Home Office
that grounds are inspected but this is done on an informal basis
and I could not be told which grounds were inspected or when which
I found to be completely unsatisfactory and unacceptable.




SWORN by the above named                      )
ROY EDEY this            12’                  )
day of                  j              1989   )
at ^ 1 HOu3#*fv             wiqOO.ci          )
   l_D rvlO O »V


Before me Solicitor/Commissioner for Oaths




( f AK n A C V D   0 ^ Y 1 3 O r\> ^
                                                                               fi




    IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
    QUEENS BENCH DIVISION
    CROWN OFFICE LIST
    In the matter of an application for Judicial Review
    THE QUEEN   -V -   THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
    Ex parte




                                    A F F I D A V I T


    I ROY EDEY Of
            MAKE OATH AND SAY as follows
    1.   I am a sports spectator and football supporter.
    2.   I submit that football supporters' safety is not being safeguarded
    by the Secretary of State for the Hone Department as he is required
    to do so by the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
    3.   Despite requests I have made (as evidenced by the file of correspondence
    and supported by reports of incidents since the terrible disaster
    at Hillsborough Stadium in April 1989 and marked "REl") the Hone
    Secretary has failed to give me an assurance that he will at least
    have^carried out an independent inspection of the 92 Football League
£   Grounds by the 14th January 1990, or by any other date.
    4.   He is empowered to do this by Section 11 of the Safety of Sports
    Grounds Act 1975.
    5.   There is no other way of ascertaining whether grounds are safe
    on a national basis as the Home Secretary has informed me he has
    no powers of enforcement over local authorities and therefore cannot
    require them to make the necessary inspection and issue him with
    a report of their findings.
    6.   There have been five major disasters since 1923 at British Football
    League Clubs and three near miss disaster situations since April
    1989 and another disaster could occur at any time.
                                                                                           Crown Office Ref
                      In the High Court of Justice
                      Queens Bench Division
                      Crown Office List
                      In the matter of an application for Judicial Review

                                The Queen - v - i n k              <<c-r* /           of                - Viv/;
                                                                  **' •**     V' *■        :
                                Ex parte

                                Notice o f application for leave to apply for Judicial Review
                                Order 53 rule 3(2)
                                This foim must be read together with Notes forGuidance obtainable from the
                                Crown Office
                                To the Master of the Crown Office, Royal Courts of Justice, Strand, London W C 2 A 2LL

         The Applicant:          Roy Edey
                 Name
               Address

                Description      Solicitors' Managing Clerk

       Judgment, order,
                                 The Secretary's letter of the 28th December 1989 in
        decision or other
                                 reply to mine of the 15th December 1989.
            proceeding in
          respect o f which
      relief is sought, and
          the date thereof.



      Relief sought:
                                  That the Court requires the Secretary of State for the Home
         (Grounds forthe
                                  Department in accordance with Section 11 of the Safety of
          reliefshould be
                                  Sports Grounds Act 1975 to arrange for an independent inspection
         set out overleaf)
                                  of all 92 Football League Club Grounds without delay to
                                  establish whether the safety of spectators is ensured to his
                                  satisfaction.




                               Signed                                                   Dated


 Name and address of the                                                    Applicant's Ref.
 applicant's solicitors, or,
ifno solicitors acting, the                                                  Telephone No.
address for service of the
                 applicant                                                            Fax No.




Form 86 A
                   Director of Public Prosecutions                     Deputy Director and ChiefExecutive
                                 Allan Green Q.C.                      D. S. Gandy OBE




                                          Director of Headquarters Casework
                                                     C. W. P. Newell


      Mr R Edev                                                             Crown Prosecution Service
                                                                            Headquarters
                                                                            4/12 Queen Annes Gate
                                                                            London
                                                                            SW1H9AZ
                                                                            Telephone 01 -222-7944
                                                                                      Ext.
                                                                                                 231


Your Ref:                               Our Ref:                                         Date:

                                        PGK/3341/89                                       2 October 1989


      Dear Sir
      HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
      Your letter dated the 22 September 1989 and its enclosures,
      addressed to the Director of Public Prosecutions, has been passed
      to me for reply.
      I can confirm that copies of the correspondence which you have
      conducted with the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Lord
      Justice Taylor and Mr J Mervyn Jones have been passed to the
      Crown Prosecution Service.   You will be aware that Mr Dear, the
      Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police is conducting a
      criminal investigation to all aspects of the Hillsborough
      Disaster and that Mr Jones is responsible for the investigation
      on Mr Dear's behalf.      The Crown Prosecution Service are in
      regular contact with Mr Jones and once the investigation is
      complete a report will be submitted to the Director of Public
      Prosecutions so that the most full and careful consideration can
      be given to the possibility of instituting proceedings against
      any persons or other bodies who may be criminally responsible.
      You can be assured that all the matters which you raise in your
      letter relating to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club will be
      considered.




Fax 01 -222-4751                               Telex 945310 CPS HQ                                     Britdoc DX2328 Victoria
Finally, your letter did not enclose the copy letter which you
referred to in the final paragraph as having been sent to
Mr J Mervyn Jones.

Yours faithfully




M G Kennedy
Police Complaints Division




BMKE0928.F11
                                                   25th September 1389.


The Rt. Hon. Douglas Hurd P.C. M.P.,
The Home Office,
Whitehall,
London.
SW1.


Dear Home Secretary,
                        Disaster at Hillsborough

     I find your letter of the 18th September in reply to mine of the
24th August profoundly unsatisfactory. It is not good enough to place
the responsibility for spectators at football grounds on local
authorities.    Your Department has a duty to ensure that designated
grounds have safety certificates.

     Lord Justice Taylor's report draws attention to the fact that
Sheffield United had been operating for years without a safety
certificate. The first paragraph of your letter makes it clear that you
have still not bothered to ascertain whether or not clubs hove valid
safety certificates. The interim reconmendations of Lord Justice Taylor
being put into effect can only be controlled and ensured through the
safety certificate.   This is confirmed in your letter.    So also can
compliance with the Green Guide.

     Grounds are still not safe as evidenced by an incident at Preston
North End's ground five weeks after Hillsborough and at Coventry City's
ground on the first day of this football season, i.e. the 19th August
the date on which "The Times" published my letter accusing you of
dereliction of duty!   I also enclose details of a survey carried out by
the Sunday Times at the same time.

     It is clear beyond peradventure that a lead from the Government in
the shape of yourself as Home Secretary is absolutely vital. That lead
must be by way of regulations by statutory instrument laying down
minimum requirements for safety certificates to secure safety at
football grounds pursuant to Section 6 of the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act 1975.

      Mr. Justice Popplewell in his report on the Bradford fire said:
"Had the Green Guide been complied with this tragedy would not have
occurred." That is not necessarily the case as regards the Hillsborough
disaster because that tragedy exposes two glaring deficiencies in the
Green Guide.     Mr. Justice Popplewell in his report recomnended that
safety certificates were issued on an annual basis and that before
re-issue there was a duty on the local authority to inspect grounds.
The Green Guide at Paragraph 36 merely provides for an inspection by
club management which is of course not independent. Had the re-issue of
 the safety certificate depended on an inspection by the local authority
 at F •llsborough it is unlikely the disaster would have occurred.
 22 September 1989

The Director of Public Prosecutions
4 Queen Anne's Gate
Westminster
London
SW1.


Dear Sir

Disaster at Hillsborough

I feel that I must pursue with you my contention that there is a prima
facie case of manslaughter against the Directors of Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club. In this connection I refer to my letter to you of the
18th May, and your reply of the 3rd June.

I understand from Mr J Mervyn Jones that the correspondence I conducted with
the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire/ and the Right Honorable
Lord Justice Taylor has been passed to you by him for your information.
I do not know whether you have a copy of a letter written to me by Mr T Watson BA
Assistant Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police dated the 15th June
and so I enclose a copy. I also enclose a copy of Mr J Mervyn Jones letter
to me of the 2nd August.

The deaths and serious injuries which occurred in Hillsborough Stadium on
the 15th April must be laid at the door of the football club. They knew
that the Liverpool spectators could not be properly accommodated on the Lepping
Lane terraces. They knew that serious crushing of spectators had occurred
in 1981 and that there were broken arms/ legs and ribs requiring hospital
treatment. They knew that on that occasion the gates had to be opened and
about 250 spectators used the pitch as a place for safety. They knew that
the police said after that incident that 10/100 was too high a figure for
safety on those terraces. The figure was not reduced.

The 1981 incident led to the terraces being sub-divided into pens. They
did nothing to ensure that those pens were properly monitored so that they
were not overfilled unsafely. They did nothing to ensure that there was
immediate access to the pitch as a place of safety in an emergency as laid
down by Paragraph 215 of the Government's Green Guide. In fact the gates
in the perimeter fencing were not designed as exits thereby ensuring that
in an emergency there was no means of escape. Having had previous warning
in a crushing incident that such access would be required in an emergency
such conduct is so grossly negligent it must be looked upon as criminal.
The T im es       19.8.89




  Hillsborough lessons still unlearnt?
   From M r R. F.dev                         From M r Edward Grayson
  Sir. Lessons have not been learnt          Sir, T he claim in your leading
  from the terrible disaster at              article (August I5) that
  Hillsborough Stadium on April              One lesson has emerged repeatedly
  I 5. The new football season opens         from recent inquiries into disaster*,
  with the safety o f spectators at          including those at Zeebrugge. King's
  football grounds in as big a               Cross. Hillsborough. Clapham Junc­
  shambles as it has always been.            tion and Lockerbie. In every case the
                                             door was shut after the hone had bolted
  T his is in large part due to
  dereliction o f duty on the part o f       is vividly illum inated by Hills­
  the H ome Secretary. H is depart*          borough, and the silent message
  m cnt is concerned with regulating         built in to Lord Justice Taylor's
  ground safety.                             interim report. His own recom ­
                                             m endations are recorded in para­
     Despite the Popplcwell and              graph 315 at page 57 to
  Taylor reports, he has failed to           complement the recommendations
  issue regulations or to give guid­         which Mr Justice Popplcwell set out
  ance to local authorities as to the        after his inquiry at Bradford.
  term s and conditions to be put
  into safety certificates. This                M r Justice Popplewell's interim
  should be done forthwith by                report noted laconically in para­
  statutory instrum ent.                     graph 2.28 at page 10
                                             Had the Green Guide been complied
     T he Taylor report shows that           with this tragedy would not have
  Sheffield United Football CTub             occurred.
  has for years been operating
                                                In his final report M r Justicc
  without a safety certificate. How
  many other designated clubs do             Popplewell traces the pattern o f
                                             shutting, or ineffectively attem pt­
  not have safety certificates? It is
                                             ing to shut, stable doors after
  the Home Secretary’s duty to find
                                             bolting horses with a chilling
  out and remedy the situation.
                                             sequence o f non or limited re­
     Most o f those who died at              action to G overnm ent inquiries
  Hillsborough were crushed against          into football crowd casualties
  the perim eter fencing. T he fencing       covering Wembley, 1923; Bolton.
  contravened the G overnm ent                l946;lbrox, 1971; Bradford, 1985;
  G reen G uide which, at paragraph          and Birmingham, 1985.
  2 1S. requires full access to the
  pitch to be available when it is              The dism al conclusion to
                                             emerge from this consistent p at­
  likely to be used a s a place o f safety
                                             tern is that if the 1923 and 1946
  in an emergency.
                                             recom m endations for ground-con-
     Five weeks after Hillsborough a         trol and licensing legislation,
  fire broke out at the rear o f             which were ignored in Whitehall
  terraces occupied by 2.000 Port            and Westminster, had been im ­
  Vale spectators a t Preston North          plemented and enforced, as they
  End's ground. Fortunately, police          have always existed for other
  reacted quickly, opening the               places o f public entertainm ent,
  access gates to allow hundreds             Bolton, Ibrox, and Bradford and
  o f spectators on to the playing           Birmingham ground and other
  area.                                      authorities would have been on
     T his incident was reported in          notice and under regulatory con­
  The Tunes and I sent a copy to             trol to creatc at least the circum ­
  Lord Justice Taylor with the               stances and conditions w ithin
  com ment: “ You could have had to          which the post-Wembley disasters
  take on board a further tragedy.” 1        could have been avoided o r
  was thanked for drawing the                dim inished.
  m atter to his attention. I would             Furthermore, all four football
  have thought that if anything              fatalities examples illustrate your
  would have persuaded him that              claim at the wider national level o f
  perim eter fencing in its present          the need for proper back-up and co­
  form should have been taken                ordination between neighbouring
  down it was that incident.                 agcncics. and for clear and logical
     Four m ajor disasters at British        lines of command and communica­
  football grounds have so far               tion in central Government
  claimed the lives o f 250 predomi­            Sport does m irror vividly wider
  nantly young people on the thresh­         problems which might otherwise
  old o f life. It is a national scandal     be less easily identified. The
  and the Home Secretary must                inexorable and alm ost inevitable
  ensure that it does not happen             climax o f Hillsborough after 65
  again.                                     years o f inertia from successive
   Y ours sincerely,                         governments surely proves this,
   R. EDEY.                                  particularly on the eve o f yet
   Lower Flat.                               another season with the now
   Field House North,                        perm anent apprehensions for the
   West Street,                              game's future at the public level.
   H arrow .                                 I am . Sir, yours faithfully,
   Middlesex.                                EDW ARD GRAYSON.
   A ugust IS.                               4 Paper Buildings, Temple, EC4.
                                                                Xo
4



were not to be stewarded.       She cannot understand why the
Governments Green Guide was voluntary and did not have the
force of law.    This unsatisfactory situation still subsists
today and must be remedied without further delay.

     The Home Secretary owes it to Trevor and Jenny Hicks and
all the bereaved and the hundreds who have been injured
physically and mentally in these disasters to ensure that
grounds are safe and that such a tragedy never happens again.
     What is Lord Justice Taylor's response to this wholly
unsatisfactory state of affairs?     In my opinion he makes a
fantastic interim recomnendation. It is to the effect that all
league football grounds which still have perimeter fencing
should have suitable and sufficient cutting equipment available
"to release numbers of spectators if necessary." Decision as
to use is to be made by a nominated senior police officer at
the ground. Yet in Paragraph 77 of the Taylor report there is
the stark conment on Hillsborough: "If no relief came in four
minutes there would be irreversible brain damage; if longer/
death."    It would probably take more than four minutes to
identify a serious emergency had arisen and by then it would be
too late.

     She other criticism I have of Lord Justice Taylor's report
is that he has ignored precedent.     He has accepted that the
police had assumed a role for safety of spectators on the
terraces.   He should not have done. The Green Guide as have
all previous inquiry recommendations placed responsibility for
safety of spectators inside the ground on football club
management.   Lord Justice Taylor refers to club and police
responsibility as a very difficult grey area and an interim
reconmendation is that there should be a written agreement
between   club and police     setting   out   their respective
responsibilities for crowd safety and control. Lord Justice
Taylor has confused the issue and created a very grey area
which did not previously exist.        The Home Secretary by
statutory instrument should make it clear as to the division of
responsibility between club management and police and I hope he
will preserve the status quo before the Taylor Report muddied
the waters.   He must also issue comprehensive regulations for
safety at sports grounds.

     The Taylor Report shows that Sheffield United although a
designated club has operated for years without a safety
Certificate.    The Home Secretary must ensure that all
designated clubs are operating with safety certificates which
are up to date in every particular. Local authorities must be
directed to provide accordingly and those grounds or parts of
grounds which they consider unsafe must be closed by
Prohibition Notices until they are made safe.     No terraces
should be open with perimeter fencing unless the club can
demonstrably show that immediate access to the pitch is
available in an emergency, without the aid of cutting
equipment.
        •C*,' t *
     Victoria Hicks    was 19 reading chemistry at Liverpool
University/ Sarah Hicks was 15 at Haberdasher Askes School.
Trevor and Jenny Hicks lost two beautiful daughters at
Hillsborough and their lives will never be the same again.
They had no need to die.    Jenny has told me she would never
have allowed Sarah to go on the terraces had she known they
     In 1971 66 people died at Ibrox Park as a result of
massive crowd surges on a gangway towards the end of the match.
This tragedy led to the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975 and
introduced a system of Safety Certificates. Section 6 (2) of
that Act enabled the Home Secretary to make regulations for
safety at sports grounds. No such regulations have ever been
introduced.   Yet it is vital that there should be uniform
minimum requirements laid down for Safety Certificates. In his
report   Mr Justice Popplewell      said,   "There is a    real
responsibility to ensure that those people who attend sporting
events can feel confident that all reasonable steps have been
taken to ensure their safety in caseof emergency."         That
responsibility has still not been discharged by the Home
Secretary.

     Following the Bradford fire the Fire Safety and Safety
Places of Sports Act 1987 was put on the statute book. In the
main it dealt with fire safety and safety of stands at sports
grounds and did not deal with terraces. It did however, under
Section 23/ enable local authorities to issue Prohibition
Notices when they     are of the opinion that admission of
spectators to a ground or any part of a ground involves risk to
them so serious that until steps have been taken to reduce it
to a reasonable level admission of spectators ought to be
prohibited or restricted.

     The Act was supplemented by an updated Green Guide issued
by the Government as a Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.
Incredibly after three major disasters already it says on the
back that it provides "Voluntary guidance to ground management/
local authorities and technical specialists on measures for
improving spectator safety at sports grounds."       Instead of
implementing the Popplewell recoimendations in legislative form
the Home Secretary considered it was sufficient to introduce a
guide on a voluntary basis!

     Paragraph 215 requires perimeter fencing gates to have a
minimum width of 1.1 metres.    It goes on: "Provision of such
gates as access points is particularly important to allow full
access to the playing area for use as a place of safety in an
emergency."   Most of those who died at Hillsborough were
crushed against the perimeter fencing. Lord Justice Taylor
finds at Paragraph 258 of his report: "Hie perimeter gates in
the pens were not designed as exits."     In other words in an
emergency those penned in were to have no chance of escape.
Paragraph 264 is damning of the Government's Green Guide. It
says: "Even if the width of Gates 3 & 4 had conplied with the
present Green Guide standard/ they would have been wholly
inadequate to relieve pressure and release spectators swiftly
on 15th April. Moreover the Green Guide says nothing about the
number of gates required for a pen of given size."
                SAFETY AT FOOTBALL QWUNDS




     Football is big business. Manchester United has just been
sold for 20 million pounds. Pools promoters make vast profits
and the Government receive 40 million pounds a year in revenue
from the pools.    Millions are paid in transfer fees for top
players.   That many games should continue to be played in
substandard stadia with third rate amenities and without regard
to the safety of the paying spectators is a national disgrace.

     250 people who have been predominately young have lost
their lives in four separate disasters at British football
grounds in the last 40 years. Mr Douglas Hurd has been Home
Secretary when the terrible fire occurred and 56 lives were
lost at Bradford and when the worst disaster of all took place
at Hillsbrough Stadium on the 15th April. Two days after both
disasters he told Parliament that he had set up inquiries under
Mr Justice Popplewell and Lord Justice Taylor respectively.

     In his report to Mr Hurd in January 1986 Mr Justice
Popplewell said: "I have to say that almost all the solutions I
have proposed have been previously considered in detail by many
distinguished Inquiries over a period of 60 years." In other
words if it had not been for inertia on the part of successive
Governments to exact statutory provisions for safety of
spectators at football grounds no tragedies would have occurred
and no inquiries would have been    necessary.

      There was a perfectly good blueprint for safetylaid down
by inquiries going back to 1924 following crowd disorder at
Wembley Stadium at the first cup final there on the 28th April
1923.    That inquiry recommended that the club was responsible
for the safety of spectators inside the ground and that the
police were responsible for the preservation of law and order
and for no other purpose.

     After 1924 there was no further inquiry until 1946 when 33
people lost their lives at Bolton Wanderers Football Ground.
50/000 spectators were expected and 85/000 turned up and as a
result because of the press of people in an enclosure two
barriers collapsed.     Itis interesting     to note that the
previous best crowd at Bolton of 43/000 had been amply policed
by 60 police officers but 103 officers was inadequate to police
85,000 spectators.    There was no hooliganism in those days!
Mr R Moelwyn Hughes KC       who    took theinquiry called for
legislation to ensure implementation of the safety measures he
recortmended. He said: "The legislation should errpower the Home
Secretary to issue general regulations for different grounds
and the broad conditions necessary for safety."       Absolutely
nothing was done following his report.
           Football ignores
           disaster lessons
       John MeOht*                 through, I went to a police­        visiting fans who turn up
                                   man and said, “Haven't you          without tickets*
 A NO TH ER football trag­         learnt anything from Hills­            In his interim Hillsbor­
 edy was only narrowly             borough?” but all he ssid to       ough report. Lord Justice
 averted on the first day of the   me was, “You bloody well            Taylor criticised South
 new season, an investigation      got in, didn’t you? Go and sit      Yorkshire police for not
 by The Observer has re­           down**. 1 was absolutely            postponing the kick-off
 vealed.                           •mazed.'                           when it became apparent
    Liverpool council has             T he working party says it      there were serious problems
asked the Football League          wants the Football League to       at the Leppings Lane end.
 for an official inquiry into      find out why police did not            In previous seasons, po­
 the game between Coventry         ensure orderly queues out­          lice delayed matches. onl\ if
 City and Everton on 19 Au­        side, why ticket- and non-         visitors were held up in traf­
gust after receiving state­        ticket-holders were not sepa­      fic or if there was a serious
ments from more than 100           rated and why stewards did         incident. But already this
 tans alleging overcrowding,       not ensure proper seating ar­      season they have postponed
-crushing and poor policing        rangements.                        at least 11 first division
T he demand shows the con­            'I was at Hillsborough and      matches, mostly to allow late
tinued precarious state of the     there seemed to be too many        arrivals time to get in
domestic game                      similarities at Highfield              O r one occasion a match
   -With the current season        Road for comfort. It is lucky      was delayed for 15 minutes
just four weeks old. there is      there was not another disas­        because stewards and police
evidence that, while there is      ter,’ said M r Harry Chase,         were still holding a pre-game
enormous will to ensure            the Liverpool councillor           briefing to discuss how. many
 safety, the game is beset with    who chairs the working             fans to let in to the stadium
confusion aboutthe best way        party.                                 Police face another di­
forward.                                                               lemma in their handling of
                                      Coventry admitted there
    Liverpool's Hillsborough                                          tickeiless fans. Afier Swed­
                                   were problems with the             ish police allowed several
working party, set up to
                                   turnstiles, which it says it has   hundred England fans into
monitor safety at grounds in
                                   now sorted out, but it denies      last week's World Cup
the aftermath of April’s trag­     that there was significant
edy which left 95 fans dead,                                          match, the Football Associa­
                                   congestion      outside      the   tion condemned the move as
says that the worst example
                                   ground or any overcrowding         likely to encourage rogue
of this muddled approach
                                   on the terraces.                   England supporters to travel
was at the Coventry-Everton
game.                                 Problems the game is            abroad without tickets.
    More than 5.500 Everton        grappling      with    revolve         But the dilemma the
fans arriving at Coventry's        around the issues of delaying      Swedes faced is one which
Highfield Road stadium             matches and what to do with        police all over England have
were forced to go through                                             to confront every week. If
only four turnstiles, causing                                         they don’t let the fans in they
considerable crushing out­                                            could create problems out­
side the ground. When they                                            side. Operational decision?
finally got inside, the work­                                         are taken by the senior police
ing party says, supporters                                            officer on the dav but there is
were met by poor sign post­                                           evidence of considerable di»-
ing and further crushing on                                           parity between local polict
the terraces, while those who                                         forces.
had bought stand tickets                                                  A senior policeman with a
found people in their seats.                                          long record of policing foot­
   A 45-year old Everton                                              ball told The Observer that
supporter who has followed                                            top officers were beginning
his team to away games for                                            to despair at the lack of any
30 years, told The Observer it                                        mechanisms to deal with the
was the worst experience he                                           problems and would be call­
had ever had at a match.                                              ing on the Government to
   ‘By 2.45, the crowd had                                            change the law.
swelled to about 500, all                                                 ‘Whatever we do in these
milling around trying to get                                          situations we are bound to
through these four tiny turn­                                         lose. We can’t arrest peoplt
stiles. When we heard a roar                                          just for coming to a match
from inside as the teams                                              without a ticket but neither
came out, panic began to set                                          can we allow- them to ram­
in. T here was pandemo­                                               page outside grounds.         t
nium, with people getting                                             have to be given the power?
hysterica! and the police            After HWsboreugh                 to deal with it before thr
doing nothing to sort it out.      ground safety was u ld             w-hole thing gets out ot
After I had been pushed            to be the main priority.           hand,’ he said
                                                Vale force
                                                  their
                                                wav back
                                                          By lan Ross

                                               Preston North End~~~~ 1
                                               Port     ..........   1
                                               P ort Vale's a tte m p t to e n d a 32-
                                               year exile from the second
                                               div isio n gathered fresh m o .
                                               m em u m a t D rep d aic Iasi n»ght
                                               w hen they held Preston N orth
                                               E nd tn a creditable drew in a
                                               piav-ofT. sem i-final first leg tie.
                                                   H ow ever, the m aten was
                                               halted in the 72nd m in u te after a
                                               sm all Tire broke out a t the re a r of
                                               terracing occupied by 2.000 Vale
                                               supporters. Several hundred
                                               people spiiled o v e r perim eter
                                               te n tin g o n to the ?!te h but police
                                               reac’. ea Quickly. opening the
                                               access gaics to allow hundreds
                                               o f them o n to the playing area.
                                                   Play resum ed after an etfh t-
                                               m m u ie delay. D erek Allan, the
                                               P reston secretarv. said th e in-
                                               citleni was a pparently causrd
                                               w hen a piece o f pap er was set
                                               a h e ru a n d dropped am ong the
                                               crowd- “ l.ucktly it turned out to
                                               be a sm all incident w hich was
                                               dealt w ith quickly hv everyone
                                               c oncerned, hui I c a n 't under*
                                               sta n d how a nyone can start a
                                               lire >n a crow d like that.** Joe
                                               W orrnil. the referee, said.




                                                                                             Football
                                                                                          Continued from page I
                                                                                          and catting eqnipmeat where

lessons ignored                                                                           daos have perimeter ieaces.
                                                                                          Oaiy 12% of groeods had a
                                                                                          doctor and ooiy 49% had cal­
                                                                                          ling equipment.
                                  pool. the chief victims of the                             While many of the dabs
    by Charies Otxtton            HlUsboroegb disaster where                              have acted en ail the recom*
      Home Affairs                95 oftheirsapponen died,are                             mendadons. some r^ard them
     Correspondent                etzraag the season without a                            as ao more than guidelines.At
                                  key Tayiorrecommendation: t                             Manchester United, oae of
                                  written agreement between                               about 10 tobemostaffectedby
THE football season kicked        dab aad police setns% ent                               a recommendanoo of a 15%
offyesterday withamaoriesef       responsibilities for crowd                              cm in the capeaty of owwds
Hillsborough stfllfresb — and     safety aad control.                                     oo the terraces, doo oflidais
the lessons already being it*        According to somys of the                            were meeting police as late as
sored.A large aamber ofd m        dabs cimea oat by The Seo-                              Thursday to clarifv what they
have failed tocany ok ailthe      day Times and Sky News, the                             needed to do ahont the rest of
changes recommended by            satelliteTV news service.«a*y                           the measures. The dob sec­
Lord Jasdce Tayiar. There ia      57% had a written agreem ent                            retary, Ken Merren. said: “In
ao sacs tk u the football         by Friday morning. with 43%                             oor opinion these were recom*
authorities are prepared t» do    saying they were sill working                          Imendadons. we didn’tconsider
anything afcootIL                 «a itorwererelyingon **iertal                           them mandatory.**
  Although Taylor said is Us      liaison".                                                  Some critics have Warned
interim reportthatthe2S safe­        Peter lobinsoo. Liverpool's                          the government aad footbail
guards he was recommeadiag        chiefexannvc. said:**• still                            aathoridcs forthedeiays after
by the begiuniagofthe seaaoa      don’thavea writtenagreement                             a Home Office drcniar to
were “the anmmem aeoesaary        hot we have a dear BBder-                               dabs which said the racpne
ioeasare (feetftwriai football    staading.**                                             mendadons should be im*
groeads can forthe present he        Althoagh the capacity                                piemented “before the startof
safely need". as many as half     eowd atyesterday'sLiverpool                             the new footbail season or
of the 91 data admitted last      match Hied through the turn­                            immediately thereafter”.
week that they had aot im­        soles iatheknowledge thatall                            However, a Home Office
plemented ailofthem.              the other recommendations                               spokesman refuted claims that
   By yesterday’s 3pm startail    had been owned oat. other                               It had given the dabs a loop*
the dabs, iadadiag Sheffield      specuton arooad the country                             hole.
Wednesday at Hfflshoroegh.        coaid not be so confident.                                 The Football League aiso
had satisfied their local aoth-      According to the sarvey,                             disclaimed any responsibility.
orities that they shoald be       recommendations soli tn be                              Chris Walley, the league of­
given safery cernficaies and      earned oet include provisions                           ficial In charge of oowd
thus permission to open their     for a doctor at each grooad:                            saterv. said: “The dobs liaise
gramas to .the public. Bet                                                                with the local setbonry wnich
B uy dabs, inrloding Liver­                  Continued on page 2
                                                                                          Issues the saferv certificate.~
- 2 -



     The other deficiency regards perimeter fencing where Lord Justice
Taylor at Paragraph 264 draws attention to inadequacies in this reg-ird.
I am concerned that Lord Justice Tnylor made an interim reconmendation
thit clubs should provide cutting equipment "to release numbers of
spectators if nccessary." Thereport shows that in a crushing incident
irreversible brain damage is caused in four minutes/ and if .longer
without relief, death will ensue.   There would be no tine to use the
cutting equipment.

     1 have already said that local authorities should U3e the
Prohibition Notice procedure to close grounds or part cf grounds which
they consider unsafe for use by spectators. Perimeter fencing is likely
to be so dangerous tint no terraces should be used unless local
authorities are satisfied that inmediate access to       the pitch is
available in an emergency as provided by Paragraph 215 of the Green
Guide.

     Unless ycu can assure me within the next seven days that you intend
to take iranediate action to safeguard the safety of spectators at
football grounds by the introduction of regulations( I intend to seek
judicial   review    of your refusal to carry out your statutory
responsibilities laid upon you by Parliament.

     When   the  river   boat tragedy occurred Mr. Cecil Parkinson
immediately assumed responsibility to ensure so far as possible another
similar tragedy would not occur.   He at once issued safety regulations
bearing the force of law.     There have been four football disasters
involving heavy loss of life and three of them have been due to
crushing. You have yet to try to ensure such a tragedy will not happen
again.

                       Yours sincerely/




                         R. Edsy ( f i r . )
22nd September 1989.


J. Mervyn Jones MSc./
Assistant Chief Constable/
West Midlands Police HQ./
P.O. Box 52/ Lloyd House/
Colmore Circus Queensway/
Birmingham.
B4 6NQ


Dear Mr. Mervyn Jones#

     I refer to your letter of the 2nd August and previous correspondence.
We did of course have a long discussion on the telephone following
your letter. I have today written to the Director of Public Prosecutions
and enclose a copy of my letter for your information.

     I do not agree with Lord Justice Taylor's finding that the police
were mainly responsible for the disaster. I have always believed
for the reasons stated in my letter that the football club were wholly
responsible for what occurred.

     It is interesting to note that Lord Justice Taylor's report does
not even support his finding. 74 deaths and 511 of the injuries would
have occurred regardless of the opening of Gate C as clearly stated
in Paragraphs 108 and 112 of the Report. Paragraph 202 shows there
were only 10124 people on the terraces# only 24 above the maximum
of 10100! The disaster mainly occurred in pens 3 and 4 which were
getting uncomfortably full by 2.15 p.m. and crushing was occurring
long before Gate C was opened at 2.52 p.m.

     I am always driven back to my starting point that no deaths and
injuries would have occurred had immediate access from the perimeter
fencing to the pitch been available in an emergency. The club was
well aware that crushing could occur as it had in 1981. That it had
been greatly exacerbated through there being no control of the numbers
entering the pens being monitored to avoid overcrowding makes a manslaughter
charge against the club management of Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club unavoidable.

     Yours sincerely#
It was in fact the cause of the disaster. Had the perimeter fencing allowed
access to the pitch the pressure in pens 3 and 4 could have been relieved
and Gate C need not have been opened until a sufficient number of spectators
had gone on the pitch to enable the 2400 spectators outside the ground to
be assimilated on the terraces without death and injury resulting.

In any event Lord Justice Taylor finds in Paras 108 and 112 of his interim
report that only 21 of the dead and only 30% of those who were injured entered
through Gate C after it opened at 2.52 pm. In other words 74 of the deaths
and 511 of the injured would have been casualties regardless of the opening
of Gate C.

The reason I have felt it necessary to write to you again is because Mr Mervyn
Jones forwarded my letter to Mr Wright of the 6th July and because Mr Justice
Taylor's interim report gives further reasons for manslaughter charges to
be preferred against the management of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
I am also puzzled at the approach by the police to criminality for this disaster.

When Mr Watson wrote to me on the 15th June the West Midlands Police had
gathered together all the information put to Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry.
I was told then there was no evidence to suggest the offence of manslaughter
had been committed and accordingly no criminal charges had been brought.
In his letter of the 2nd August Mr J Mervyn Jones told me that the West Midlands
Police had to provide the necessary facts for the Coroners Inquests into
the deaths. This is referred to in Paragraph 15 of Lord Justice Taylor's
report. The final sentence reads: "I am assured by Chief Constable Dear
and Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn Jones that it is most unlikely any further
evidence gathered will significantly alter or add to the history of events
which emerged at the hearing".

Yet Mr J Mervyn Jones letter to me went on:- "If during the course of assembling
the evidence (i.e. for the Coroners inquests) "allegations of criminal offences
arise then these will be dealt with via normal procedures". If Mr Justice
Taylor was told that it was unlikely that there will be any further significant
evidence forthcoming these comments are difficult to understand. It would
seem to suggest that the police had made up their mind not to lay charges
despite what was said in the letter to me.

What particularly exercises my mind in all this is that there is abundant
evidence of reckless disregard of life and limb by Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club not for the first time and in exactly parallel circumstances which clearly
establishes a prima facie case of manslaughter. The police should have acted
and not concerned themselves with the Coroner1s inquests. Unless it is an
act of God violent death must be looked upon as criminal/ in the first instance.
This has not been happening as evidenced by the Herald of Free Enterprise
disaster where it took an unlawful killing verdict by an inquest jury and
a further two years deliberation to decide that a ship going to sea with
its doors open constituted a criminal offence!

I agree it is important to be able to establish a case to put before judge
and jury which has a reasonable chance of success. One can be too hasty.
I believe the arrest of the captain and first mate in the recent incident
on the River Thames to be a case in point. I read that Scotland Yard sent
a report on this incident to you for determination within two weeks of the
disaster! I do not believe that tragedy was any more than a problem of navigation
which is by no means criminal. There may of course have been a look out
problem.
On the other hand I have little doubt that the ignition of a pile of rubbish
under a wooden stand at a football ground which went up like a tinder box
with the loss of 56 lives amounts to manslaughter and that the Directors
of Bradford City Football Club were extremely fortunate in 1986 not to be
charged.

I enclose a copy of a letter I have written to Mr J Mervyn Jones for your
information.

Yours sincerely.
                          From; T h e P rivate S ecretary
4
                                                                     3r**> lCx7\
                                                                 H om e O ffic e
                                                                QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                LONDON SW1H 9 AT



                                                            18 September 1989




    I h   s -     fa '



        The Home Secretary has asked m e to reply to your letter
    of 24 August wit h which you enclosed an extract from "The
    Times" and a copy of an article written by you on safety of
    football grounds.

         In your letter to the Home Secretary and to The Times
    n ewspaper you suggested that the Home Office has been guilty
    of dereliction of duty by failing to issue regulations or give
    g uidance as to the terms and conditions to put into safety
    certificates for sports grounds.

        Since 1975, Home Office guidance to local authorities has
    been that in imposing conditions they should follow the
    principles set out in the Guide to Safety in Sports Grounds
    (the Green Guide) by which the safety criteria should be
    determined in the light of the circumstances in particular
    grounds.  The main instrument of control however is the
    certificate itself.

         T he Home Office has also issued statutory guidance on what
    to look for in safety inspections.    But the general principle
    of the legislation is that the precise terms and conditions of
    a safety certificate are for the determination of the local
    authority, who are required to consult the police and, as
    appropriate, either the fire authority or the building
    authority before issuing or amending a certificate.    Each
    c ertificate needs to be drafted so as to relate to the
    situation and conditions in the sports ground to which it
    applies.

        The circular letter also took the opportunity to remind
    local authorities of their powers under section 10 of the 1975
    Act for use if there is judged to be a serious risk to
    spectators in any part of the ground.


                                                            /Recommendation


    Roy E d e y . Eso
                                                                       IX.



                               2   .




    Recommendation 14 of the Interim Report urged local
authorities to ensure forthwith that all designated grounds
within their area should be issued with a safety certificate.
We have asked those involved in the certificate process to
take urgent action on this, as w ith all other recommendations.
The responsibility for ensuring that such grounds have a
safety certificate rests with local authorities under section
2 of the 1975 Act.     The Act does not empower any central
authority to supervise the way in which local authorities
carry out these responsibilities.       Lor d Justice Taylor has
indicated that he will consider whether there should be some
national oversight or inspection of local authority
responsibilities in relation to safety in sports grounds in
stage 2 of his Inquiry.       The Government has already amended
its Football Spectators' Bill so that, if it is considered
appropriate, this supervisory role could be given to the
proposed Football L i censing Authority in respect of grounds to
which that Bill applies.       Whether further measures are
necessary to secure improvements in public safety at sports
grounds will be a m a t t e r for decision when L ord Justice Taylor
has published his final report.




                                           MISS C J BANNISTER
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH               The Rt H o n LordJustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                            50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                            London S W 1 H 9AT
                                            01-273 2577/3602/2370



R Edey Esq




                                            Date

                                              7 September 1989




We spoke today about your letters of 7 July and 24 August to Lord
Justice Taylor.  I hope that, by now, you will have received an
acknowledgement to your letter of 24 August which I mentioned to
you had been sent from here.  I apologise that you have not so
far had an acknowledgement of your letter of 7 July:  please take
this letter as a formal acknowledgement.

As I explained on the telephone, Lord Justice Taylor is not
replying individually in detail to all the letters he is
receiving.  But he is reading all of them, as he made clear in
paragraph 10 of the introduction to his Interim Report.  You can
be assured, therefore, that he has seen all the letters you have
written to him, together with their enclosures, and will continue
to see any further letters which you might like to send.  These
will be acknowledged in the normal way.

I mentioned to Lord Justice Taylor today the fact that you had
telephoned me earlier on today, and gave h im an account of our
conversation.


                                                        )



                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH            The Rl Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                          50 Q u ee n A nne’s G ate
                                          London SW1H 9AT
                                         01-2732577/3602/2370




ml m


                                                    Ref: Hl/A




  Thank you f i r your l e t t e r o f
  which has been passed to Lord Justice Taylor for
  consideration.




                             /r M WHALLEY
                            V Secretary to the Inquiry
                                            Q U E E N ANNE' S G AT E L O N D O N SW1H 9 AT



                                                               October 1989




               \s \   -J vA>\_>
        You asked me whether the Home Office was satisfied with the response
of the football clubs, local authorities and others to the recommendations in
the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry into the Hillsborough
tragedy. I should perhaps first set out what we expected people to do, or be
doing.

        You will know that our immediate action on the day of publication of
the Interim Report on 4 August was to issue a circular letter with copies of
the report to the police, local authorities, other emergency services,
football clubs and to sports organisations urging them all to take the action
required in order to implement, as necessary, the Inquiry's recommendations
without delay. The circular letter also reminded local authorities of their
power under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) to prohibit
or restrict the use of a ground if there is judged to be a serious risk to
spectators in any part of a sports ground.

        Since that time we have been checking the progress made, first through
thepolice and the fire     service but also through the local authorities
responsible for safety certificates.     The results we have had so far are
encouraging. There has been a widespread, positive response indicating that
all or nearly all the urgent recommendations have been implemented. In some
cases all of the remaining recommendations have also been put into effect.

        That does not mean there have not been problems.     Some areas of
practical difficulty still exist;    for example, on the nature of written
agreements between some clubs and the police. We shall be issuing advice on
this shortly.

        On safety issues, the indications are that local authorities have
acted quickly, that there have been few problems in implementing the urgent
recommendations of the report, and none which give us serious cause for
concern. For our part, we are following up any instances where, from the
information obtained, there is doubt as to whether the improved safety
arrangements intended by the Interim Report recommendations are being met in
full.

        I have the power to make a statutory instrument requiring mandatory
terms and conditions to be contained in safety certificates. I would use




John R Carlisle, Esq., HP.                                           /over
                                                                      /   0




24th August 1989.


The Rt. Hon. Douglas Hurd P.C., M.P.,
The Home Office,
Whitehall,
London.
SW1.


Dear Home Secretary,

     I enclose a copy of letters from Mr Grayson and me published
in "The Times" last Saturday. I also enclose a copy of an article
I have written. Your duty is clear. It is to take control
of safety at British football grounds. You have the right and
the duty to guide local authorities as to the contents of safety
certificates. You should at once issue regulations in this
regard in the form of a statutory instrument.

    It is your duty to see that all 92 league football grounds
have valid safety certificates in accordance with your regulations.
You must also draw the attention of local authorities to their
right to issue Prohibition Notices in respect of any ground
or part of a ground they consider unsafe for spectators and
that you expect than to exercise their powers to ensure that
any unsafe acgommodation is not used until it is made safe.
No terraces wile perimeter fencing should be used unless it
can demonstrably be shown that immediate access to the pitch
is available without resort to cutting equipment.

    I would be glad to know that you are remedying the situation
as if nothing is done and a further tragedy occurs I for one
will hold you responsible.

    I enclose a copy of a letter I have written to the Prime
Minister and a letter I have written to Lord Justice Taylor
for your information.

Yours sincerely,




Roy Edey.



Enc.
24the August 1989.


The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
London.
SW111 9AT.


Dear Lord Justice Taylor,

     I enclose a copy of a letter of mine published in last Saturday's
"Times" for your information. I also enclose a copy of an article
I have written. I find it surprising that in your report to
the Home Secretary you have not drawn his attention to the Prohibition
Notice procedure set out in Section 23 of the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sports Act 1987. It is right that you should
also see letters I have       written to the Prime Minister and the
Hone Secretary and so I       enclose copies.

     I was horrified but not surprised to see the result of a
survey carried out at football grounds by "Hie Sunday Times"
last Saturday. Football management has always been and allowed
to be irresponsible. That, as you know, is why I have pressed
for the Directors’of Sheffield Wednesday to face judge and jury
on charges of manslaughter. I have little doubt that when the
matter has received full consideration by the Director of Public
Prosecutions charges will be laid accordingly. There is in my
opinion one overwhelming prima facie case to be answered.

     This season I have been at Lords and the Oval cricket grounds
when an appeal for a doctor to go to the pavillion "ifone is
in the ground" has been       broadcast. At the Oval whilstthey had
a first aid post it was not manned. It seems to me ludicrous
that large stadia such as these should have no doctor of their
own and so far as the Oval was concerned no manned first aid
post. No doubt you will take these comments into consideration
in your final report.

Yours sincerely,
                                                     HOME OFFICE
                                              Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                      Direct line: 01-273
                                                    Switchboard: 01-273 3000


0 » r*W :         FEP/89 3 5 / 4 8 / 8 8
Your reference:


       The Chief Executive
       County Councils
       Metropolitan District Councils
       London Borough Councils
       Common Council of the City of London
       Fire and Civil Defence Authorities

       Chief Officers of Police

       Chief Fire Officers

       Chief Ambulance Officers


                                                           4 A u gus t 1989




       Dear Sir/Madam

       HOM E OFFICE CIRCULAR 68/1989

       INTER IM R EPO RT O F THE H ILL SBOROUGH INQUIRY
        Introduction
       The Interim Report of the Inquiry set up by the Home Secretary
       into the tragic events at Hillsborough football ground Sheffield
       on 15 April has now been published.  A copy of the Report is
       attached.  Further copies are available from HMSO bookshops.

        2.   The purpose of this circular is to inform recipients of the
        contents of the Report and to urge them to take required action
        without delay in order to implement, as necessary, the Inquiry's
        recommendations to improve safety arrangements at sports grounds.

        Government response

        3.     The Home Secretary has welcom ed the thorou ghn ess of the
        Report and its recommendations wh ich he believes should be dealt
        wi t h without delay pending the longer term findings of the
        Inquiry whi ch will be published in its Final Report.
Scope of the recommendations

4.   Although the scope of recommendations is wide they are aimed
primari ly at football league grounds and the international
stadiums used for soccer and rugby where there are liable to be
large, densely packed crowds on terraces.   Recipients should
nonetheless consider their application to other designated sports
grounds and sports grounds at which large crowds are in
attendance.

5.    The 43 recommendations are in p aragraph 316. They are in
two categories:   the 28 asterisked are those requiring
implementation before the start of the new football season or
immediately thereafter;   the remaining 15 are those which,
although requiring immediate action are likely to take longer to
p ut into effect.  The Home Secretary nevertheless urges
recipients to take urgent action on both categories so as to put
into effect as many of the recommendations as possible before the
start of the season.

The guide to safety at sports grounds

6.   It is anticipated that the Guide will be amended to reflect
the Inquiry's findings in due course after consultation with
appropriate bodies.  A n y changes will take account of the Final
Report's recommendations.    If there is any doubt as to the
nature of crush barrier testing described in Anne x C of the Guide
advice can be obtained from the Home Office 01-217 5352.

The Safety of Sports Grounds A c t 1975

7.      Consideration is also be i n g given to any necessary
enforcement of the Report's recommendations by means of a
Statutory Instrument under section 15A of the Safety of Sports
Grounds A ct 1975 (the 1975 Act) requiring safety certificates to
include mandatory terms and conditions.        Consultation as required
un d e r section 18 of the 1975 A ct will first be carried out before
any such Order is made.

Football clubs

8.     A copy of this circular tog ether wit h the Report has been
sent to all 92 football league clubs and the international
stadiums in the expectation that they will co-operate fully.
Should co-operation not be forthcoming local authorities are
r em inde d of their powers under s . 10 of the 1975 A ct for use if
there is judged to be a serious risk to spectators in any part of
the ground.

Resour ce implications

9.   Whil st acknowledging that local authorities will need to
examine current priorities in order to action the Inquiry's
recommendations, it is not envisaged that there should be
significant long-term resource implications for them.   The cost
of any additional policing and/or provis ion of ambulance
services at football grounds is expected to be met b y the clubs
or ground operators themselves.

Ot her

10.  Any enquiries about this circul ar except b a r r ier testing
(see paragraph 6 above) should be addressed to M r A Brown
(01-273 2765).

11.      Copies also go to those bodies on the attached list.

                             Yours faithfully




                            A H TURNEY
                            Fire and Emerge ncy Planning Department
6th July 1989.


P. Wright Esq.,
South Yorkshire Police,
Snig Hill,
Sheffield,
S3 8LY.


Dear Sir,

        I have the reply to my   letter of the 12th June from
Mr. T. Watson on your behalf.     It is said that there is no evidence
to suggest that the management   board of Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club have committed a criminal   offence and accordingly no criminal
charges have been brought.

        Before seeking judicial review in the High Court I thought
you should have the opportunity to reconsider the facts of the
matter. It is in my opinion only too clear that there is overwhelming
and abundant evidence of gross criminal negligence on the part
of the football club. It clearly constitutes a prima facie case
of manslaughter to put before judge and jury for determination.

        In the first place the match should not have been held
at Hillsborough Stadium. Evidence was given to the Taylor Inquiry
that representations had been made by Liverpool and the Football
Association which had been put forward to the police by Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club that the Liverpool spectators could not
be properly accommodated in the Leppings Lane terraces. Superintendent
Mole made it clear that the match would only be policed with Liverpool
being allocated the much smaller Leppings Lane terraces. The decision
to hold the match was entirely that of the Club.

        It meant that Liverpool were allocated accommodation for
less than 25% of their average gate whereas Nottingham Forest received
room for over 50% of their average gate at the Kop end of the ground.
It was a recipe for disaster. At the Kop end there were 42 turnstiles
to admit 21,000 spectators and the Leppings Lane terraces only
had 7 turnstiles for the capacity of 10,100 people on those terraces.

        Evidence was given by the chief steward for that part of
the ground that the Leppings Lane terraces had never been stewarded
and that he had never seen the Government's Green Guide and it
had never been brought to his attention and that he did not even
know of its existence. This was obviously known, or should have
been known, to the Club and was in direct contravention of the
Popplewell report and the detailed procedures laid down for stewarding
in the Green Guide.
2




        Popplewell and Paragraph 215 of the Green Guide make it
abundantly clear that if there is perimeter fencing there must
be immediate access to the pitch as a place of safety in the event
of an emergency. This was completely ignored by the Club. Evidence
was given to the Taylor Inquiry that the fire brigade had to be
contacted for bolt cutters. The Club doctor said the likely period
of survival in the crush was only four minutes. Those crushed
died of traumatic asphyxia. They had no chance of escape. In
this connection, I would particularly refer you to the sixth paragraph
of my letter to the Director of Public Prosecutions dated the 18th
May, a copy of which was enclosed with my last letter.

        For all these reasons I think it is your clear duty to
prepare and submit a case to the Crown Prosecution Service of manslaughter
against the Directors1of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and,
if thought appropriate, against the Club itself - bearing in mind
the recent P & 0 decision - in respect of the incident which occurred
at Hillsborough Stadium on the 15th April 1989. Would you please
let me have your decision in the light of this letter as soon as
possible.

Yours faithfully,




R. Edey (Mr).
TELEPHONE:                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                  POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 5479%                                              SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                                          SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


P WRIGHT CBE OSt J CBIM
CHIEF CONSTABLE                                            14 July 1989



        Mr R Edey




        Dear Mr Edey

        I refer to your letter of 6 July and previous correspondence in
        respect of criminal charges arising from the events at
        Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.

        You will be aware that the investigation is being conducted by
        Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief Constable of West Midlands Police, and
        it is he and not the South Yorkshire Police who is in possession
        of the evidence arising from the investigation. Consequently
        any action along the lines you suggest must be initiated by his
        investigation.

        I have forwarded a copy of your correspondence to Mr Dear who
        will no doubt be writing to you in due course.

        Yours sincerely
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                      MEDICO LEGAL CENTRE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                               Watery Street
 H I L L SB OR OU GH I N Q U I R Y T E A M              Sheffield S3 7ET
                                                        Telephone: 0742 726105
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                 Fax: 0742 726247
PO Box 52, Uoyd House                                   KNOWSLEY HALL
Colmore Circus Queensway                                Prescot
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                       Merseyside L34 4AF
Telephone: 021-236 5000, extn. 2025                     Telephone: 051-449 3871
Fax: 021-233 3256                                       Fax: 051-449 2976
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
                                                        Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 021-359 3332                                 Our Ref:         JMJ/VSC
Fax: 021-359 6735
                                                        Date:            2 August 1989



           R Edey Esq




          Dear Mr Edey

          I refer to your recent correspondence to the Chief Constable of South
          Yorkshire Police, the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Right
          Honourable Lord Justice Taylor. The correspondence has been passed to
          me by Mr P Wright, Chief Constable, South Yorkshire Police.

          I am responsible, on behalf of Mr G Dear, Chief Constable of West
          Midlands Police, for the conduct of the investigation into the events at
          Hillsborough on 15 April 1989. My responsibilities are not only to
          service the needs of Lord Justice Taylor's Judicial Inquiry, but also to
          provide the necessary facts for the Coroner's Inquests into the 95 who
          died, which at this time are scheduled to commence early next year.
          Consequently the enquiries we are undertaking are most thorough. If,
          during the course of assembling the evidence, allegations of criminal
          offences arise then these will be dealt with via normal procedures.
          However, at this stage, there is still a lot to be done before we are in
          a position to consider the issues you raise.

          I am grateful for your letter and I have noted your concern.

          I have passed a copy of the letter to the Director of Public Prosecutions
          for his information.

          Yours sincerely




 PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT .. Birmingham
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH        The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                     50 Q ueen A n n e ’s G a te
                                     L o ndon S W 1H 9A T
                                     01-273 2577/3602/2370




                                                Ref: HI/E




   & LCU                  /


   Thank you for your letter of 12J''-         1°^ •
   which lord Justice Taylor has read and which will be
   taken into account in the Inquiry.




                          R M WHALLEY
                          Secretary to the Inquiry
TELEPHONE:
SHEFFIELD (0 7 4 2 ) 7 6 8 5 2 2


                                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                SNIG HILL
                                                                   SHEFFIELD S3 8LY

T. W A T SO N . BA
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE




    Mr R Edey
                                                               ACC(MS)/EMP



                                                               15 June 1989




    Dear Mr Edey

    May I reply to your letter of 12 June on behalf of the Chief Constable.

    As you know the tragic events which unfolded at the Hillsborough
    Football Stadium on 15 April 1989 are being considered in the most
    intimate detail by Lord Justic Taylor's Inquiry. An independent enquiry
    team from the West Midlands Police have conducted exhaustive enquiries
    and furnished the Inquiry with all the relevant available information.

    If it had been felt at any time during the gathering of information that
    criminal offences had been committed then the appropriate investigations
    would have been commenced. At this stage there is no evidence to
    suggest that an offence of the nature you suggest has been committed and
    accordingly no criminal charges have been brought.

    Yours sincerely
    12th June 1989


    The Right Honourable Lord Justice Taylor,
    Inquiry on the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
    Town Hall,
    Sheffield,
    Yorks.


    Dear Lord Justice Taylor,

                                DISASTER AT HILLSBOROUGH.

           Thank you for the letter of the 8 June acknowledging my letter
    of the 31st May.

           Having just received a letter from the Senior Crown Prosecutor
    I have, as a result, written today to the Chief Constable of South
    Yorkshire and enclose a copy of my letter to him for your information.
    I think it right that you should see such correspondence and be aware
    of what I am endeavouring to do in this matter.

    Yours sincerely,




    R. Edey (Mr)



    Enc.
+
 12th June 1989.


P. Wright Esq. C.B.E.,
Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police Headquarters,
Sheffield,
Yorks.


Dear Mr. Wright,

                        DISASTER AT HILLSBOROUGH

dai-Tl           a >°PY.?£           e° the Director o( Public Prosecutions
dated the 18th May together with a copy of the reply I have just
received from the Senior Crown Prosecutor, Mr. E.C.S. Williams.

        Since I wrote my letter evidence has been given to the Taylor
Inquiry by Chief Superintendent Mole that the Football Association
and Liverpool and Sheffield Wednesday Football Clubs had made approaches
m an attempt to change police plans so that Liverpool supporters
couid be properly accommodated. They were told by Chief Superintendent
Mole that he was only prepared to police the match under the plans
laid down by the police. By their representations Sheffield Wednesday
must have known that that method of policing put the Liverpool supporters
3ti risk.

       The fact that the match was held with that basic disagreement
over safety of the spectators from Liverpool at the Lepping Lane
terraces reinforces my belief that the Directors of Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club were criminally negligent in allowing the match to
be held at all let alone the perimeter fencing situation referred
to in my copy letter sent herewith. On these two grounds there must
be a prima facie case of manslaughter for the Directors to face before
judge and jury.

       Unless you assure me within the next seven days that you agree
with my contention and will carry out an investigation referring
it to the Senior Crown Prosecutor for consideration for proceedings
to be instituted, I intend to apply to the High Court for a writ
of mandamus requiring this to be done.

       I have sent a copy of this letter to the Right Honourable
Lord Justice Taylor for his information.

Yours sincerely,




R. Edey (Mr)


Enc.
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH       The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                    50 Q ueen Anne s Gate
                                    London SW1H 9AT
                                    01-2732577/3602/2370




Mr R Edey




                                    Date8 June 1989




Dear Mr Edey

Lord Justice Taylor has asked me to thank you
for your letter of 31 May together with
enclosures, and is grateful to you for drawing
the matter to his attention.

                                Yours sincerely




                            R M WHALLEY
                       Secretary to the Inquiry
                   Director of Public Prosecutions                     Deputy Director and ChiefExecutive
                                 Allan Green Q.C.                      D. S. Gandy OBE




                                          Director o f Headquarters Casework
                                                     C. W. P. Newell



                                                                            Crown Prosecution Service

      Mr R Edev                                                             Headquarters
                                                                            4/12 Queen Annes Gate
                                                                            London
                                                                            SW1H9AZ
                                                                           Telephone 01 -222-7944
                                                                                     Ext.




YourRef:                                OurRef:                                          Date:

                                                                            3rd June 1989




      Dear Sir

      Thank you for your letter of 18th May 1989.

      The   Crown  Prosecution   Service   does   not  undertake   the
      investigation of alleged criminal offences, such investigation
      is the function of the police.  If and when an investigation is
      conducted, the results would be referred to us and consideration
      would then be given to the possibility of proceedings.

      Yours faithfully



              (



      ECS Williams
      SENIOR CROWN PROSECUTOR




      WT020fi-06



Fax 01-222-4751                                Telex 945310 CPS HQ                                    Britdoc DX2328 Victoria
            Lessons of the past
            should have halted
            disaster, says Hurd
         andthe                                Fo°rtbaU
         crowd safety blunder M r S °fLleStf onsofPrevious
         saidlast night       ’ r Hurd*^ Home Secretaiy
         ^fisstsfss                          asffl*«s—                B-*-’
         Hurd said after tfce public                       hav®alread>'Prom-
      SA i S ^ . Taylor’s
      It is for everyone concerned working out MacceDtahf1
  | K T h ? ^ d areaPPliedinthe a ^ s c h e r n e ^ T n S ^ .
  I  T^e Home Secretary praised tice T a ^ r^ a l:after V0” 1Ju*-
  I                               *&«£ ^                    bis


  I1 c            suspension of Chief KthTfiill
                                          i Srs0afbomu?ntL 1i0^ , back-
                                                              E lation,
  ! £*«S?<£SS2.eliif ffffiSRiSSSMS-
    Justice Taylor's report?       -                      >»™ l»o f m t o




     wmie he was saticfir f? rh f                             ?bea foot-
   the interim i*>nm4 MH nnt J rf?                      nties bave brought
   g e d a n v -S a Tor jjb o rtc n m .'n l' w W    d ^ c S ^ 1? ^   schenie
   aT ^e taw oinaTSfy m innm                 J? “ “ 'dered acceptahif,
   ^ s a s g r i r r - mird T m f tS    j S ^ overament-
   &vernm?nt would look anew at p i ^ s t ? L eXpeCf the whole
   the r e le n t legislation.       E S ? j £ “ ^ eted ** ® «
   r S - » “ £ t^JsSoaSBS   5

  ^recommendations should^ foJcfub?'/*0" 6* " ’ PrcP"ed
  unplementedforthwith.   S e S e in tfc «“ treduce the
i a S ste a & g w -
' to localauOioritiMthf ° ? Ce “ * a number of iM tchda£7n
                                        E   E     ? * " •* * * *
: '“S M ■MtckeV°'i , " “ U0“ *                  Howell, labour sports
  -tw Sksjkxs* SrT® tfts s J t
, rbe put
      S^  u,to “j~SJ3SS
               effect before the iRtoTh^   ■'?*«»
                                   ? £as completed his
 beginning of the seasonin      tw o   “ ^ stt*atl°n.

 2 9 f t . Bill                        J M         f f i - ’S a s . t '
                                       J ftS S « S ? r' He "» 4
                                       • Cut police costs for football
                                                                     »*<■

                                       s&ttJSsatasi'
                                 * H5££.” w“ 4ry“ ““ or                        ■
will address in h iiS ? iS H ? " # i     “ * “constmctive
Lawn Tennis Association

All England Tennis and Croquet Club

Royal and Ancie nt Golf Club

R A C Mo t o r Sports Association

British Board of Amateur Athletics

Ho ckey Association

British Show Jumpi ng Association

National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs

Football Supporters Association

St Johns Ambulance

Sports Councils for England and Wales

Central Council for Physical Recreation
E.R.



       As sociation of County Councils

       As sociation of Metropolitan Authorities

       Lo ndon Boroughs Association

       Associa tio n of London Authorities

       A ss ocia tio n of District Councils

       Wels h Counties Association

       A ssociation of Chief Police Officers

       Clerks to Police Authorities

       Regional Managers, Health Authorities

       Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Associ atio n

       National Association of Fire Officers

       Fire Brigades Uni on

       Police Federation

       Police Superintendents'    Association

       Associ ati on of Chief Ambulance Officers

       Football Association

       Football Association of Wales

       Football League

       Football Trust

       Football Grounds Improvement Trust

       Rugby Football Union

       W e l s h Rugby Football Union

       Rugby Football League

       Speedway Control Board

       Cricket Council

       J o c k e y Club

       National Greyhound Racing Club
31st May, 1989

"Private and Confidential"
Lord Justice Taylor, ”
The Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry,
Sheffield Town Hall,
Sheffield,
Yorkshire.


Dear Lord Justice Taylor,

                      DISASTER AT HILLSBOROUGH

      I think it right that I should let you know that on 3rd May I applied
to Me Crompton the Stipendiary Magistrate at Sheffield for a summons to
be issued against the Directors of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and
Mr Peter Wright the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire that they killed
Victoria Hicks and Sarah Hicks at Hillsborough Stadium on 15th April, 1989.
The Magistrate* refused the application on the grounds that I had no direct
interest and could not bring direct evidence before the court.

      I enclose herewith a copy of a letter I have written to the Director
of Public Prosecutions. I think you should see this as a matter of courtesy.
Had the 95 deaths occurred to animals the RSPCA would have been down on
those responsible like a ton of bricks. Football management has to be made
to face up to its responsibilities.

      I am struck by the fact that after the disaster at Bolton in 1946
Mr Moelwyn Hughes KC laid dow^a blueprint for such a disaster not happening
again and yet similar disasters have occurred in 1971 at Ibrox Park and
at Hillsborough resulting in a further 165 people losing their lives.

      Even today grounds are not safe and you could have had to take on
board -a further tragedy at Port Vale five short weeks after the disaster
in respect of which you are at present hearing evidence. I enclose a newspaper
cutting of the incident to which I refer. I hope you will recommend that
the Home Secretary issues regulations laying down minimum standards of safety
at sports grounds as recommended by Mr Moelwyn Hughes 43 years ago and as
he is impeiiJed to do by Section 6 (2) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
1975.                                                    ^

Yours faithfully,




Roy Edey (Mr)
                                                    22nd May, 1 9 9 0 .

Dr. S.L. Popper,
Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
Sheffield, S3 7ET.


Dear Dr. Popper,

    Thank you for your letter of the 15th May.

    The Coroners Act 1988 came into force on the 10th July, 1 98 8.
Section 32 empowers the Lord Chancellor, with the concurrence of
the Home Secretary, to make rules under the Act. No rules have been
made since the 1988 Act was enacted.

    The Lord Chancellor made The Coroner's Rules, 1984, in exercise of
the powers conferred on him by Sections 26 and 27 of the Coroners
(Amendment) Act 1 9 2 6 . The whole of that Act was repealed by the Coroners
Act 1988 (Section 36 (2) and see Schedule 4.)       Therefore, on the passing
of the Coroners Act 1 9 8 8 , the Coroner's Rules 1984 were invalidated. No
Rules have been put in their place. Coroner's directions as to the conduct
of inquests have become unfBettered again with the enactment of the 1988 Act.

    The cases you cite in your letter were prior to the Coroners Act 1988,
You are not therefore, bound by those decisions.

    Section 8 (3 ) (d) of the 1988 Act places a duty and obligation o n a
Coroner to summon a jury if "death occurred in circumstances the continuance
or possible recurrence of which is prejudicial to the health or safety of the
public or any secttan of the public."    Parliament obviously intends that your
inquisition takes cognisance of ways and means of preventing another tragedy
in similar circumstances occurring.

    Rules 36 (2) ti^and 42 (b) of the 1984 Rules were contrary^to that
intention and ir adhered to, would frustrate the will of Parliament. If
the Coroner and his jury are not permitted to express an opinion other than
who the deceased was and how, where and when the deceased came by his death,
I contend that the Coroner and his jury are denied the opportunity properly
to discharge their duties.

    Rules 36 (2);4l and 4-2 (b) of the Coroners Rules 1984 were, in my
opinion, ultra vires. Coroners and their juries have a duty to comply
with the terms of the Statute and Rule 36 (2 ) is interference by executive
action with that duty. Rule 36 (2 ) was a contradiction in terms of Rule 43.

    My sole concern, as you know, is to prevent a recurrence of another
'Hillsborough type tragedy.'   It was a miracle that there was not a ^
repetition at Middlesbrough last December. My last letter set out, in detail,


                                                                  Contd
Dr, S.L. Popper,
Sheffield.                  _     Page 2.                         22nd May, 1 9 9 0 .




many matters which enabled the disaster at Hillsborough to occur.
There is nothing to prevent another tragedy occurring at any time. It
is in the public interest that your jury should be aware of them
and take account of them in the verdict they are required, by law, to return
after having heard all the evidence. Twenty recommendations to prevent a
recurrence were made by the inquest jury into the disastrous fire at
Bradford City Football Ground.

    Bearing in mind that the Hillsborough disaster was the third disaster
where spectators had been crushed to death at a football groundsince 1 9 4 6 ,
I consider myself to come within Section 11 (2) of the Coroners Act,19 88 ,
for the reasons given in my letter of the 4th and 22nd April, 1990.

    I think you should have an opportunity to reconsider what you have
said to me in your letters of 10th April and 18th May in the light of
this letter.   I await your reply as soon as possible please. If you
still disagree with my submissions I will, in the public interest, take
the matter to the High Court by way of judicial review pursuant to
Section 33 (2) (b) of the Goroners Act 1 9 8 8 .

                             Yours sincerely,



                            -ROTEDEY.
18th May 1989.


The Director of Public Prosecutions,
4 Queen Anne's Gate,
Westminster,
London.
SWl.


Dear Sir,

Disaster at Hillsborough.

     Would you please let me know as soon as possible whether you intend
to institute proceedings against the Directors of Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club for manslaughter of those who died in Hillsborough stadium
on 15th April 1989.

     Mr. Justice Taylor went on record at a preliminary hearing, before
taking any evidence, that he would not be looking at a crime having been
committed or apportioning blame for what occurred.

     The terrible fire at Bradford four years ago made it clear beyond
all reasonable doubt that there must be immediate access to the pitch
in an emergency. The government guidelines published in 1986 lays this
down as a requirement for safety at football grounds. I would hardly
have thought that anybody with a grain of coimon sense could have looked
at it in any other way. Had there been fencing not allowing access to
the pitch at Bradford, instead of 56 deaths, the death toll would almost
certainly have been numbered in hundreds.

     Yesterday, Mr. Trevor Hicks testified to the Taylor Enquiry that
he saw one of his daughters being manhandled over the fencing. It had
unfortunately been too late and both his daughters died in the crush.
Mr Hicks tells me he is willing to testify at a trial for manslaughter.

     It is in the public interest that the gross criminal negligence which
has occurred is brought home to football management. If the sanction
of the criminal law is not invoked, further tragedies are much more
likely. The deaths which occurred at Hillsborough were wholly avoidable.

     Had access to the pitch been available whatever the circumstances
outside the ground those penned behind the fencing could have been allowed
on to the pitch before the police felt obliged to open the gate. The
police outside could have informed the Security Officer inside that they
had an emergency on their hands and to relieve pressure they needed to
open the gate. He could then have ordered the opening of the fencing
allowing access to the pitch before the gate was opened and no deaths
would have ensued.
     I have to tell you, sir, that if you inform me that you do not intend
to prosecute in this matter I will, in the public interest, be seeking
judicial review of the decision of the Stipendiary Magistrate at Sheffield
given on the 3rd May, refusing me consent for a private prosecution.

Yours faithfully,




Dictated by R Edey (Mr)
and signed in his absence.
                               HF.R MAJESTY'S C O R O N E R
                                   IN N E R   WEST   LONDON




        FA C SIM IL E M E SSA G E


T0:            Dr       Popper      H. M. Coroner.               FAX NUMBER:        07^2-72624?.

ADDRESS.-           Medico Legal Centre.        Watery Lane.    Sheffield.




FROM:           Dr Paul KNAPMAN          H. M. Coroner.        Inner West London.

ADDRESS,        Westminster Coroner's Court.




NUMBER OF PAGES TO FOLLOW'                           ^




                                       M E S S A G E

        Documents      faxed     12noon        Monday    30th April 1990.
      families may
        try to halt
      first inquests    By Nicholas Watt
  FAMILIES o f victims o f the       deaths. Mrs Eileen Dallaglio,
  Marchioness disaster yes­          who lost her ballet dancer
 terday condemned the Direc­         daughter, Francesca, aged 19,
 tor o f Public Prosecution’s        attacked the boat's safety stan­
 failure to decide yet whether       dards and said nothing was
 to bring any chaises. This          done to improve safety after
 means that next week’s in­          the Zeebrugge disaster.
 quest could be stopped after          She described the Mar­
 four days because o f the          chioness as “a catalogue o f
 danger that it could prejudice      errors” and asked why com­
 a future trial.                     mercial traffic was allowed on
    Mr William Gorman, o f the      the Thames at lam.
 Marchioness Action Group,             “It is now nine months
 called it “unbelievably cruel”      since the disaster, and the
 and said some o f the bereaved     boats are still operating in
 families might try to stop the     exactly the same way. I was an
 inquest if only the first part     air stewardess 20 years ago
 identifying the dead, goes         and we had stringent safety
 ahead.                             tests then,” she said.
    Fifty one people died last         Mr Philpott, a keen sailor,
 August after a collision on the    said that before the disaster he
 Thames between the Mar­            noticed that the skipper could
 chioness pleasure boat and a       not look behind, there were no
 dredger, the Bow Belle.            life jackets and the windows
    Mrs Margaret Lockwood,          were stiff to open.
 who lost her son, said: “All we       He was in the lower dining
 are left with are yesterday’s      room at the time o f the
 memories and tomorrow’s            collision and when the boat
 lost dreams.”                      rolled over he said it was
    Mr Patrick Allen, a solicitor   impossible to get out.
 for many o f the families, said:      “People were trapped by
 “My clients wanted a full          tables and o f the 27 people in
 inquiry and were expecting         that part o f the ship only four
 that to happen with the in­        survived.” O f those I was a
 quests. Now it looks as though     sailor, one was a scuba-diver
 that is not going to happen        and the other two had no idea
 and they are very angry. We        how they escaped,” he said.
 are still taking taking instruc­
 tions from our clients but
 some o f them want to take the
 issue to the High Court.”
    Mr Iain Philpott, a survivor
 said: “ It is appalling that the
 DPP was informed by the
 coroner, Dr Paul Knapman,
 on March 16 that parts one
 and two o f the inquest were to
go ahead and now we have
 murmurings that it is to be
stopped.”
   He also condemned the
Government’s failure to call a
public inquip? into the
disaster and said that families
o f the victims o f the
Hillsborough disaster had ex­
pressed their dismay to him
that there would not be one.
   The group criticized the
amount o f compensation that
had been paid and asked why
libel juries awarded sums in
the millions yet there was no
legal requirement to pay out
money when there were
1390-04-29__ 12 =03        01 828 28378      KDNICA                                  jm   ELQ_L




I




                                                               22nd April, 1990.

      Sir Patrick Mayhew, P.C., M.P.
      The Attorney General,
      Attorney General's Chambers,
      Royal Courts of Justice,
      London, WC2A 2LL


      Dear Attorney General,

                               Re Inquest into the Hillsborough Disaster.

          I have your letter of the 20th April written by Mr. Parkinson in reply
      to my letter to you of the 18th April. Whilst I appreciate what ie said
      about your jurisdiction under Section 13 of the Coroner's Act, I9 88 , if it
      is pointed oii to you that the Coroner conducting this inquest has resumed
      it without statutory authority and therefore, the necessary jurisdiction
      under the Act, I would have thought it was your duty to draw the attention
      of the Coroner to his powers under the Act.

          Section 16 (l) is quite specific and only allows an adjournment on
      resumption of the inquest if there have been manslaughter charges preferred
      prior to or during the resumption of the inquest. This is not the position
      so far as Dr. Popper is concerned. Mr. Kennedy of the Crown Prosecution
      Service tells me that he still awaits the final report from the West Midlands
      Police and that the DPP will probably make his decision whether to prosecute
      "sometime during the summer."

          The Coroner has to await his decision before resuming the inquest. He
      cannot empanel a jury and then deny them the opportunity of hearing the
      evidence and reaching a verdict. If criminal proceedings ensue, it could be
      months or even years before conclusion* of the proceedings result in
      a pquittal or conviction vhioh n o   appealed agnino-fc by thooc conviolej.
      Acquittal of any accused would necessitate a fresh inquest under Section 16 (6 ).

          Coroners have no authority to conduct inquests on the basis of a
      "half way house" before the decision of the DPP is known. Saturday's report
      regarding the inquest on the River Thames pleasure boat disaster reinfoces
      this point. I enclose a copy of the report.

          Dr. Knapman has fallen into the same trap and is to commit the same error.
      Neither coroners are lawyers and it is therefore, doubly imperative that you,
      as Chief Law Officer of the Government, draw their attention to the irregularity
      of the inquests they are conducting.

          Might I also suggest that you issue a directive to all coroners that when
      an incident has been h*a-~be*« referred to the DPP for consideration for
      prosecution, coroners have to await that decision before resuming inquests
      and empanelling juries for the reasons stated above and in conformity with the
      Coroner's Act I9 B8 , Section 16. It is not open to a coroner to anticipate the
      institution of criminal proceedings.

                                            Yours sincerely,
