   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)




        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                      At

               The Town Hall,
                 Sheffield.

                      On

               1st March, 1991




          TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




    From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
         Official Shorthand Writers,
     55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT



MOLE Recalled

By The Coroner
Cross-Examined by Mr. King
Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning
           SIXTY FIRST DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                  FRIDAY, 1st MARCH 1991


                  BRIAN LEONARD MOLE Recalled

                        Bv THE CORONER?

Good morning. Am I right, Mr. Mole, that in fact you are
not on holiday on Monday? - A. That is correct sir.

      MR. ISAACS: I take full responsibility sir, a
crossed wire somewhere.
      I also notice that my learned friend Mr. Manning
is not here at the moment.
      THE CORONER: He has rung and he is going to be
late, so what I am going to do, I will have to take him
out of order because we need to get on, despite the fact
you are not on holiday. Can you start Mr. King, if you
don't mind?
      MR. KING: Sir, I will. This is no fault of anybody'
but my own, because I anticipated Mr. Manning would be
going first I have not quite collected my act together.

      THE CORONER:     Do you need a few minutes?

      MR. KING:     I don't need people to retire sir.

      THE CORONER: That is why I was asking you do you
want a few minutes to collect your thoughts. Take as
long as you need, I do not wish you to feel in any sense
pressurised.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Mr. Mole, I want to, if I may, sort out a confusion in
my own mind. As I understand it your evidence is in your
capacity as somebody who when you were at Hillsborough
was the most senior Police Officer who had active control
of the Hillsborough ground when you were there. That is
right, isn't it? - A. That is correct sir.

Your evidence is that at league games there was a system
in operation through the Police for the systematic filling
of the pens on the Leppings Lane terrace? - A. I think I
explained that fully yesterday, yes.

That, as I understand your evidence on behalf of the
Police in this way, is that that was designed for the
purpose of segregation? - A. That is correct sir, yes.
                                                         2

                                     B.L. MOLE



Q. As I understand your evidence - this is the confusion I
   am in you see and I want to investigate it - is that had
   nothing to do with risks of overcrowding as such which
   were being perceived on the West terraces, it was to do
   with the segregation of away fans? - A. That is correct
   sir, yes.
Q. It was directed to issues of public disorder? - A.
   Segregation stems from the problems of public disorder and
   to that extent, yes sir.
Q. It had nothing to do with ensuring even distribution in
   your evidence of spectators across a terrace for safety
   reasons, it was all to do with this segregation issue?
   - A. Yes sir, based on the intelligence of how many were
   coming dictated as to how many pens we would utilise and
   I think I described fully yesterday of 1,000 running in
   a 10,000 capacity area or 200, and therefore was dependent
   upon the numbers anticipated on the intelligence available
   to us.
Q. So on your evidence, which I have to say is very different
   from Mr. Lock's evidence, who was also in a senior position
   with the Police at Hillsborough, on your evidence when it
   came to games when the terrace was open to a whole set of
   fans and a capacity game at that, this system of filling
   the pens which operated at league games just was not
   followed, it was abandoned in effect? - A. The question
   stemmed from whether we manned the gates sir and I was
   trying to answer the question about manning the back gates
   and the explanation described the method by which we manned
   them or did not man them.
         In a full capacity game we did not man them because
   there was limitation for segregation purposes on the use
   of that end of the stadium.
Q. But what you have told us was that if the whole area was
   being used for a capacity game there was no question of
   segregation. Correct? - A. Correct.

Q. Therefore all that had been in an Operational Order
   dealing with the, and I quote from the Operational
   Order we have looked at already in a league game, about
   "ensuring that pens are filled in accordance with
   instructions for control", all that went by the board?
   - A. The term "goes by the board" does not apply because
   it did not apply if we weren't using pens separately.

Q. Yes, exactly, because on your evidence the sole problem
   which was being addressed at a league game with the
   filling of the pens in the way described was not any­
   thing to do with distribution of fans for safety reasons
   or overcrowding, it was simply segregation. That is
   right, isn't it? - A. I think yesterday I tried to
                                                        3

                                      B.L. MOLE


  draw very strongly the comparison between the maintaining
  of public order and the links between safety.

Q. But it does follow from that, doesn't it, that at the
   capacity games the whole terrace being used, your
   evidence is that, or is it, do you say when the West
   terrace is being used for a capacity crowd that the
   Police first of all had any function to fulfil in
   respect of the filling of it? - A. Are you referring to
   the controlled filling of each pen?

Q. I am talking about any control over the filling of the
   terrace? - A. At the risk of repeating myself I can't
   say any firmer than when there is a full capacity match
   the gates are left open, the crowd find its own level.
   If Officers recognise difficulties, and it is the
   perception and recognition, then they react to it. If
   they don't then they don't. If it is not a full capacity
   game the control as I described very clearly yesterday
   is instituted.

Q. So in other words on your evidence on behalf of the
   Police, at a full capacity game there was no system as
   such directed to and designed to ensure the even
   distribution of fans across the terrace. That is right,
   isn't it? - A. I think I have just answered that.

Q. That is right, isn't it, there was no system? - A. The
   system is find its level with the whole area being open.

Q. That isn't a system, that is just allowing the fans to
   go where they will, isn't it? - A. That is my system.

Q. I see. But you agree with me that it has no elements
   in it other than allowing the fans to go where they will?
   - A. I think I have said that very clearly sir.

Q. Can I put to you that that is one of the most dangerous
   systems patently and obviously to employ at the West
   terraces and I will take you through a number of matters
   to see if you agree or disagree with me. - A. Can I
   first of all say I do disagree. It is not the most
   patently obvious.   Twice it worked extremely well and
   was applauded by everyone without any dissent. I can't
   agree that it was the most patently obvious dangerous
   situation sir.

Q. Let me deal immediately with your answer which seems to
   be based on past experience, doesn't it? - A. It is
   based on past experience sir.

Q. You are saying because nothing went wrong in the past
   therefore the system was all right? - A. What I am saying
   sir it is not patently obvious, which is what you said.
                                                         4


                                        B.L. MOLE



           MR. PAYNE: Yes, get it right. The witness gave
     a perfectly clear answer and then it was put back to him
     in a different form.
Q.         MR. KING: You are saying that because it did not
     go wrong in the past, yes? - A. No sir, your question was:
     "Was it patently obvious that that method was dangerous?"
     and I said "No, it is not patently obvious otherwise that
     would have been recognised".
Q. And you are relying on past experience in support of your
   system, aren't you? - A. I am relying on fact, not
   speculation.
Q. I just want to deal with what the past experience was.
   The past experience was just two games, wasn't it? - A.
   The past experience of semi-finals was two games.

Q. How many games can you speak of prior to 1989 when you
   had direct experience of the use of the West terrace, the
   Leppings Lane terrace for a full capacity game when the
   whole of that terrace was to be used to its full by one
   set of fans? - A. I could not give you a number. I can
   tell you I go back to 1966 when the stadium held 66,000
   people and I policed matches at that stadium on that
   occasion, but the number of times I have had capacities
   I am unable to say. 50,000 yes and probably more or
   around that figure on numerous occasions, particularly
   when popular teams were visiting the stadium.




                            Q. Let me be more precise
Let me be more precise. How many games can you speak
of where the whole of the West Terrace was used for a
full capacity crowd when the radial fences were in
position as we know them today? - A. Since the radial
fences were put in I could not give you a number. On
one hand, possibly other than the Semi Finals, when the
whole section was used but because there was not a
specific counting facility at the early part of the
radial fences I could not say if it was at capacity or
not but certainly very large numbers in the whole area.

I am looking to an all ticket full capacity game. Mr.
Mole, the answer is easy, is it not? It was the 1988
Semi Final and the 1987 Semi Final. Those are the only
two games where you had the radial fences, an all
ticket game with a full capacity crowd using the West
Terrace. - A. Without figures I cannot tell you. The
West Terrace is only part of the stadium and whilst the
rest might not have been sold out it may well have been
full on those terraces.

You in fact cannot point to any game, can you, other
than those two? - A. I cannot add to what I have said,
sir.

     MR. PAYNE: I mean this is really most unfair.
This is something which can be established by
statistics historically. If my friend wants this
information then we will get it from the Club. It will
take a little time to put it together. It is quite
unfair just to dump it on Mr. Mole, to ask him to think
over the whole of ten years and give an answer.

       THE CORONER: He has said he cannot recollect.
M r . King has tried and in the end we have to accept
what Mr. Mole says.

     MR. PAYNE: The answer can, in fact, I am sure
from the Club records be found exactly if it is
important.

     MR. KING: I will leave it to the Jury to make
their own minds up, sir, on the evidence.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. KING: As far as the two Semi Finals go, Mr.
Mole, in 1987 we know that was the one which was on a
Sunday, was it not? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

We know that that was the game between Coventry and
Leeds when the kick-off was postponed? - A. It was,
sir, yes.
The 1988 Semi Final when the filling of the pens was
done or the filling of the terrace you say was done by
fans finding their own level, you say was a success so
far as the West Terrace go? - A. I say, not only I say
it was a success, it was acclaimed a success generally.

If, in fact, the tunnel to the West Terraces in 1988
was closed off - I know you say you had no knowledge of
it but if it was closed off - and if Police in 1988,
and we have heard evidence to this effect, directed
fans to the sides in 1988, that makes a nonsense, does
it not, of your claim that we can look to the 1988 Semi
Final as showing that the system of fans finding their
own level is one which works? - A. It is a presumption
that it happens, sir. I disagree that it happened.

Of course, and that is a matter for the Jury to decide?
- A. It is, sir.

If it did happen then that may well be the reason, and
may be the only reason, why the 1988 Semi Final did not
have the problems of the 1989 Semi Final as far as the
centre pens go, may be? - A. I cannot speculate, sir.

You see, Mr. Lock you accept was an experienced Police
Officer? - A. I think I said so yesterday, sir, a most
professional and capable Officer.

You worked in close conjunction with him? - A. He was
one of my Officers who was working to me, sir, as a
Divisional and Deputy Divisional Commander.

His evidence, which I want you to comment on, in effect
was that you could not allow fans simply to find their
own level. You had to have something more systematic
than that to ensure that the centre pens did not get
overfull at the expense of the side pens. You do not
accept that? - A. Without being critical of Mr. Lock's
evidence he has not had the experience of that and so I
find it difficult to understand how he makes that
point.

Let me see if I can help you in some way. Your system,
so-called system, of fans finding their own level did
not in itself give any assistance to spectators
entering the turnstiles A to G as to how to get to the
side pens, did it? - A. I think you will find the
stewards have a role in directing individuals to
locations within the stadium, sir.

I will come back to the stewards in a moment. - A.
Thank you, sir.
I want to look at the system which you on behalf of the
Police say was employed. It did not give any
assistance, did it, to any fan coming through
turnstiles A to G as to the way of getting to the side
pens? - A. That was not our task, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I did not hear the answer? - A.
That was not our task.

     MR. KING: I will come back, and Ihave made a
note, to ask you whose task it was. It did not give
any fan before he went down the tunnel to know whether
or not when he got on to the centre terraces they were
already full, or they were full or packed. It did not
give him any assistance as to what the state of the
centre pens was, does it? - A. No, sir.

Before he gets there. That   is right, is it not? - A. I
have just said, no, sir.

So you agree with me? - A. I explained yesterday I was
asked to speculate on a scenario that described what I
would do if it was full and I gave an answer to that.
Not having had the matter drawn to my attention of a
problem, clearly Officers are not asked to deal with
it. The order does not specifically give them
instructions to direct individuals to locations or
react to situations.

I want to take you through what you system does not
provide for. You have agreed with me it does not
provide for directing fans when they go through A to G
to the side pens. You say, "That is not our task". It
does not provide for enabling a fan before he goes down
the tunnel to know what the state of the centre pens
is, you agree with me. It does not help a spectator,
does it, to know in advance that there are radial
fences dividing off the fences, that is correct? It
must be? - A. That is correct, sir.

It does not help a fan when he gets on the terrace to
know that there is a radial gate at the back. The
system you employ does not actually aid him to know of
the existence of a radial gate at the back, does it? -
A. When we talk of a system, sir, the system includes
the fact that we are dealing with Police Officers. If
I were to spell out every aspect you are trying to
introduce at the moment I would never get an order
written. The system takes account of the fact that
they are Policemen. Members of the public ask
Policemen questions and when you say I don't
specifically have a system which says, "Direct them to
    A

                                                             B. L. MOLE

           point A" or "How do they get into point b?" or "Is it
           full?" or "What time is it?", no, I have not, but they
           are Police Officers we are dealing with, recognised as
    B      Police Officers, who in their normal day to day duty
           would give that advice if asked and frequently are
           asked. I certainly don't introduce it in a documented
           system.

        Q. I am not, Mr. Mole, actually on that issue yet. I will
           come to it. - A. I must have missed the point, sir.

        Q. I am discovering what your system provided for and what
           it did not provide for. Your system did not in any way
           assist a spectator who got on to the terrace to know of
           the existence of a radial gate. You have to accept
           that, that is right? - A. That is correct, sir.

        Q. It follows that if the centre pens, for example, become
           populated, populated perhaps in a way where you
           describe an Officer would be swallowed in the crowd, do
           you understand what I am talking about by populated? -
           A. I do, sir.

        Q. Indeed, I am interested to know what did you mean by
           "swallowed in the crowd"? What sort of crowd are you
           talking about? - A. I don't really understand your
           question, by what sort of crowd? If an individual is
           isolated in uniform in the middle of any crowd, size,
           shape or whatever, he becomes ineffective in deployment
           terms.




                                        /Q. But you used.




H
                                             B. L. MOLE

But you used the expression swallowed, didn't you? - A.
Swallowed, absolutely.

Which gives the picture of a large number of people all
around him? - A. If that is the picture you wish to
see, sir. All I say is he is inoperative because he is
in the middle of cannot respond to incidents.

All right. That sort of crowd, I am postulating a
heavily populated terrace, your system of the fans
finding their own level does not give any assistance to
a fan who is in such a heavily populated centre pen, to
know or see the existence of a radial gate which is
obscured by such a heavily populated collection of
people? - A. I think for the third time, sir, I have
agreed with you. You cannot see the gates and it does
not provide a facility to tell them where they are.

     MR. PAYNE:   My friend is repeatedly using the
expression, "your system". Now I have just looked up
the evidence of Mr. Mackrell which deals with this
point, and it is quite clear that this was the system
which the Club also accepted.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   That is absolutely not correct,
sir, absolutely not correct.

     MR. KING:   I agree entirely with my learned
friend, Mr. Catchpole.

     MR. PAYNE:   I am looking at page 38C-F (Day 52),
where I asked him exactly about ....

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, can we deal with this in the
absence of the Jury? If we are going to have speeches
    if that is correct then I would ask that Mr.
Mackrell be recalled.

     MR. PAYNE:   The only reason I rose is because of
the use of the expression, "your system". The Jury
have heard the evidence and ...

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   With respect, I can repeat the
evidence Mr. Mole has just given earlier today, which
said, "find your own level, that is my system", and
that is exactly what my learned friend has been putting
to him. It is wholly improper of my learned friend to
speak ....

     MR. PAYNE:   I am surprised that this point is
contentious.
                                              B. L. MOLE

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   With respect, my learned friend
is not at all surprised this point is contentious. It
is the whole point of what has been going on today.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, you will sum the case up
eventually and I can't say any more.

     THE CORONER:   I will do my best. May I just say
this, Mr. King? I do have one point actually. You are
quite correct to ask him what his system is, as he
understands it. In one of your questions you had
prefaced that by saying "your system on behalf of the
Police", and I was at the point of stopping you at that
point, but you did not repeat it. I think insofar as
you are asking him what he, in the days when he was
Commander, understood to be his system, I have got no
objection to you asking that. I don't suppose for a
minute that you have any complaints about that either?

     MR. KING:   Sir, I don't, but in the light of that
it might become important. Can I just break off this
line of cross-examination for a moment?
     THE CORONER:   Of course.

     MR. KING:    I may have to come back to it.It may
become important.

I want to go back to some basics of your position, Mr.
Mole, in 1988. Remind me again in 1988 what was your
status in the Police Force? - A. Chief Superintendent
in overall command of the game.

And in 1989 up until the date you handed over
responsibility to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield you
continued in that capacity? - A. I did, sir, yes.

I have forgotten the date now when you handed over to
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, I am sorry? - A. 27th
March, sir.

Which was how long before the game, that is about three
weeks? - A. Three weeks, sir.

The plan which you operated in 1988, you took the
leading role, I suspect, in drawing up that plan? - A.
I did, sir, yes.

And the plan which you passed on to Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield in 1989 was that - I hope
you understand what I mean by this - as that embryonic?
In other words, was that just in outline, or did you
basically hand over the same Operational Order as 1988,
with 1989 substituted and some amendments which you had
                                               B. L. MOLE


yourself introduced as to manpower and so forth? - A. I
think I covered very fully yesterday the fact that the
plan would be almost exactly the same, with minor
amendments, and I think I was asked the question, if I
had been there would it have been my signature and not
Mr. Duckenfield1s and I said yes.

I think it is being said, I may be wrong, on behalf of
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, that he basically was
taking over a pre prepared plan which he was assuming
had been thought through, and he did not have much
input into it because he was so new to the game. Is
that fair? - A. I think I have just said exactly that,
sir. The plan was prepared by me; it was almost the
same with minor variations in manpower terms, and would
have been signed by me.
     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, I hesitate to rise, it is
very rude, but my learned friend has just passed me the
passage from Mr. Mackrell's evidence. I don't know
whether you want me to deal with this in the absence of
the Jury? I am quite happy to read it. It relates to
the question of the capacity, an enquiry in relation to
capacity and Dr. Eastwood. There are then a series of
questions on that and if you don't mind me reading it,
just so that I can make this point clear:

     "Is this the message you received, Mr. Mackrell?
     A. Yes, it is."

This is about Dr. Eastwood's reply ....

     THE CORONER:     I am sorry, can you give me the
page number?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    Yes, it is page 38, Day 52.
     "Q. Did you, act upon that accordingly, leaving
     the capacity at Leppings Lane end as it was? - A.
     yes.

     Q. And not taking any further action to allocate
     any particular numbers, capacity numbers, to the
     different pens? - A. No, because the pens were
     open. People could transfer from one pen to
     another pen."

- dealing with capacity -
     "Q. Right, this is a very important point, Mr.
     Mackrell ...."

- this is Mr. Payne asking -
                                                       12

                                             B. L. MOLE


     "... and I am grateful to you for saying that. Is
     this the true position that having made this
     inquiry from this time onwards, the club's
     attitude was that provided the radial gates were
     open and locked open, then the spectators could
     move freely from one pen to another? - A. So I
     understood it."

In other words, could they move freely from one pen to
another if the gates were open, yes.

     "Q. And so distribute themselves over the terrace
     as they wished? - A. Well, they could distribute
     themselves over the terrace. I don't say as they
     wish because there might have been a constraint
     put upon them, but they could distribute
     themselves over the terrace.

     Q. What do you mean, a 'constraint'? - A. Well, if
     the Police filled one particular area."

- so dealing with they system -

     "Oh, I see, unless they were stopped?- A. Yes.

     Q. If they were not stopped ...."

- it doesn't say by whom, who took that decision -

     "... and if the gates were just locked open and
     left open at the back of each radial fence, so far
     as the club were concerned was the idea then that
     the fans could distribute themselves evenly as
     they wished across the terrace? - A. They would
     have to because they would have to be moving from
     one area to another to take advantage of toilet
     and refreshment facilities.

     Q. Yes, that is what was intended to happen? - A.
     Yes.

    Q. Is that the system which was in effect for the
    three semi-finals you have been talking about? -
    A. Yes."

It doesn't deal at all, with respect to my learned
friend, as to whose system it was, he was just asked
the question, if they were not stopped by a particular
constraint, and the gates were left open ....

     THE CORONER:   Yes. You have read it.   I don't
think we need to argue the point ....
                                                B. L. MOLE

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   It is an important point because
that was an improper interjection by my learned friend,
because it is slanting evidence, with respect, which
simply was not given and if that is the impression that
you, sir, have then I would invite Mr. Mackrell to be
recalled and we will deal with that point very
specifically.

     THE CORONER:  Well, let's allow Mr. King to press
on, I think. I am sorry, Mr. King, have we distracted
you too much?

     MR. KING:      Sir, would it be awful if we had a
short break?

     THE CORONER:     No, it would not.   Let's break for
ten minutes now.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     I apologise but it was a very
important point.

     THE CORONER:   It is quite all right.    Mr. Payne,
which volume is it?

     MR. PAYNE:     It is Day 52.

                  (Short Adjournment)
                                       B.L. MOLE


     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, I am not going to
deal with this point now. I think we will press on with you,
Mr. King. I having read it and I can make up my own mind what
it means.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    Sir, can I just mention, if you
carefully read his answers to me as well on the point of the
two different systems?

      THE CORONER:  If need be we will discuss it without the
Jury either this afternoon or at some appropriate time. Mr.
King?

     MR. KING:   Mr. Mole, so you understand what I am doing,
I am looking at the system which you described and 1 am
identifying features which I am putting to you it did not
provide for, and we were going through them, so you understand
when I have finished that I am then going to ask you in the
light of the fact that it did not provide for all those
things, was not it patent and obvious to you at the time if
you thought about it that it was a patently unsafe system as
far as crowd safety went. All right? - A. I understand what
you are saying, sir.

You have agreed with me that your system did not provide for
any assistance to a fan who found himself in a heavily
populated centre pen to know of the existence of the radial
gate at the back which would take him to a side pen if because
of that heavy populated pen it was obscured to him. You have
agreed with that? - A. Yes, sir.

Equally, it was always   known to you, was not it, when you drew
up your plan that the centre pens were notoriously the most
popular part of the Leppings Lane terrace? - A. As I have said
on a number of occasions it is the most popular location
behind the goal.

And it was known to you as a fact if one stood in the
concourse coming through turnstiles A-G, it was known as a
fact that the tunnel was easily to be seen with the word
"Standing" over it, was not it? - A. The tunnel is directly in
front of the entrances, yes.

And has the large word, "Standing", over it? - A. I will
accept that. I cannot recall now, but I am sure it did, yes.

I am sure you must have walked round the ground in your
capacity as the senior   Officer? - A. Many times, sir. it is
two years ago. I don't want to mislead the Jury. I will
accept it is there. I can’t in all honestly recollect exactly
which signs, but I accept it.

When you are drawing up your plan surely one of the things you
have got to do is walk round the ground and take into account
features of the ground? - A. No, sir.

You would not do that? - A. No, sir.
                                                                 15


                                               B.L. MOLE



     Q. You can't just ignore the state of the ground, can you? - A. I
        did not say that, sir.  You said when I drew up the plan I
        would walk round the ground.  I have Policed it for ten years,
        sir.  I don't need to walk round the ground when I drew up the
        plan.

     Q. Fair enough.  I am sorry.  That is fair comment.  In other
        words, you were satisfied that you knew the essential features
        of the ground without having to walk round before drawing up
        the plan? - A. Absolutely, sir.

     Q. And one of the essential features of the ground which you
        would know about at the time, if you can't remember now, would
        be that when you came out of turnstiles A-G as a spectator
        immediately in front of you was the tunnel with the large word
        "Standing" over it? - A. I think I have accepted that.

     Q. And that tunnel, of course, led directly down to the centre
        pens, did not it? - A. Y'es, sir.

     Q. You would also know, therefore, without having to walk round
        the ground again, that there was absolutely no signing at all
D       which indicated a spectator when he came through A-G with his
        back to the turnstiles that there was a route to his left
        through that wall on his left which would take him to the side
        pen No. 6? There was no sign to that effect? Correct?     You
        would know that? - A. No. sir, yes.

     G. You would also know there was only a very small sign not in an
        obvious position which if he managed to see it to his right
        indicating there was a way round to the right to the pens we
        know as 2 and l? You would know that? - A. Yes. sir.

     G. So you therefore would know there was a likelihood that a
        spectator coming through turnstiles A-G with no prior
        knowledge of the ground whatsoever, that sort of spectator,
        the likelihood was that he would go straight down the tunnel.
        You would know that? - A. No, sir.

     G. You won't accept that? - A. I would  accept that a visitor to a
        sports stadium usually would enter and be pleased to enter
        after a journey, would seek toilets, would seek refreshments,
        would seek space in that area, before heading to the standing
        position, sir.  So not automatically would I accept that he
        would head straight for the tunnel.

     Q. I am sorry.  Let us assume he has been to the toilet and done
        everything else.  The combination of the fact that the centre
        pens in any event would be popular, are the most popular area,
        the fact that the only obvious route on to the terrace for
        somebody coming through A-G was down the tunnel, the
        likelihood is. is not it. which you would know about in
        drawing up your plans, that the likely route for a spectator
        coming through A-G, when he has been to the toilet and done
        what he wished, would be to enter the terrace down the tunnel?
        That is the likely route, is not it? - A. It is one of the


HI
                                      B.L. MOLE

possible options, sir.

Not a possible option, Mr. Mole. It is the likely route, is
not it? - A. It is one of the possible options, sir.

I will leave it to the Jury to decide what was obvious there.
- A. Thank you, sir.

But your plan of the fans finding their own level did not
cater, did it, for a likelihood that the natural and obvious
route for a fan would be to take him down into the centre
pens, did it? - A. They are your words, sir.

They are. - A. I have said it is one of   the possible options.
They would use other routes and did use   other routes. We are
taking no account of the fact that many   of these supporters
visit on regular occasions and know the   layout of the ground,
sir.

You told us when you were asked yesterday that a fan who
wanted to move out of the centre pen could do so, if he was
uncomfortable, by moving to a side pen? - A. I did, sir.

The route to the side pen would be how? How would he get to
the side pen if he was already in the centre pen? - A. He
would use one of two or three methods, actually. It would
depend upon whether this was his own decision to move, and I
think I agreed yesterday in certain circumstances he would
have extreme difficulty.

Thank you. - A. But I think he would move back. He would go
either back through the tunnel, depending on the density of
the crowd, or he would go left or right through the gates at
the top of the radial fence. Alternatively, and I described
the matter yesterday, if there was a recognition of his desire
at the perimeter gate side by Officers, then as on other
occasions they would be removed from that venue.

Just dealing with now a fan acting on his own initiative,
because your system up to the point that somebody manages to
see someone in distress, is leaving a fan to find his own
level, and I am concentrating now on the safety of that
system. Therefore, I am concentrating on a fan trying to find
his own level. You have now acknowledge there could be
extreme difficulty for a fan if he was in the centre pen and
he wanted to get out of it. - A. I have accept that, sir.

And that is an obvious factor which anybody planning the
filling of the whole of the West Terrace would have to take
into account, would not he? - A. No, sir, it is not an obvious
factor.

Well, I will leave that to the Jury to decide also, because a
fan in the centre pens trying to get out who does not know of
the existence of the radial gates and can't get back because
of the density of the crowd is just stuck, is not he? That is
right, is not it? - A. You are going over the same ground,
                                        B.L. MOLE


sir.  I have answered the question.  What I am saying is that
it has happened on two occasions previously and has worked
well.  I can work, and therefore it is not obvious as you
would wish me to say.

Just because it can work, Mr. Mole, does not mean you should
ignore risks that it won't work, is it? - A. You say there are
risks, sir.  I have not identified risks.  If I had, as I did
with the Kop, I would have dealt with it.

So be it.  You d o n ’t recognise the obviousness of the risk of
an extreme difficulty of a fan in the centre pens, the extreme
difficulty of getting out when he wants to? You don't
recognise that? - A, I don't accept your presumption, sir.

So be it.  Your system did not even provide, did it. for a
clear worked out in advance plan for what to do if even on
your system it was noted that the centre pens were so full and
the disparity between the centre pens and the wing pens was so
obvious that you had to do something about it.   You did not
have a clear worked out plan as to what to do. did you? - a . I
did not have a plan for many contingencies,   I have plans, in
Police training terms, to deal with all sorts of situations
that develop.  That experience, that training, would be
utilised to relieve any situation, as was on the K o p some
years before which I described earlier.

You see, Mr. Lock told us that on the system he understood the
Police were operating there was worked out in advance what was
going to happen in those circumstances, because he told us
about this system of using a method to close off the tunnel
and direct fans to the side wings.  You just don't accept
that? - A, I have repeated many times, sir,   I cannot say any
more than what I have already said.

You were asked by the learned Coroner if you viewed the
terrace and saw a marked disparity in level what would your
method have been, and you gave an answer which did not involve
using the tunnel.  That is right, is not it. using closing off
the tunnel? - A. That is correct, sir. yes.




                            /G. You were asked the same.
                                                                  18


                                            B.L. MOLE



Q. You were asked the same question by Lord Justice Taylor
   and I wonder if you could see page 60 of your transcript
   from the Taylor Inquiry please.
              Sir, I say page 60. It is a very large transcript.
        I hate to say it, cross-examination by myself sir, just
        below letter 'A'.
              THE CORONER: Can I just explain to you what we
        want you to do. Wewant you to read it.    Don't make any
        comment on it until you have read it andthen Mr. King
        will ask you whether that is correct.
              MR. KING: Sir, it is very properly pointed out,
        it was not my cross-examination it is being suggested,
        it was Lord Justice Taylor's questioning.
              THE CORONER:    How much do you want him to read,
        Mr. King?
              MR. KING: If    you could read the questionput by
        Lord Justice Taylor   and his answer sir. If you could
        read that.
              THE CORONER:    It is from 'A' to 'B' basically.

              THE WITNESS:    Yes sir.
q   .         MR. KING: Do you accept that that is an accurate
        account of what Lord Justice Taylor asked you and the
        answer you gave? - A. Absolutely sir.

Q. Do you stand by that? - A. I do sir.
Q. If I ask the question, may be presumptuous, I will pretend
   I am Lord Justice Taylor and you give the answer out as
   to what you said. Lord Justice Taylor to you:
              "If you saw that the middle two pens were
              very crowded and that the two wedges
              in the corner were fairly lightly
              populated, what would you do, open the
              gates and move some out or what?"

        Your answer? - A.
              "Operationally I have not faced the
              situation but ..."

Q. Lord Justice Taylor:

              "I mean pre-match?"

        A.    "Facing what you say I would do what was
                                                            19

                                        B.L. MOLE



           suggested earlier this morning, I may well
           have closed the tunnel with our serial of
           Officers and I may then direct to the wings."

Q.    So to Lord Justice Taylor you were prepared to accept that
     the closure of the tunnel was an option you might have
     utilised? - A. I have never doubted it is an option sir.

Q. How would you have closed the tunnel with serial Officers,
   what would you have done? - A. I think yesterday I
   described bringing Serial 14 or 15 down the tunnel which
   effectively closes the tunnel because it is full of ten
   Officers and then move them along the back to encourage
   people to move into the outer wings, and likewise from
   the perimeter track to encourage them to move likewise.
   I can't recall the words yesterday but that was the
   operation I was trying to describe.
Q. I just want to understand what you mean by "closing the
   tunnel" in your adopted answer today from Lord Justice
   Taylor's Inquiry. Are you saying closing the tunnel so
   that new fresh spectators can't come down it? - A. No,
   I wasn't sir.
Q. You weren't? - A. I wasn't sir, not there.
Q. I will leave that and come back to it later because I
   am going to have to go all the way through the transcript
   to find out what had been suggested earlier this morning
   to Lord Justice Taylor? - A. Can I add sir, I don't know
   what the question was before. It may well have been put
   to me was that an option open to me and I would say
   "Yes, it is". What I tried to describe yesterday was
   the method that I would see in hypothetical circumstances.

Q. You see your planning just did not provide in advance
   for what to do, your planning in the sense of clearly
   thought out what to do if the method you adopted which
   was looking and hoping and seeing and perhaps seeing
   distress meant you had to do something about it? - A.
   You are conveniently forgetting my overall role sir and
   my overall training and knowledge and you are neglecting
   to bring to attention that I have contingencies open to
   me and various tactics which would not be written down.
   Likewise if the stadium collapsed, and I mentioned that
   I think at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry when I talked
   about a bomb. Theife is not a written contingency but my
   experience and training gives me options and tactics
   which I would deploy.

Q. But you are not the person who is always going to be
   operating the plan, are you? - A. My Sector Commanders
   are there. I think I said very carefully yesterday,
   each and every one of them were very capable, very
   professional and had my full support in decision making
   and tactics they utilised.
                                                           20

                                      B.L. MOLE



Q. Are you saying that they would know about a method of
   closing off the tunnel in these circumstances? - A. They
   would have many tactics open to them sir.

Q. Are you saying that they would know of the method of
   closing off the tunnel in these circumstances? - A. I
   cannot say that. I said they would have many tactics
   open to them.
Q. The very fact you can't say it, Mr. Mole, shows, doesn't
   it, how inadequate this plan was because it did not have
   a clear laid down procedure for what to do, it was pure
   speculation and hope as to what would happen in the
   circumstances of having to close off the centre pens and
   put people in the wing pens? — A. It did not have a
   clear laid down plan if the stadium collapsed sir. I
   think we are being hypothetical.
Q. So be it. The operational plan, just so    I can draw all
   these factors together, gave no specific   responsibility
   to any Officer on the perimeter track to   view and monitor
   the crowd for overcrowding, did it? - A.   No sir.

Q. The Operational Order did not provide in it any specific
   direction to someone on the perimeter track or indeed
   anybody else's Serial who had anything to do with Leppings
   Lane terraces as to what he should do if he noted a marked
   disparity between the centre pens and the wing pens.
   That is right, isn't it? - A. You are saying there is
   nothing in the plan, in the order?

Q. Yes? - A. That is correct sir.
Q. There was nothing to put an individual Officer on notice
   as to what he should do by way of communication, a plan
   to adopt, nothing in the plan at all? - A. Nothing on
   paper sir.
Q. And you can say this much, your briefing, the one you did
   and we have heard about other briefings from other Officers
   so we can deal with that through their evidence, but your
   briefing to the senior Officers you briefed equally
   contained no reference at all when you were briefing
   to this problem of monitoring the crowd for overcrowding
   or disparity between centre pens and wing pens. Nothing
   was mentioned at all about that. That is right, isn't
   it? - A. I would not expect to sir. A Policeman's duty
   is always that, protection of life.
Q. So be it, I just want to establish that nothing was done
   in the briefing.
         THE CORONER:   He has answered that, Mr. King.
                                                                21

                                          B.L. MOLE



            MR. KING:   I agree sir, he has.
    Q. Taking all these factors together which were known to
       you at the time, I am not now talking about hindsight, the
B      factors as to the route fans would take. You don't
       agree with it. The fact that fans had no signing or
       directions to take them to the wing pens. That was a fact
       known to you. The fact as to the radial fences; the
       fact as to the radial gates; the fact of the absence of
       the matters I have referred to in the Operational Orders.
       Taking all those factors together, isn't it obvious if
       anybody turned their mind to it, put any thought to it,
       that that plan had carried the clear potential for over­
       crowding in the centre pens which could not be relieved
       until it was too late? - A. You have the facility to
       make a number of presumptions sir. I don't accept any
       of those presumptions. There was clearly no specific
       indication of what you have tried to allude to sir,
       and had there been I would have taken, as I have on many
       occasions, positive steps to rectify it.
    Q. Are you saying, Mr. Mole, that unless a problem has been
       experienced in the past there is no way of foreseeing
       it in the future? - A. Without being facetious, sir, I
       have not got the facility of a crystal ball.
    Q. You do have the facility of looking and planning ahead
       for contingencies arising out of the potential layout
       of the ground, don't you? - A. I don't think I can pursue
       the matter further sir. I have explained fully my view,
       my understanding and had there been a situation where
       I could have reacted to I would quite positively have
       done so.
    Q. You also - and this is nothing to do with past experience
       - have access to guidelines which are laid out in I put
       to you three documents and I will take you to the first
       one. First of all the Green Guide? - A. Yes sir.

    Q. That would be in your possession in 1988, indeed 1987?
       - A. Yes sir. I am trying to recall if the updated one
       had been done by then and I honestly don't know from
       Popplewell, but the old or the new would sir.
    Q. So I can help you, it may be total hearsay, but in the
       edition of 1986 I have it says: "Crown copyright 1986.
       First published 1973. New edition 1986. Second
       impression 1986."
             THE CORONER: I don't think anybody is arguing
       that it was in 1986.
             MR. KING: I wonder if the witness might be handed
       a copy of the Green Guide?
                                                               22


                                        B.L. MOLE



          THE WITNESS:   Yes, I have a copy sir.
Q.         MR. KING: Just before I direct you to any particular
     passage, this of course also was a means of information
     which would be available to your successor who took over
     from you for the 1989 match? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Mr. Duckenfield? -A. Yes sir.

Q. Indeed it would be one of the documents which anybody
   in your position should have regard to in advance before
   policing any football matches. That is right, isn't
   it? - A. I would expect that sir, yes.

Q. Can I take you to Chapter 8 please? - A. "TERRACES AND
   VIEWING SLOPES"?
Q. Yes indeed. Could you just read out so that we can all
   follow it just the opening paragraph which is under the
   heading: "TERRACES AND VIEWING SLOPES" beginning with
   the word   "Arrangements"? - A. Yes sir.

           "Arrangements should bemade to encourage
           the even distribution of the crowd on the
           terraces to provide ease of access and
           egress; to control and facilitate movement,
           particularly if a local emergency should
           arise during the event; and to contain
           pressures before they reach dangerous
           proportions. The provisions set out here
           will assist in achieving these conditions."

     Now what   in your planning, if anything, for the 1988, indeed
     the 1989  game in the state you handed it over, amounted
     to an arrangement to encourage the even distribution of
     the crowd for a reason, among others, to contain pressures
     before they reached dangerous proportions. Can you point
     to what arrangement in your planning was there to
     encourage the even distribution of the crowd on the
     terraces? - A. As I understand it, sir, the Green Guide
     is directed to the Club and I would see that as being
     one of their functions sir.

Q. We have here a clear dispute, Mr. Mole, which I must put
   to you immediately. It has been up to this very moment
   everybody's evidence, and I will be put right and no
   doubt shouted down if I am wrong on this, that the
   arrangements for the encouragement of the even distribution
   of the crowd on these West terraces was a matter left by
   the Club to the Police at their say so, in other words
   the Police accepted it?
           MR. PAYNE: Well if he is inviting me to interrupt
     I will because that is not right. One only has to refer to
                                                             23

                                      B.L. MOLE



  the memorandum of Dr. Eastwood which makes it quite clear,
  the one which passed between Dr. Eastwood and the Club
  written at the time.
        THE CORONER: May be the way to do it, Mr. King,
  is to say it has certainly been put that it has been left
  to the Police, I don't think we can argue about that and
  you can approach it in that way.

        MR. KING: I hear a whisper from the side, as I
  once was told in the Court of Appeal by a senior Judge
  in the middle: "The cavalry is coming to your aid from
  my left. Mr. King". I hear from my learned friend
  Mr. Catchpole he says it was never challenged this
  proposition.
Q. It is a matter of evidence for the jury, Mr. Mole, but
   let me just ask you therefore, are you saying that your
   planning made no arrangement at all to encourage the
   even distribution of the crowd on the terraces? - A.
   There was nothing written down on the plan. I think I
   have described very fully and vividly the procedures
   I adopted sir.
Q. It is a fact your procedures did not contain anything
   which would encourage the even distribution of the crov/d
   on the terraces. That is right, isn't it? - A. That
   is right sir.
Q. So if it were your responsibility - and I know you say
   it wasn't - but if it were the responsibility of the
   Police there was a serious dereliction of duty, if it
   were their duty, I accept that, but a serious dereliction
   of duty in 1989 if it were their duty. Do you accept
   that? - A. No sir, I would not abrogate my responsibility
   as a Police Officer overall and I think I have tried to
   make that point on a number of occasions that I have a
   responsibility as a Police Officer. The Green Guide
   lays a responsibility, in my view, on the Club.

Q. Let me now deal therefore with what is emerging as a
   clear confusion, through your evidence, as to what was
   the role of the Club and what was the role of the Police.

         Can I hand to you a document which you refer to
   as another source of information of policing at games
   which would have been available to your successor,
   Mr. Duckenfield, which is the, you called, it is the
   ACPO Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events
   Guide to Policing Football and I have asked in advance
   for certain pages to be prepared? - A. Can I just say
   sir you did not ask me if that was available to
   Mr. Duckenfield, you asked me if the Green Guide was.


                              Q. You said yesterday
You said yesterday because I made a note of it, Mr.
Mole... - A. It is available. I am not arguing.

Mr. Mole, yesterday when you were answering questions
as to the sources of information to someone like Mr.
Duckenfield - in fact you put me on notice - you
actually identified two documents and the first one you
identified was this Guide to Policing Football. I have
only extracted a few pages.

    MR. BEECHEY:   The C number for this document, sir,
is C.513.

     MR. KING: Sir, can I hand out also at the same
time a copy of the same document, a source of
information to which the witness referred called the
Standing Instructions for the Policing of Football
Matches.

     THE CORONER: That will be C.514. Again you are
only handing out an extract, Mr. King, are you not?

     MR. KING: Indeed, sir.    It was not that I was
trying to hide anything.

     THE CORONER:   No, no. These are very thick
documents and cover a great deal of ground.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I was only concerned aboutthis,
and again I do it with a view to helping. It isnot my
witness. I have got a copy of the whole of this
document, the first one that was produced the ACPO
Guide and there are many, many pages to it. I
appreciate that my learned friend has only chosen one
or two but out of concern to Mr. Mole he may wish to
refer to other sections of it. I know not and, of
course, he is at a disadvantage there.

     THE CORONER: I think perhaps if you have a full
set of that document perhaps you would be kind enough
to lay it next to Mr. Mole.

     MR. ISAACS:   If he should wish to do so.

     THE CORONER: Yes, in case in his response he
wishes to draw our attention to some other paragraph.
In fact we have just done it. (handed)

     MR. ISAACS:   Similarly, there is the Standing
Instructions.

    THE WITNESS: That is the one I have got, sir, the
Standing Instruction.
     THE CORONER: If he does refer to it we will just
incorporate the additional pages.

     MR. KING: I do not want to take any disadvantage
of the witness. I do not even object to his having a
quiet moment to read it.

     THE CORONER: No, Mr. King. Mr. Isaacs has very
helpfully said that we do not know what his answer is
going to be and it may be he may wish to look at
something else.

     MR. ISAACS: He may wish to have some time to look
at it, I do not know, but I think that is what Mr. King
was mentioning just now.

     THE CORONER: Start, Mr. King, because we will be
breaking again in about five or ten minutes and,
therefore, it will give us a chance if need be.

     MR. KING: If I look at the clock, sir, if you
gave me a time we will work to that.

     THE CORONER: About ten past is what I am aiming
at unless necessity dictates an earlier break.

     MR. KING: Can we look first, Mr. Mole, to 513
which is the Guide to Policing Football? We have the
front page and at the bottom it is dated October
1987. - A. Yes, sir. That is the ACPO Guide.

It may be obvious to everybody but just in case it is
not, what does ACPO stand for? - A. The Association of
Chief Police Officers.

It is right - you have been handed a full copy now - it
contains a large number of matters, does it not? - A.
It does, sir, yes.

I want to turn, if I may, to the first page which I
have copied for you, if you turn the page, which is
headed "Briefing”? - A. Yes, sir.

Could you read out to us 1.11 and then 1.12 please? -
A. Yes, sir. It is headed "Briefing" as you say:

   "1.11 Officers should receive a full briefing
   prior to taking up their duties which should
   include after match arrangements and clear
   instructions as to booking off. Where
   practicable such briefings should be carried
   out on site. In large scale police operations
                                                                  26
                                                         B. L. MOLE

            the operational commander should brief all
            officers not below the rank of Inspector, and
            Inspectors should be responsible for briefing
 B          officers of the rank of Sergeant and Constable.

            1.12   In accordance with the 'Popplewell'
            recommendations the briefing must include
            evacuation procedures and the duties and
            responsibilities of stewards should be brought
            to the attention of police officers (see Duties
            of Stewards - paragraph 3.1 et seq.)."

     Q. Popplewell is, of course, a reference to Lord Justice
        Popplewell? - A. It is, sir, yes.

     Q. Who made a report following a well known disaster, the
        Bradford fire disaster? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

     Q. The first matter which tells us that the briefing of
        Officers should include, it includes the duties and
        responsibilities of stewards? - A. That is correct,
        sir.

     Q. You would expect that to be carried out, would you, in
        1988 and 1989? - A. I would, sir, yes.

     Q. I just want to look to what the advice is given as the
        responsibility of stewards and one can look first, if
        you turn the page, to duties of stewards at 3.4? - A.
        Yes, sir.

     Q. Do you see among the duties of stewards 3.4 and could
        you read out 3.4? - A. Yes:

            "3.4   Stewards should be distributed
            throughout the ground in accordance with a
            detailed pre-arranged schedule, agreed between
            the police and management of the ground."

     Q. Was there, when you were in charge of Hillsborough and
        I am particularly referring now to the 1988 game and
        indeed up to your handing over for the 1989 game, a
        detailed pre-arranged schedule agreed between the
        Police and management in regard to the distribution of
        stewards? - A. My recollection is that that is correct,
        sir. Points were agreed.

     Q. Is it in writing this schedule? - A. I am hastily
        remembering but I know on the Safety Certificate, it
        may have been superseded or at that time I am not sure,
        but it used to be part of the Safety Certificate that
        points were agreed with the Working Group to determine




HI
where stewards should be or should not be in various
parts of the stadium.

I do not want you to speculate because I would like to
know. You were in charge. Where will I find this
detailed pre-arranged schedule? - A. I knew where the
stewards were and I am hastily trying to remember where
the detail is. I think it is contained in the Safety
Certificate.

Did you expect the Club stewards to fulfil the role
which is laid out at chapter 13 - keep C.513 in front
of you - and look to chapter 13 of the Green Guide for
the moment? - A. Stewarding, yes, sir.

This gives clear guidance as to the function of
stewarding, does it not? - A. It does, sir, yes.

It says at the top, does it not:

    "Effective stewarding should prevent
    overcrowding in sections of the ground, reduce
    the likelihood and incidence of disorder, help
    disperse spectators in such a way as to reduce
    crowd pressure..."
A. Yes, sir.

Then it describes in 195, paragraph (a) as one of the
five basic duties stewards are called upon to carry out
that these were:

    "controlling or directing members of the public
    who are entering or leaving the ground, to help
    achieve an even flow of people to the viewing
    areas and safe dispersal of spectators on the
    terraces or viewing slopes."

A. Yes, sir.

Given that you know from the ACPO Guide that there had
to be a detailed pre-arranged schedule, and you were
aware of that, who did you understand had the
responsibility under your operational planning for the
stewarding of the Leppings Lane terraces designed to
control or direct members of the public to help achieve
an even flow of people to the areas and a safe
dispersal of spectators on the terraces? - A. The
stewards, sir.

Who did you understand had that role? - A. The
stewards, sir.
                                                                     28
                                                             B. L. MOLE

        Q. The Club stewards? - A. The stewards, sir, yes.
        Q. The Club in   other words? -A. Yes.
    B
        Q. Does it come as a surprise to you that the Club
           evidence is so far that that role, the stewarding of
           the Leppings Lane terraces as far as how you do it,
           achieving an even flow andsafe dispersal of
           spectators, was one which had been accepted by the
           Police? - A. I understand that viewpoint, sir.

        Q. Does that come as a shock to you? - A. I have heard it
           said before, sir.

        Q. When you first heard it did it come as a surprise? - A.
           No, sir, I think the difficulty has been expressed in
           other forums with the use of the Leppings Lane
           terraces. The manner in which they carried out their
           function was by overview and by direction from the
           concourse area and from the wings but I think I have
           already agreed that they would be non-effective
           actually on the terraces.

        Q. You misunderstand my point, Mr. Mole. I am not now
           looking to the method or system adopted. I am looking
           to who, as between the Club and the Police, you
           understood had the responsibility of working out
           whatever system was going to be used for, and I quote
           again from the Green Guide and that passage:

               "controlling or directing members of the public
               who are entering or leaving the ground, to help
               achieve an even flow of people to the viewing
               areas and safe dispersal of spectators on the
               terraces or viewing slopes."

          Who, did you understand, had accepted that
          responsibility arising out of your pre-agreed
          arrangements in 1988 for that Semi Final and thus, by
          inference, for the 1989 one as well? - A. I don't
          misunderstand you at all, sir, the stewards.
        Q. The Club? - A. The Club stewards.

        Q. Therefore if, in fact, the Club says, "We did not have
           that responsibility. We had handed that over in effect
           to the Police", something has gone horribly wrong on
           your evidence with this pre-arranged schedule agreed
           between the Police and management, has it not? - A. I
           do not think anything has gone wrong, sir, in that
           agreed arrangement. The method used was used the
           previous year and I am not using that as being
           absolutely correct. What I am saying is that it was



H
used. They understood fully their role. We understood
our role and there is a sharing but it does not
abrogate the responsibility of the stewards for that as
outlined in the Green Guide.

But you have accepted that you yourself, as you
understood, the Police did not have a role to play in
controlling or directing members of the public to
achieve an even flow of people to the viewing areas and
safe dispersal? - A. That is correct, sir. We have a
role and it would be wrong to try and hide behind
saying that we have not got a role. Of course, we have
got a role. In responsibility terms the responsibility
never left where it is lain, the Club stewards have
that responsibility otherwise what other function do
they have?

Somebody in advance to have a safe system would have to
work out in advance who and what were the arrangements
going to be. Who was going to make the arrangements
for the even distribution of spectators and who was
going to have the system for controlling members of the
public to achieve the safe dispersal? Somebody had to
have that responsibility on the day. Who did have
it? - A. For the third time, sir, for the third time -
and I am not confused - the Club stewards have the
responsibility. The Police have a responsibility. We
do not abrogate that either. Neither side does. You
miss out the points of who are briefed by stewards, the
arrangements pre-match, the arrangements out of season,
the briefing of stewards on their role, the issuing of
stewards' instructions which are set out, very
detailed, in accordance with the Safety Certificate as
to their function and role which is all part of their
role.




                            /Q. If that is right.
If that is right, Mr. Mole, tell us. - A. I will, sir.

Tell me what you understood because you accept there
was this detailed pre-arranged schedule, tell me what
was the arrangement which you understood was operating
through the Club and the Club stewards, which was in
operation in 1988 to encourage the even distribution of
the crowd on the terraces? - A. The stewards are
situated behind the turnstiles; they are situated at
the entrance points, that is the tunnel, the wings, the
gap in the wall; they are situated in the West Stand;
they are situated on the staircase at the south side of
the West Stand with an over view of the terraces; they
are situated at the bottom of the gangways in the West
seating area, to over view the Leppings Lane; and quite
clearly, in accordance with the ACPO Guidance and the
other document which you have not yet looked at, they
have the responsibility of bringing any matters of
overcrowding, discomfort which can't be dealt with, to
the attention of Police Officers for action. That is
my understanding of their role and plan. They had, as
I have agreed on numerous occasions, no actual function
on the terrace, because I think they would be
ineffectual as policemen. Their role is guide, direct,
assist, observe and report.

What specifically did you understand the arrangement
was to encourage the even distribution of the crowd on
the terrace, so as to contain pressures before they
reached dangerous proportions? What was the actual
arrangement designed to encourage that? - A. I don't
think I can add to what I have said.

I still don't understand what the arrangement was to
encourage it. What was the feature in everything you
have said which was an arrangement to encourage the
even distribution so as to contain pressures before
they reached dangerous proportions? - A. I think I have
covered every point as well as I can: observe, report,
speak to, direct. I can't say any more, sir.

How does that encourage the even distribution across a
terrace? - A. I am frustrated, sir. I can't answer
your question.

So be it. Let me go quickly, because it is the same
point, to the standing instructions for the policing of
football matches, which is C514. The front page is
"Standing Instructions for the Policing of Football
Matches", turn to page 40, you will see three quarters
of the way down the page as to the matter of stewards,
you see the paragraph, "Steward should be distributed
...."? - A. Yes, sir.
                                             B. L. MOLE

Could you just read that out to us? - A.

     "Stewards should be distributed throughout the
     ground in accordance with a detailed pre-arranged
     schedule agreed between the police and management.
     Their numbers and location should not be less than
     the minimum stated in the safety certificate.
     Their duties may be divided into four main
     categories".

I am not at the moment concerned with those categories.
We come to the fact that there was supposed to be, if
this Standing Instruction was in existence, a detailed
pre-arranged schedule agreed between the Police and
management? - A. I have said that, yes.

The final point before we breaks your understanding is
that on the concourse there was no role for the Police
to direct fans, spectators, to the wing terraces? - A.
I have not said that, sir.

You don't say that. Do you accept that it was part of
your operational plan that Police Officers should be
stationed on the concourse for the specific purpose of
directing fans to the side terraces as opposed to the
centre pens? - A. I have answered that one, sir. It is
not in the plan, but I would expect Officers who are
Police Officers to react to questions posed by members
of the public, which is their duty.

Of course, a casual question and the reply. I am
talking about a specific duty of stewarding, in
inverted commas, because that is an aspect of
stewarding, isn t it, which is directing people to
places? - A. Policemen are not stewards, sir. There is
nothing in the plan which gives that -- I have said it
three times.

So in other words you are saying that in your eye the
arrangements between you and the Club did not have
within it a stewarding role for Police Officers on the
concourse, in respect of the distribution of fans
between, for example, the centre pens and the wing
terraces? - A. I think I have said that clearly, sir.

Right, and that would be obvious, wouldn't it, if you
are right, if one had a detailed pre-arranged schedule?
That would come clear? - A. Of stewards?

Yes, because one would see .... - A. We have a
detailed, pre-arranged schedule of stewards and I have
also said that, sir.
Can you understand why, and you may not be able to,
that the evidence we have heard from Mr. Mackrell on
behalf of the Club is that he understood and expected
that Police Officers would be on the concourse
fulfilling the role I have just described? - A. He
understood and would expect Police Officers to do
exactly what I have said, that they would do it as a
matter of course. It is not - the distinction I keep
trying to draw - it is not in the plan, it is a
function of a Police Officer.

I am not talking about a general function of Police
Officers to give the time if you ask. I am talking
about a pre-arranged obligation and duty which is all
designed to help even distribution, and you are saying
that the Police did not have a stewarding role worked
out in advance for that purpose on the concourse? You
are saying that, aren't you? - A. I think for the
fourth time, sir, it is not in the plan that they have
a stewarding role.

They did not have a specific stewarding role worked out
in advance for that purpose, that is right, isn't it? -
A. I have just said it, sir.

Yes, and if Mr. Mackrell on behalf of the Club suggests
that they did, then that is hard to reconcile, isn t
it? - A. It is hard to reconcile because there is not a
written plan or role of stewarding. There is, and one
has to understand in fairness to both parties, a
relationship between Police, stewards and the Club as
to how functions are carried out, but it is not a plan
or assumed role of the Police to be stewards.

     MR. KINGs      Thank you, sir, that is a convenient
moment.

     THE CORONERs      Quarter of an hour, okay, and we
will carry on.

                    (Short Adjournment)

     MR. KINGs   Mr. Mole, can I move to an associated
matter? You have told us the fact that there were no,
to your knowledge, pre-determined numbers laid down as
a safe capacity for individual pens, as at 1988 and
'89? - A. That is correct, sir.

You knew that when you were drawing up your operational
planning order? - A. Yes, sir.

Do you agree with a matter which has been put a number
of times in this Inquest by my learned friend Mr.
Payne, on behalf of the Police, to various witnesses,
                                                          .33
                                                 B. L. MOLE

   that the fact that there was no laid down numbers made
   the task of monitoring a given pen for overcrowding
   through visual observation that much more difficult?-
   A. Yes, sir, I agree.

Q. You in your planning stages would know of that factor,
   wouldn't you? - A. Of the difficulty?

Q. Yes. - A. For individual pens - I would be conscious of
   it, yes, sir.

Q. Because you don't know an individual number, and you
   would also know that there was no means of counting
   them individually into the pen, you would know that,
   wouldn't you? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. There is no way of knowing in advance that the safe
   capacity is reached, that is right, isn't it? - A. That
   is correct, sir, yes, except for the whole.

Q. Yes. So conscious of that factor what, if anything,
   did you do in the arrangements you made as to the
   monitoring of the crowd for its overcrowding, having
   regard to that particular difficulty? What special
   arrangement, if anything, did you do to take into
   account that factor? - A. I was satisfied that the
   capacities took account of the difficulties, was
   assured by those who would assure me of numbers that I
   could comfortably accommodate 10,100 in that area, and
   that the gates at the back were adequate to encourage
   the free flow between there to allow my policy for
   finding its   ownlevel to apply.

Q. But we haveagreed, haven't we, that there   are a number
   of factors which militate against the free flow, not
   least of which is when the gates at the back become
   obscured to somebody in a full, or getting full, centre
   pen? - A. We have talked about that mitigating against
   it when it is full. The difficulty then applies, and I
   have agreed with that, but in the filling it does not
   become 10,000 in one minute, it becomes 10,000 over a
   period, and the flow is, in my view, or I was led to
   believe was adequate to cater for the finding its own
   level, and having tried it, found it worked, and had
   not reason to believe that anything had changed when I
   planned for '88 or '89.

Q. Does it follow from what you are saying that the fact
   that there was no means of counting numbers in and no
   predetermined capacity for individual pens, wasn't that
   a factor which led you to introduce any particular
   special measures to your system, that is right? - A.
   That is correct.
In fact, didn't that factor alone make your system
obviously an unsafe one because unless you haye
particular attention in those circumstances for the
levels of overcrowding, levels of distress, special
attention, careful observation, people directed
particularly to that issue, you are going to be in
difficulties, aren't you? - A. All those comments are
with hindsight, sir.

Well one thing isn't in hindsight, is it, that you
would want to have regard particularly to the disparity
of the pens, that is the way the pens were filling up?
That is a very good tell-tale sign, isn't it, as to how
the crowd is distributing itself? - A. It is in March
1987 when I was first faced with the problem. Then I
had to devise a plan and took into account what was
facing me then. That plan worked. Nothing altered my
state of mind, which needed me to alter the plan.

But you knew and were aware of the fact that there was
no way of knowing precisely how many people, by way of
numbers, were in a given pen? You knew that? - A. I
think I have agreed that, sir, yes.

You knew that was an added difficulty to monitoring the
crowd for overcrowding. You knew that? - A. What I
have said, sir, is that I was convinced that the 10,100
could be accommodated safely, with the use of those
gates. My experience in '87 confirmed that
understanding and nothing acted on my mind to alter
that arrangement.

I understand, so the answer to me is that that factor
did not of itself lead you to take any particular
measures? That is your answer? - A. Absolutely not,
sir. I looked at the whole.

You did not make any complaint through the Officer
Working Party to say, well this gives us an impossible
task, do something about this particular element? - A.
No, sir, because we were not talking of separate
numbers in pens at that time.

No. I am talking now about the problem of ensuring an
even distribution of the crowd across the terracing? -
A. I was satisfied that it could be coped with, sir.

But you agreed with me that even distribution is
important, isn't it, at a capacity game? - A. Yes, sir.

Because if you have obviously mal-distribution by the
time you get near to kick-off, there is an obvious risk
if you have got a capacity crowd that you have got too
many in one section and not enough in another? - A. The
word obvious is important, sir. If it was obvious I
would do something about it, and you are absolutely
right.

You might not do something about it at 2.15 because at
that stage it is all filling up? - A. I would do
something about when I saw it. If it was obvious I
would do something about it.

I think my learned friend Mr. Isaacs put to you that if
you saw a disparity between pens, say the centre pens
and the wing pens, at something like 2.15, that might
not bother you because you would say well, the centre
pens are the most popular, it will all even itself out
in due course? - A. Yes.

But there has to come a time, doesn't there, with a
full capacity game when you are approaching kick-off,
that if there is a marked disparity between the centre
pens and the wing pens, that must be a matter of
concern for anybody in the Control Box who is in charge
of the Leppings Lane terrace and the distribution of
the fans on that area? - A. If what you are viewing is
obvious then yes.

It is something which you have got to look out for in
view of the fact that you knew and would know that
there was no precise way of counting numbers into the
pen to a given level? It is an added factor, that
factor, to make sure that disparity is something you
look out for, isn't it? - A. That fact equally applies
to the Kop and the terrace, sir, so yes.

But it is a factor, this absence of a means of counting
numbers in and an absence of fixed numbers in a given
pen, which makes monitoring for disparity that much
more important, isn't it? - A. The recognition of
difficulty with the pens is afterwards, sir. I had no
indication that the pens were causing a problem. The
numbers were adequate, as far as I had been assured, to
safely cope with them.

But I am talking now about distribution across the
terrace. One of the ways, if you can't count people
in, to ensure that things are going all right as
regards overcrowding, is to look out for marked
disparities of the pens, isn't it? - A. If it is seen,
sir, do something about it.

Yes, because even if overcrowding has not happened
before, overcrowding on a terrace is still something
which the Green Guide, for example, says you have got
to plan for a be aware of, possible overcrowding? - A.
That is correct, sir, yes.
                                              B. L. MOLE

Yes. It isn't a risk you can ignore just because it
has not happened in the past? - A. You can't ignore any
risk, sir.

Particularly not overcrowding in a terrace? - A. No,
sir.

You would agree with me that if you, in charge of a
game, had noticed a marked disparity between the centre
pens and the wing pens at, shall we say, 10-to-3, with
only ten minutes to go at a full capacity game, you
would have done something about it? - A. Dependent on
what the disparity was. If it was not causing a
problem the fact that the centre pens were full and the
wings were empty is not a problem and I would do
nothing about it. The disparity doesn't matter. If I
recognised difficulty, danger, risk to life, then I
would do something about it, but if it was merely that
the centre was full and the wings were empty, fine,
that does occur many, many times.

Mr. Mole I must take you through that, which I would
put to you is a terrifying answer. Let me take you
through it slowly. You would know that the West
Terrace overall had a fixed capacity, wouldn't you? -
A. Yes, sir.

You would be expecting at an all ticket game semi-final
for that capacity to come and fill the West Terrace? -
A. I would, sir, yes.

You know in advance that the safety numbers has been
worked out according to the size of the terrace? You
must know that much? - A. Yes, sir.

It is based on the notion of experience, laid down in
all the rules we have, all the guidelines we have, that
people should be accommodated in a certain density? -
A. Yes, sir.

For safety reasons, so that we don't get a situation
where you might not see it but in fact there is
overcrowding occurring? - A. Maybe, sir.

It must be so .... - A. Not must.   If I don't see it I
don t know, but it may be.

Mr. Mole, if in fact one could rely on visual
observation to decide whether or not there was
overcrowding on a terrace, then we would not have laid
down safety numbers, we could just rely on visual
observation? - A. I think I have said a number of
times, I was convinced that the numbers given me were
                                             B. L. MOLE

right and capable of adequately accommodating those
people safely. My observation is a bonus.

Those numbers, of course, depended on them being used
for the whole terrace? - A. Correct, sir.

They didn't take on board that they would all be in one
particular part of the terrace? - A. That is correct,
sir.                                                 *

It would be the assumption that within reason you would
have an even distribution of that full capacity crowd
across the terrace, wouldn’t it? - A. When you had got
the full capacity.

Yes, that is right, isn't it? - A. When you have got
the full capacity.

Yes, that is right, isn’t it? - A. Yes.

If at 10-to-3 with only ten minutes to kick-off, you
reached^that stage of a semi-final, your expectation
is, isn t it, that by 10-to-3 the vast majority of
people have already arrived? That is the expectation
upon which you are working and you do your planning? -
A. That is the expectation, sir.
                                       B.L. MOLE


And if by iO-to-3 the vast majority of people have arrived,
this capacity, then you would expect, to see them distributed
across the terrace in such a way that there would be no marked
disF-arities, because they could not all tit. into the centre
pens?J “ A. If they had all arrived, I would expect- so, yes,
sir.

So if with 10 minutes to go to kick off you do see a marked
disparity, you would immediately say to yourself, 11Something
is going wrong here”, would not you? - A. If I saw a marked
disparity 10 minutes before kick off and had information t-hat-
the whole number of those attending were present, then I would
do something about it.. That has not been said to me.

You would immediately make a thought process go through your •
head at 10-to-3, would not you? “There are the centre pens",
if this be the case.  "They look full.  Here are the side
pens.  They look half empty".  You are going to be concerned
about that, are not you? - A. If the other factor is present
that I have got some information that 10,000 have arrived,
because then that would act on my mind.  If there are only
y,000 there I would expect to see that disparity.

I am sorry? - A. If there were only 8,000 there I would expect
to see that disparity.

If there were only 8,000 there you would expect, to see a
marked and obvious disparity between the pens?

     MR. PAYNE:   Are we talking about arrived inside the
ground or outside? That is what has not been made clear.

  THE CORONER:   I thought it- was clear:

You mean inside the ground? - A. What I am trying to say is if
my information is that 7,000-8,000 have arrived, then because
of the propensity of people going to the centre zones then I
would expect to see disparity in thinning at the worse ends of
the terraces which would have to be filled by the extra 2-and-
a-half thousand that has yet to come.  I would expect to see
it. Therefore I would not automatically do something about
moving those people who had taken the good sense to come
early to see the advantage place and have the best view in the
ground.

     MR. KING:   Mr. Mole, at 10-t-o-3 you were almost at kick
off, were not you? - A. I have been almost at kick off many
times with a lot many to come.

If you have a situation where you can see the centre pens are
full and there is marked disparity with the side pens, that
has got to sound a warning bell to you about something? What-
warning bell would it sound? - A. I think, sir, you are
ignoring what I am trying to say.   If I knew the whole number
was there, yes, and I would do something about- it.  If I did
not, no warning bell, other than to recognise the factor, take
account of it, and if it- needed action I would take it.
If you did not, how would you find out if the full number had
arrived? - A. I have the facility with the club to inform me
of how many have come through the turnstiles which feed that
area, and that would be relayed to me either by going to look
myself in Graham Mackrell’s office, as I used to do, as I
mentioned yesterday, or by having that transmitted from the
ground control Police room to the club's television room where
the recording equipment is.

But you would want immediately to find out what the position
was, would not you? - A. I would ask the question, sir.

Yes, because you would want to know whether you had to do
something about the distribution? - A. If 1 looked at that and
had seen there is a problem then the second part of the
equation is essential to me.

But not only that, if you in fact discover there are only
8,000 in and there are 2,000 still to come, you would not want
those 2,000 to go into the two pens which were obviously lull
as opposed to the wing pens, would you? - A. Possibly not,
sir, if 1 identified a problem with the centre pens.

I am sorry. The logic of what you have told this Inquest is
this, that if you see at about 10-to-3 two centre pens which
are full and wing pens which are obviously disparate, less
full, obviously so, you would then make an enquiry to see how
many had come and how many were yet to come. If you
discovered everybody was in you would do something about at
because it would look as if too many people were in the one
spot? That is right? - A. There are so many ifs in that. sir.
If I was faced with something which said to me, ’’There is a
problem in the centre pens. It is over full", then if that
was the case I might even do the action you described earlier
with the tunnel, I might do something about it. If 1 felt a
need I would do it. I cannot speak without knowing what has
happened, but I can quite clearly say if there was a problem
then I would have to do something about it.

Mr. Mole, you still talk about if there is a problem.   Jf on
this enquiry which you recognise you would have to make you
discovered that everybody was in, and I mean that so my
learned friend understands, was inside the ground, in the
terrace, the whole 10,000, and there was marked disparity
between the centre pens and the side pens, if all were in you
would say, "I have to do something about that because that
goes to show we have not got the even distribution, markedly
so, which safety demands". You would have to say that? - A.
Not necessarily, sir.   I will explain that.   I am not being
dismissive by that. What I say is that the factor of 10,000
or the figure agreed on is a safe factor with a certain amount
of movement around each individual. That does not necessarily
say that it has got to be equally distributed unless people
are overcome or in discomfort and recognise a discomfort. It
may be that it is comfortable to stand with 6 inches around
you. It may mean that you need a foot around you, and I would
*u

                                                                           40


                                                       B.L. MOLE


                expect- to see some difference, because quite clearly a lot. of
                people want- to get in the main point-. It- is like being in a
                t-heat-re. They will fill the area where t-hey can see better,
                but the wings might be slightly empty.

           Q. But "slightly empty" I am not arguing about.    I am arguing
      B       about the observation of marked disparity.    You d o n ’t wait
              until you see signs of distress in those circumstances.       If
              you believe on the information received that- everybody is in
              you act- immediately., don't you? - A. I don't move people if
              there is no distress and no problem.    I shall have another
              problem if I did that, because they would certainly take
              exception against- me doing it and criticise me, which
              could cause greater problems for me in the circumstancei I
              am being faced with.

           Q. Whdt- about moving people tor their own safety? - A. j. would do
              that- if there was a danger.

            Q. There must be a danger if you know that the full terrace nas a
               capacity for safety reasons, and you know on this hypothesis
               that everybody is in, and you know that there is a       led
               disp-arity between the centre pens and the side pens, that must
          I    mean for safety reasons, despite your not- being able to see
               signs of distress, that there is a safety problem.     you must
               know that.'? - A. I don't accept- this word "must". It is very
               nice to be able to stand there and say "must".     There is no
               "must" about- it. I would observe what- is seen.    It there is e
               problem I would do something about it. If there is not. I
               would not.     If I ask a group of people to move from the
               street- they will tell me where to go if there is no reason for
               it-. If there is a reason they react- to it P'Ositivei> and do
               it- sensibly.

           Q. So, Mr. Mole, you are saying and your attitude to policing at
              the West Terrace was this, that- even if you saw a mari ea
              disparity with 10 minutes to go between the centre pens and
              the s ide pens, unless you could see, and you would wait until
              you cou1d see, obvious signs of distress in the centre pens,
              you do nothing about it? Is that what- you say? - A. I did not
              say that-, sir.  I did not say that-. What- I would life r.c s=«y
              is what I have tried to emphasise.    If the whole number were
              there, if there were difticulties, if there was a problem, I
              would do something about it. What I am saying is, facing a
              crowd, they do not- stand equally right- across the board.   It
              is thinner in parts and thicker in others.    If I see that by
              doing something they wish to do they are causing themselves a
              difficulty and safety is at risk, again I would do something
              about it.   If there is nothing to suggest a risk, they are
              comfortable, they are not- trying to move away, for me to try
              and move it just- because I think it- is right to do lt-
              wit-hout good cause, could cause greater problems and I would
              have a nasty reaction from those good people who attended in
              good time to seek the best- location, and I am putting my
              will on them unnecessarily.

           Q.   Ce»n I suggest to you, and I won't- take that hypothesis of the


     HI
full terrace any further, that is a terrifying answer, because
it is saying to this Inquest and this Jury that even though
you see a marked disparity on a terrace which safety lays down
should have a certain number reasonably evenly distributed,
that if you see a marked disparity then you do nothing ,about
it unless there are clear signs of distress in the crowd? - A.
I am not saying that at all, sir.

Let me move on to a second hypothesis, because you see this
marked disparity, and I am postulating marked disparity at 10
minutes to go. I am not talking about just little spaces,
where two pens are clearly full and you have got marked and
obvious spaces in the wing pens. All right? I am talking
about marked and obvious disparity. Let us say you make this
enquiry which you said you would make in those circumstances,
and you discover there are only 8,000 in, which you may say
explains the disparity, but there are some 2,000 still to
come. All right? - A. Yes, sir.

In those circumstances you would not in any circumstance want
those extra 2,000 to add themselves to the middle centre pens,
would you? - A. Again, it would depend on what the situation
was.   I think I have answered this, Mr. King. I have said if
I saw a problem, I might utilise the tunnel system you have
talked about, I might put people in to redistribute it, but 1
would have to see the situation. There are options I would
do. Not necessarily would I automatically say "No more in
there".




                          /Q. I am sorry.
                                                       42
                                      B.L. MOLE



Q. I am sorry, I am talking now where you have discovered
   that there are 2,000 people, because that was your
   example, still to come. All right, you have discovered
   this, and you are satisfied on your reasoning that in
   fact the people in the centre pens aren't in distress,
   they have managed to get themselves so distributed in
   the centre pens that they look all right, but nonetheless
   on this hypothesis you have got this marked disparity
   with the side pens. All right? - A. Right.

Q. You would not want the 2,000 to add themselves to the
   centre pens, would you? - A. I would not expect them
   to sir.
Q. But if in fact you have got a marked disparity, what
   does that tell you about the way fans have been behaving
   on the day of the match, what does that tell you? - A.
   That they are late in attendance, is that what you
   are alluding to?
Q. No, when you have got the fact even with 8,000 in you
   have got the centre pens full and you have got marked
   and obvious disparity in the side pens, what does that
   tell you about the way fans are behaving as regards
   their choice of pen? - A. Acting normally sir.

Q. Which is? - A. To seek the best vantage position.

Q. Which is? - A. The centre pens.

Q. Right, therefore if you know that 2,000 more are to
   come you would not want those 2,000 to behave in that
   way, which you say is the natural way to expect, which
   is to make their way to the centre pens. You would not
   want that, would you? - A. I would not want it and I
   would not expect them to do it. They don't attend
   football matches for the first time ever, they all know
   full well if they are coming late they are not going
   to get to the best vantage points and they head for the
   other points.
Q. Mr. Mole, why would you not expect those extra 2,000
   to want to make their way to the centre pens along with
   everybody else who seemingly has done this? - A. Well
   they have the benefit of commonsense sir and they know
   full well that they are not going to get into the best
   seats which have already been occupied or the best
   standing positions sir.

Q. How would you anticipate or expect they would know
   they should not go down the tunnel but should go to the
   side wings? How are you entitled to make that assumption?
   - A. I am not making an assumption sir. I am trying to
   apply it to your hypotheses a camonsense and people
                                                        43

                                     B.L. MOLE



  do have commonsense and they do approach it in that
  manner. We have dismissed Stewards, we have dismissed
  Policemen. I have agreed and accepted that in the
  exceptional circumstances which you are trying to relate
  to me I may have had to take some action. I don't know.

Q. I am dealing with commonsense since we are on commonsense.
   You gave the example of 2,000 still to come as the
   explanation which you have discovered in this situation
   of the centre pens being full and being marked and obvious
   disparity in the side pens. You have no reason, have
   you, to anticipate that the 2,000 who have to come would
   know that the centre pens were full. You have no reason
   to assume that they know that? - A. I have no reason to
   assume they would know they were full except that they
   would expect them to be full from their own experience
   sir.
Q. How would you expect them to know that the way to the
   side pens away from the full centre pens was via a
   side route round the side of the West terrace? - A. I
   would expect them to receive directions. I would expect
   them to ask. We are not talking about 2,000 normally
   coming all in at once, they are asking questions; they
   are seeking directions; they know they are late; they
   want to get in as best they can and commonsense applies,
   people do ask.
Q. I find this terrifying again. Coramonsense. Commonsense
   is people coming through turnstiles A-G this extra 2,000
   ahead of them is the tunnel, isn't it? - A. Ahead of
   individuals is the tunnel, yes sir.
Q. And there is no - unless they are given directions - no
   clear way of their being able to know that the centre
   pens are full and they have got to go to the side pens?
   - A. I entered this building sir and the staircase is
   directly ahead. I asked which way to come and I expect
   people to do exactly the same sir.
Q. Do you see any role at all for those controlling the
   terraces if they see a marked and obvious disparity
   between the centre pens and the side pens and know that
   2,000 have still to come, that they should take some
   steps to see that the 2,000 who have yet to come would
   go to the side and not to the centre. Do you see any
   role for somebody who sees that situation? - A. I see
   the Stewards having a role to direct if they have seen
   a problem sir.
Q. And what role do you see for the Police Control Box if
   they see this problem of the disparity between the
   centre pens and the side pens and 2,000 still to go?
   - A. If the problem is causing concern sir or liable
   to cause concern then they must take action.
                                                             44


                                        B.L. MOLE



Q. It is going to cause concern if the 2,000 go in the
   centre pens even if it has not caused it already,
   isn't it? - A. You are presuming again that they are
   all going to come at once.
           THE CORONER:   I think, Mr. King, you have exhausted
   this.

           MR. KING:   I agree sir.
Q. Let me move on very naturally to where I do know they
   were all coming at once. Does that make a difference in
   your reasoning if I did know they were all coming at
   once? - A. I think it must make a difference in my
   reasoning sir.
Q. What would the difference in reasoning be? - A. Again,
   and I can only presume that you are alluding to the
   circumstances that took place and I can only speak in
   knowledge of what I have been told subsequently.

          All I can say, if I can draw a comparison, if I
   had the description you have given me and I had a situation
   building I would have to think of what options were open
   to me.
Q. You would not want the 2,000 who you knew had still to
   come and on your hypothesis you knew were now coming in
   in one go, you would not want them to go anywhere near
   the centre pens if you had before you the centre pens
   which were full and there were wide open spaces in the
   wing pens. That is right, isn't it? - A. If it was my
   intention to get them into the ground to watch the
   match I would not want them to get in there, no sir.

Q. You would therefore have to take some measures to divert
   them? - A. If it was my intention to get them into the
   ground sir.

Q. Let me move to a totally different matter, delaying
   kick-off.
         I understand that there is a basic policy worked
   out in advance as to the circumstances in which kick-off
   would be delayed by those policing Hillsborough and was
   worked out for example for 1988 and 1989. Is that right?
   It may not be a policy? - A. Basic policy. An under­
   standing sir that consideration has to be referred to
   me and I said it was one of the decisions I would take.

Q. What was the basic policy of the reasons for decaying
   kick-off? - A. None arrival; not likelihood of arrival;
   some incident within the stadium which wanted resolving;
   numerous facets which might affect public order, public
                                                           45

                                      B.L. MOLE



  disorder, the ability to control a situation, but I
  would take those aspects into consideration before
  implementing a delayed kick-off.
Q. But at the end of the day, crowd safety must be paramount,
   mustn't it? - A. Any crowd of that number has to be of
   paramount importance.
Q. Thathas to be the paramount principle at the end of the
   day? - A. It has to be a considerationsir and I have run
   public order and safety together.
Q. But for example you don't sacrifice public safety, crowd
   safety for the convenience of 22 footballers do you?
   - A. Oh absolutely not sir.
Q. I mean it may be a great inconvenience to 22 footballers
   to have to go off the pitch having come on it, but at the
   end of the day that is not the overriding factor, is it?
   - A. That is a consideration but it is the effect of
   them going off and not the fact that they are going off
   that I am concerned with.
Q. And one thing is certain: you don't at the end of the
   day if you have a clear public safety problem outside
   the ground punish people punitively if you form a view
   that it is their own fault they are in that situation.
   You don't allow considerations of punishment to enter
   into the reasoning do you? - A. I am sorry, can you
   explain that sir?
Q. If you have a large crowd outside the ground with a
   few minutes to go to kick-off, in circumstances where
   it looks as if and it is obvious you are not going to
   get them all in before kick-off, right? - A. Yes.

Q. And the crowd is in such an anxious state that they are
   causing a crushing problem outside turnstiles which is
   giving rise to great worry as to the safety of the
   crowd, all right? - A. Yes sir.
Q. But you as the Officer in charge form the view: "Well
   it is their own fault for coming late", you don't allow
   that factor to determine whether or not to delay kick-
   off to remove the source of anxiety, do you? - A. No sir,
   I think I tried to cover that yesterday. It is sad to
   say in football terms there is an element who determinedly
   come late and without tickets with the intention of
   getting into the ground, but whilst I have to take that
   into account and I think I said yesterday if I did it
   on every time then it would go on for ever so it is a
   consideration, but I certainly would not not delay kick-
   off just to punish them. I would take into account how
   many, what was happening, the effects of their entry
   or none entry into the stadium on those who were already
   there.
                                                         46

                                      B.L. MOLE




Q. Let me also now deal with another matter, again led into
   it. The anticipation of when people are likely to
   arrive outside the turnstiles to get into the ground.
   That is the matter I want to look at? - A. Yes sir.

Q. You, I am sure, know that if in fact too many people
   arrive shortly before kick-off for the efficient use
   of the turnstiles then you are likely to have a crowd
   problem, aren't you? - A. The possibilities are there
   sir, yes.
Q. It is fairly obvious that, isn't it? - A. I would not
   say "obvious". There are possibilities sir, determined
   on the circumstances.

Q. You yourself must have, at the planning level, have
   known how many turnstiles were being used in the plan
   for how many given spectators with given tickets? - A.
   I did know sir, yes.
Q. You would know, wouldn't you, for example, that the
   Leppings Lane end, the Liverpool end, had some 24,000-
   odd spectators coming with some 23 turnstiles? - A. Yes
   sir.
Q. And you would know also as regards those coming on to
   the Leppings Lane terrace, A-G turnstiles, they were
   being directed to go through turnstiles A-G? - A. That
   is right sir, yes.
Q. That is some 10,100 people with seven turnstiles to
   feed them? - A. Yes sir.

Q. You would also know because of your experience of thu
   ground or just by walking round if you had no
   experience, that if you look at turnstiles A-G and I
   wonder if you could turn to the model so we can go
   through it? - A. Yes sir.

Q. That the area immediately in front of turnstiles A-G
   is a narrow confined area, isn't it? - A. It is a funnel
   sir, yes.
Q. You would also know presumably through experience and
   speaking to the Club, what the likely efficiency of
   the turnstiles is in terms of how many you can expect
   to go through a given turnstile in an hour, you would
   know that roughly? - A. I know that with liaison with
   Mr. Mackrell and others.

Q. Mr. Mackrell told us that the number which he discussed
   with I think he said yourself and the likely number was
   800? - A. I differ with that sir. I know in Lord Justice
   Taylor's Inquiry I gave evidence regarding this and
   the nominal figure in the Green Guide is 750.
                                                            47


                                     B.L. MOLE



Q. I didn't say that, I said 800 was the .... A. I appreciate
   that sir.   The nominal figure is 750 but that took
   account of paying and my recollection in discussion with
   Graham Mackrell was 1,000 sir.

Q. All right, let me use for the moment the 1,000.     All right?
   - A. Yes sir.

Q. With seven turnstiles at 1,000 a turnstile that means
   it is 7,000 in an hour, isn't it? - A. That is correct
   sir.
Q. And it means in half-an-hour 3,500? - A. Yes sir.

Q. It follows from that, doesn't it, that if you only have
   half-an-hour to go to the match, then you need over
   half of the expected level of spectators to have already
   gone through turnstiles A-G if you are going to be able
   to get safely the 3,500 spectators who you can get through
   in the final half-hour? - A. I accept the figure sir,
   yes.




                    Q. 3,500 from 10,000
                                                                     48

                                                              B. L. MOLE

      Q. 3,500 from 10,100 is between 6,000 and 7,000 people, do
         you accept? - A. Yes.

 B|   Q. Easily over half the total of 10,100? - A. Yes, sir.

      Q. If, therefore, it was known shall we say at half past
         two that less than half the expected capacity, less
         than half the number of spectators who had to go
         through A to G, had gone through and there was over
         half still to come, that is over 5,000, you would know
         at half past two that there was likely to be problems
         even at a rate of a thousand per turnstile, would you
         not? - A. I would be asking questions, sir.

      Q. Of course. The question you would ask is, first of
         all, how many on the face of it are still to come and
         if there is over half still to come this is going to be
         potentially a problem of more people arriving in the
         last half hour than the turnstiles can cope with. You
         would know that from half past two onwards, would you
         not? - A. I would take the question further than that,
         sir. I would ask where were they for a start because
         that would activate my mind as well because if the
         suggestion was that they were already here then, yes, I
         might have to be thinking that getting them through in
         that time would be limited. If, like they were in the
         Coventry and Leeds match, they were stuck on the
         motorway or something then it is another consideration.
         So I would be asking those types of questions.

      Q. If you had no information that they were stuck on the
         motorway then you would know with half an hour    togo
         that there is likely to be problems at the Leppings
         Lane turnstiles if, at half past two, less than half
         the numbers had gone in? - A. The question is likely,
         yes, sir.

      Q. Of course, the Police Control Box inside the ground has
         access, does it not, the information from the Club room
         as to how many people have already gone in through the
         turnstiles? - A. The Police Control Box, yes, it is a
         landline to the Club Control room, yes.

      Q. It also has a view of the ground before its eyes so
         that it can see roughly the way that the different ends
         are filling up. He can see that? - A. Yes, sir.

      Q. He can make an assessment visually also as to roughly
         the percentage at which end of the ground has filled up
         compared with the 100 per cent full? - A. Yes.

      Q. You can, therefore, marry together those various
         assessments in order to say to yourself, "There is



HI
going to be a problem here" if you reach the conclusion
that over half have yet to come? - A. If I reach that
conclusion, sir, yes.

It is an important safety matter which those in charge
of a ground must go through that process of keeping an
eye on the numbers who have gone through already at a
capacity game and the numbers still to come? - A. That
is the whole purpose of the system, sir, yes.

Can I ask you some other matters please? The decision
to change round the Ground Commanders - and I may use
the wrong word, I am sorry - the Sector Commanders from
1988 to 1989? - A. Yes, sir.

The change from Commander Greenwood who was outside and
Commander Marshall who was on the inside? - A. Yes.
Changing them round? - A. Yes.

I just want to ask a question about that. You say that
1988 had been a success? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

What would be the reason for altering, if I can put it
this way, on your evidence a winning team? - A. Yes,
sir. Mr. Greenwood had tremendous knowledge of the
ground itself but no longer worked for me in F Division
and, in fact, worked in E Division. Throughout the
season, that is the 1988/1989, building up to that, Mr.
Marshall was my deputy and as a consequence regularly
worked outside on the Leppings Lane and knew the up to
date position regarding that area of the ground, the up
to date position regarding the Hillsborough area, the
Middlewood area. Parsons Cross area, where all the
various facets of visiting supporters would be
involved. Mr. Greenwood's knowledge had waned somewhat
on the matters affecting the community in the Division
but the ground had not changed. His knowledge of the
ground was sufficient and, therefore, I put him into
territory which he was fully conversant with ie inside
the ground with Mr. Marshall outside in the knowledge
of all changes that have occurred in the locality and
problems with which he might be faced such as
roadworks, traffic signs, diversions etc. which he was
far more acquainted with.

You did not reason to yourself the opposite, "If it has
gone well in 1988 why take a chance with putting men
into different situations?"? - A. I do not think I was
taking a chance at all, sir. I was making the best of
the information and experience available to me.
                                                                       50
                                                               B. L. MOLE

        Q. Your role yourself, you were involved with the 1989
           planning right up until March 27th? - A. 26th actually.
    B   Q. You, on your own evidence and I am not complaining
           about this, were a man of great experience at the
           policing of the Hillsborough ground? - A. I had been
           there for some years, sir, yes, and had experience of
           that.

        Q. You had been instrumental you tell us in the drawing up
           of the 1988 plan and indeed the primary one
           instrumental in drawing up of the 1989 plan? - A. Yes,
           sir.

        Q. I am trying to investigate who it was, it may not have
           been you, who took the decision so close to the Semi
           Final to remove you from the scene? - A. The decision
           was taken before the Semi Final. I think I said that
           yesterday. I had been notified of my transfer to B
           Division some time before 20th March. In fact, I think
           it was the day I went to Malta. I was away a fortnight
           before I came back and then notified that I had got the
           Semi Final by which time Mr. Duckenfield I think had
           already been told of his pending promotion and moving
           into my position.

        Q. I just want a few facts. When was it you discovered
           you were going to be promoted out of your then rank? -
           A. No, I was not promoted out of my then rank. I was
           the Chief Superintendent and I had been so since 1985.
           I merely took over a Division which used to be policed
           by a Chief Constable ie B Division and in some ways
           probably is a senior post within the Force. Mr,
           Duckenfield was to be promoted on 27th March and the
           moves had been planned weeks before that.

        Q.    What I want to know is, when youreceived the news that
             you were going to have to take over this Division? - A.
             I would be guessing but certainly, I don't know, 14th
             March, something, a week or so before the 20th, when I
             was notified about the Semi Final.

        Q. The 14th March was when you first heard thatyou were
           going to move to this Division? - A. I must be fair to
           the Jury, I cannot categorically give you - and I am on
           Oath and I can't tell you the date.   It was a week or a
           fortnight before the 20th March.

        Q.    I am just trying to get the time down. No one is going
             to hold you to an exact date but it was something like
             the 14th March? - A. Absolutely, yes.




H
Who was it within the Police Service who made that
decision? - A. I would think the Chief Constable, sir.

Was it a position which you had applied for, if I can
put it that way and you were waiting to hear? - A. No,
sir.

It just came out of the blue, did it? - A. The Chief
Constable periodically moves his senior Officers into
command positions which he feels they are best utilised
in. We have a rough rule of thumb guide of four/five
years in one position. I had been in Hammerton Road
for seven years but as a Detective Superintendent, as a
Deputy and a Divisional Commander. In real terms the
time was ripe for a move.

Six days later or so you receive the news, on the 20th,
that the Semi Final was going to be played at
Hillsborough? - A. No, I received a call from Graham
Mackrell asking me if we would be in a position to
police the Semi Final if it was to be at Hillsborough.
That was on the 20th? - A. The 20th.

That was the first indication that there might be the
Semi Final? - A. That is correct.

When was it you were definitely going to have the Semi
Final roughly? - A. The same day or the day after,
within that area because what it resulted in was that I
was able to say to Graham, "I canpolice in exactly the
same way as we did last year, the same size of the
ground" etc., the various facets that come into it and
if that is agreeable to the FA and the Club, fine, and
then a telephone call back, if I can expound, asking me
if I could change the ends. I think that has been
mentioned before, change the ends of supporters. I
said, no, and it goes back in a telephone call, "Go
ahead". Within 24 hours.

So we are talking about the 20th/21st? - A. Yes, sir.

Did you know on the 20th/21st that at that time you
were not going to be able to carry out the usual
policing role yourself? - A. I did, sir. I knew I was
moving on the 27th.

You knew you were going on the 27th? - A. I knew I was
going on the 27th.

Did you yourself not say to yourself, "It is so close
to a Semi Final, I am a man of such vast experience,
shouldn't I get in touch with the Chief Constable and
say, 'Look, can we not postpone my transfer only a few
weeks until the Semi Final is over?'"? - A. No, sir.

You knew, did you, at that time of the 20th/21st, that
it was going to be Chief Superintendent Duckenfield who
was taking over? - A. I did, sir, yes.

What was it about Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's
experience that made you say to yourself, "There is no
problem here. Although I am a vastly experienced man
it is all right for Chief Superintendent Duckenfield to
come in at relatively the last moment to take over"? -
A. Mr. Duckenfield is an extremely experienced senior
Police Officer. He had in fact been or currently was
the Deputy at the central Division of the Force, that
was in D Division. In such capacity he had
responsibility for the policing of large matches at
Sheffield United. He was involved in demonstrations.
I know throughout the miners' dispute he had been
particularly operationally involved in the control of
heavy picketing and his experience within general
policing terms was wide in my view to equip him and
find him capable of taking command of any operational
situation with which he may be faced.

You were satisfied based on your knowledge of that
experience that all the matters you tell us you had
drawn on in order to deal with what you say you did
deal with as regards crowd safety would be available
through experience to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield?
- A. With his experience together with, and I have made
emphasis upon this, my selection of support Officers
whose ability, all of them, that is Mr. Murray, Mr.
Greenwood and Mr. Marshall, is, in my view, and Mr.
Chapman, without question, sir.

What experience did you understand Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield had of policing at Hillsborough? - A. I
know he was - and when I say know I am guessing whether
it was Inspector or Chief Inspector - I am quite sure
Chief Inspector at one time in the F Division and had
knowledge of the Hillsborough stadium from that
experience.

To your understanding, that experience had dated back
to when? What year or years? - A. I am hastily trying
to recall his promotion, sir. I have known Mr.
Duckenfield all my life - all my service that is - and
so it is very difficult to put dates and times but I
would think I became a Superintendent in 1979 and Mr.
Duckenfield shortly after that I think. So I would be
guessing, 1978, and it is purely a guess but I am
somewhere there.
     MR. ISAACS: Mr. Duckenfield is here. He has
heard what has been   said and I will take instructions
so that we can deal with this now.

     MR. KING: I am afraid, sir, my learned friend
misses the point of the questioning. I am trying to
investigate what was known to this witness at the time.

        MR. ISAACS:     I am sorry about that.

     THE CORONER:        The witness is saying   hecannot now
remember.

        MR. KING:     What the truth is does not matter to
that.

     MR. ISAACS: If I have missed the point it seems
that everybody else did as well. I do apologise to my
learned friend for missing the point. I was trying to
be helpful.

     MR. KING: I am glad my learned friend can speak
on behalf of everybody.

     THE CORONER: In that case I think we ought to
make it quite clear because it was not entirely clear
to me that what you are asking this witness is not
whether he now knows when Mr. Duckenfield was promoted
to Inspector or Chief Inspector but whether on the 21st
March he had firmly in his mind that Mr. Duckenfield's
promotion or history....

     MR. KING: I am trying to investigate, sir, what
Mr. Mole understood as to the experience of Mr.
Duckenfield in order to investigate what I am
investigating, sir, and make clear I am investigating,
the decision that he was quite happy to accept the
change over so close to the Semi Final.

     MR. ISAACS: This witness has been asked whether
he was happy to accept it or whether his acceptance was
a matter for him at all or for the Chief Constable.
Perhaps the Chief Constable should be asked these
questions.

     MR. KING: With respect to my learned friend, I
phrased that part badly. I was asking him whether he
himself had said anything to the Chief Constable to
say, "Hold on a minute, don't change me over until the
Semi Final".
     THE CORONER:    I think you can ask him that
question.

    THE WITNESS:    I did say no, sir.

     MR. KING: I was really reaching the end of my
investigation when my learned friend interrupted.

     THE CORONER: Yes, I think Mr. Isaacs was trying
to be helpful but you were exploring a slightly
different tack.

     MR. KING: I will not say, sir, beware of Greeks
bearing gifts which is always a matter in my head.

     THE CORONER:   Right, you ask the question.

     MR. KING: You have told us the experience you
knew that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield had and I
need not go through it any more. You are saying that
you had no reason to believe that the person taking
overall command was somebody who was not of sufficient
experience to carry out the duties which you had to
carry out? - A. Absolutely, sir. I believe anybody who
carries the rank of Chief Superintendent is expected to
carry out all those functions but I quite clearly
recognise that being so new to the event he would need
support and I selected that support to give him the
benefit of their experience, sir.




                              /Q. You have also told us.
                                                 B. L. MOLE

You have also told us that Mr. Duckenfield would have
access to the Standing Orders Instructions which I have
already referred to, the Guide to Policing Football,
which I have already referred to, and the Green Guide?
- A. Yes, sir.

You have already given evidence that you would expect,
I suspect you would certainly suspect somebody who is
just new to the job, to have a look at those matters
when taking on the job? - A. That with a tremendous
amount of other pieces of papers as well, sir.

These are important pieces of paper as regards policing
football matches, aren't they? - A. Absolutely, sir.

If you feel that you don't have the proper experience,
if you felt that, it would be very important to look at
them, wouldn't it? - A. If I felt that, yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I want to stop again for
a few minutes because I think this is quite hard going
for all of us. Is it convenient for me to stop now or
have you more or less ....

     MR. KING:   I am very happy to stop now, sir, and
I can continue in a few moments.

     THE CORONER:   We will just have another short
break and then we will press on.

                    (Short Adjournment)

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, Mr. Isaacs sends his apologies.
He has been detained for a few moment but he will be
back shortly.

     THE CORONER:      Thank you.   Yes, Mr. King.

     MR. KING:   I was referring to the sources of
information available to someone in your position,
planning a semi-final such as the one that took place
at Hillsborough in 1988 and '89. One of the features
of the Green Guide which you have available to you is
it highlights and draws to your attention problems
which you yourself from experience may not necessarily
have experienced? - A. Such as, sir?

I will draw your attention to one in a moment. I just
want to know whether you agree that the Green Guide is
a source of advice which is not just based on your
personal past experience, yours? - A. Yes, sir.

the Green Guide is therefore available to you and may
draw your attention to matters which past experience
                                                             56

                                                     B. L. MOLE

     had not drawn to your attention? - A. Very probable,
     sir, yes.

Q. Can I ask you to turn to page 14 of the Green Guide,
   please? This is dealing with the chapter on management
   responsibility, and at the top of page 14 you see (v)?-
   A. Yes, sir.

Q. Could you just read out the opening sentence, stopping
   when you come to the sub-paragraphs? - A. Yes:

            "To draw up in consultation with the emergency
            services contingency plans, including arrangements
            with police for stopping an event, for:"

Q. And then we come to (c), "coping with exceptionally
   large numbers of spectators arriving at the ground .
   You see that? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. To your knowledge had any contingency plan been drawn
   up for coping with exceptionally large numbers of
   spectators arriving at the Ground, before the 1989
   semi-final at Hillsborough? - A. By the Club, sir, not
   to my knowledge.

Q. By anybody for the moment? - A. I referred earlier
   about ticketless fans and the like which I had
   contingency plans for, if you recall, where to take
   them and what to do with them, which was my contingency
   plan, but I have no knowledge of the Club having a
   contingency plan under that category (c).

Q. Therefore to your knowledge there was no plan in
   existence, either from the Club or from the Police,
   apart from ticketless fans, for coping with
   exceptionally large numbers of spectators arriving at
   the Ground? - A. No, sir.

Q.   That is correct? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q.    The Operational Order begins with a reference to
     safety, doesn't it? - A. I think in the "Intention",
     sir, I mention it. I have not got it here.

Q. Just look at the Operational Order.

            MR. BEECHEY:   C285, sir.

          THE CORONER:   This is the 1989 Order, of course,
     that we are looking at. I am just making sure we know
     which one we are looking at.

Q.          MR. KING:   Paragraph 2.1, could you   just read it
     out,   please? - A. Yes:
                                             B. L. MOLE


     "It is the intention of the Police to allow this
     match to take place and to ensure public order and
     safety both inside and outside the football
     ground, to segregate and control opposing fans and
     prevent unnecessary obstruction of the highway and
     damage to property. This will be attained and
     displayed with a high standard of smartness and
     professionalism."

There we see a reference that the intention of the
Police is to ensure public safety? - A. Sir.

Both inside and outside the Ground? - A. Yes, sir.

Let me deal first with inside the Ground. Apart from
that reference can you point to me any provision in
this Operational Order which is directed to ensuring
that there will not be overcrowding on the terraces?-
A. I have not read the whole Order recently and I do
not know what the serial instructions say. Off the top
I would think there is probably no specific reference
to overcrowding on the terraces, unless there is a
reference in a serial order and I honestly cannot
answer the question without reading the whole Order,
sir.

I am not trying to trap you. I have not found one but
I am sure we have plenty of people who will come to
your aid. - A. Yes, can I accept that, sir, and just
say I don't know what the serial orders actually say in
this Order, but I would accept normally it would not
say anything about overcrowding.

So there is nothing about overcrowding and the problems
of overcrowding inside the Ground, that is right? - A.
Yes.

Is there anything to your knowledge, and again say if
you want time to look through it, in relation to the
arrangements outside the Ground, which is specifically
directed to public safety in the context of
overcrowding outside the Ground? - A. The only
reference I would hazard a guess at is the queue
forming of maybe serials 16, 17, 18 and 19, and control
but whether the word overcrowding is used, I doubt it,
sir. Again, I am guessing at 17, 17, 18 and 19, but I
am sure that is the four serials that man the
turnstiles.

It looks as if to me that in this document there is
absolutely no reference again to specific measures or
orders directed to public safety inside the Ground, in
the context of overcrowding. I think you probably
accept that? - A. I think I do, sir.
. Apart from that which you have referred us to about
  forming orderly queues outside the turnstiles, I can't
  find anything in relation to public safety in the
  Operational Order regarding overcrowding outside the
  Ground? - A. No, sir.

      MR. KING:        I have no further questions, thank
 you, sir.

        THE CORONER:     Mr. Manning, can we come back to
 you?

      MR. MANNING:   I think not only we can but
 probably we must, sir, for expediency. The position as
 I see it, this is not a question or even a statement,
 but practicality, I think that my cross-examination
 will be relatively short. There have been words said
 like that before which have led us into two or more
 hours. I know that my friend Mr. Catchpole may be
 somewhat longer than I am likely to be, and it may be
 convenient if my words, relatively short, encompass
 something around half an hour, for that to be a natural
 breaking point. I make those observations, sir.

      MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, it would be of some
 assistance if that could be a natural break. At the
 moment I think I will be some period of time, but I
 would like the opportunity to try and shorten it and
 just consider what has been said.

      THE CORONER:    It is perfectly plain that we are
 not going to conclude with Mr. Mole today unless we go
 on and on, and as you are not on holiday, will you be
 back on Monday, please?

        THE WITNESS:     Yes, sir.

      THE CORONER:   If Mr. Manning could start, but
 before you start can I look at the bottom end of the
 row? Have you any idea, and I know how difficult it
 is, how long your cross-examination is likely to be,
 Miss Addleman?

      MISS ADDLEMAN: Sir, from my point of view I
 won t be here on Monday.

      THE CORONER:   What I meant is if youwere to be
 given an opportunity today how long do you reckon you
 are going to be?

        MISS   ADDLEMAN: Perhaps no time at all.

      MISS ADDLEMAN: I see. Okay, let Mr. Manning
 start and then we will sort things out.
                                             B. L. MOLE

           Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING

Chief Superintendent: a man with enormous experience;
a man in whom a lot of people have a lot of confidence
as being a man with particular expertise in policing
football matches generally; a man who actually lectures
on the subject within the Police Force and outside; and
in answer to the question, "Is he a man for whom you
have got time and respect?", the answer, "During the
miners' strike he was in operational control, that is
the extent of his experience". That, sir, was someone
talking of you. Do you accept that? - A. The facts are
correct, sir, yes.

And the same person who made those remarks says that
when he was in the Police Force, for it is Mr. Lock who
made those remarks. - A. I see, sir.

There was a tried and tested formula for policing
football matches at Hillsborough, which he inherited
and which in he continued? - A. Yes, sir.

Although you have fairly described this Operational
Order and Plan as being yours, would it be right to say
that it did not start de novo, that you yourself
inherited a plan which was tried and tested? - A. Yes,
sir.

And which you varied insofar as it was necessary from
your experience? - A. Yes, sir.




                     /Q. And from the experience
                                        B.L. MOLE


And from the experience being gained by Police Forces around
the country? - A. That is correct, sir,.

At a time particularly during the early and mid-1980s when
policing football matches was a most difficult profession? -
A. Yes, sir, indeed.

Is it right to say that you don't simply adopt a maxim,
"Because last year was successful let us not change anything"?
- A. Absolutely, sir.

But equally, if there has been success is   there another maxim
that says, "If you change it for change's   sake and there is
then a problem, someone is just as likely   to criticise you for
changing a winning formula"? - A. That is   absolutely right,
sir, yes.

It is fair to say, Chief Superintendent, that there were
changes made between the Operational Orders of 1988 and 1989?
- A. Yes, sir.

And I think in particular that whilst it has been acknowledge
that 1988 was successful, the particular problem which was
discussed afterwards was the point on the Kop where Liverpool,
as it turned out, the same team and the same club, had
supporters who were at the Nottingham Forest end? - A. That is
correct, sir, yes.

And one of the regrettable facts of at least some factions of
football crowds is that there is a need to keep them apart? -
A. It is so, sir, yes.

And the word ’’segregation” in relation to football is one of
the major factors you have to have in mind? - A. That is
correct, sir, yes.

And that encompasses the public order or the prevention of
public disorder and the safety of the people attending? - A.
That is absolutely correct, sir, yes.

Can you tell us, please, in a few sentences, what was the
problem which was perceived in 1988 and what was changed,
therefore, so far as the 1989 plan is concerned? - A. Yes,
sir, the infiltration of the areas allocated to Nottingham by
Liverpool supporters created difficulty, and in particular the
weeding out of them with a view to ensuring public order, and
secondly, and as importantly, their safety because they become
at risk once they are in a crowd of 21,000 and are the
opposing element, as it were, and we had to make contingency
plans which I know in particular Mr. Greenwood had a
particular input into, in order to deal with such an occasion
in 1989, which dictated allocating an area of the Kop, an
elevated piece close to the North Stand, where they could be
directed and shepherded. I , of course, was not present when
the operation took place, but that planning was brought into
being in the interests of public order/safety.
                                        B.L. MOLE


And it was a matter to which particular attention was going to
be given in the 1989 operation? - A. Certainly Mr. Murray, who
had done the 1988 Semi-Final very quickly after moving to
Hammerton Road, was conscious of that difficulty, and together
with M r . Greenwood was in a position to be constantly aware of
the problems that that would create in defeating a very
detailed plan of segregation.

I think another matter that had been reported was that senior
Officers of Chief Inspector rank and above found the need to
have a recognition other than the ordinary call sign, and the
decision was taken so far as radio was concerned that they
would identify themselves by means of name rather than bythe
ordinary call signs? -   A. Yes. it can be confusing. For
example, my call sign is Bravo Hotel Yankee One, but they do -
have similarities elsewhere with other Officers having Yankee
One as a call sign, and confusion can arise when determining
which Sector Officer you are dealing with, and names are often
far more easily understood.

So in order to improve   communication, that   was a modification
of the plan? - A. Yes, sir.

There were a number of other instances, for example the
potential flash point at the roundabout at the junction of
Leppings Lane and Penistone Road? - A. It is always an
extremely difficult point to police.   Members will no doubt be
aware that the visiting supporters come from the Wadslev
Bridge station and pass that island, in close proximity to the
other supporters who are heading for Penistone Road
turnstiles.   There is a constant danger of a flash point at
that location.

So, Chief Superintendent, without going through each and every
change that was made, some minor and some fairly major? - A.
Yes, sir.

But a successful formula from the year before, and in
principle, from the year before, that was adopted for the
ensuring year? - A. Yes, sir.

Had there been anything in the previous year's Order, to take
the point my learned friend, Mr. King, just put to you about
safety, of any greater definition of a way in which a Police
Officer should act in relation to the safety of the general
public? - A. None at all, sir.

What is your understanding, and I think you touched on this
probably in the early stages of your evidence, but forgive me
because I think it is now an important restatement in view of
my learned friend's questions, as to the training of Officers
and their attitude to safety as a fundamental part of that? -
A. I think it is an absolutely fundamental aspect to being a
Police Officer to constantly be conscious of the needs of the
community we serve.  I, and I think it is worth mentioning
here, sir, introduced at Sheffield Wednesday a community
policing project for that very reason, that the Officers I use
                                        B.L. MOLE


there have an understanding of the crowd and of the stadium,
and on most of my operations I planned to use the same
Officers in the same locations because they knew of the
difficulties that been experienced. They could see places
where there were difficulties in public order terms and
respond to it, and the community recognised them, as they do
out in the villages and towns in normal policing terms as
their local bobby, and I believe that was part of the training
process as well. In fact, even in the 1988 and 1989 matches,
the same Officers were amongst those, although the Serial is
larger at a Semi-Final because you need more Officers, but the
same Officers who police league matches were on the perimeter
track in Serial 1, I believe, carrying out that very same and
very important function.

Thank you. So in a nutshell, you don *t have to tell a Police
Officer more than alerting him to the fact that public order
and safety must be paramount in his mind? - A. It is always
his prime objective in policing, sir.

And you make reference again very early on to that discretion
which a Police Officer has, namely, to react to a situation
and to deal with a situation even if it had not been what he
was specifically there for? - A. Absolutely, sir. I would
expect every Officer to act independently when faced with such
situations despite sometimes stepping outside what he has been
briefed to do, because he must have that discretion. The
whole concept of policing is the Police Constable policing and
facing situations day to day and responding to them.

And if an Officer were to come across a situation you would
expect him either to deal with it if it were something he
could simply deal with or to alert other Officers if that were
necessary? - A. As he would in any situation in his day to day
work, that is exactly what I would expect.

And you would not expect to have to write that into an
Operational Order? - A. I would never stop writing, sir.

Many of us are aware that the Officers on the beat very often
get stopped by members of the public. You would be aware and
able to confirm, Chief Superintendent, sometimes it is as
trivial as, "Have you got the time?” . - A. Absolutely, sir.

It is much more likely to be, ”Do you know the way to?". - A.
It is, indeed.

Where is there a car park?” . - A. Yes, sir.

If there was an Officer standing outside the turnstile area
would you have anticipated that people coming to the ground
would have asked the Officer for directions if they were
unsure where they should go? - A. I would, and frequently when
I operated in the Land Rover that was the first question I was
asked, where to go to, "Where do we get programmes? Where do
we stand? Where do we move? Which turnstile?", many, many
times.
                                                                <S3


                                              B.L. MOLE



    Q. So you would not be at all surprised to have heard both junior
       and senior Officers who have given evidence in this Inquest
       telling of the requests for directions on numerous occasions?
       - A . I would absolutely expect that, sir.
B   Q. And equally, for Officers who were inside the ground, if for
       example their duties were behind the turnstiles or wherever
       else they may have been, similarly you would have anticipated
       requests? - A. I know that they do it, sir.

    Q. Can we now look at a usual control box situation,   - A . Yes,
       sir.

    Q. You have, I suppose, over the years spent hours if not on end
       over cumulative periods in the control box? - A. Yes. I have.

    Q. We have had one scenario painted by Mr. Lock, who in fact I
       think did the job Mr. Murray was doing in 1988 and 1989? - A.
       Yes, he did, sir.

    Q. And he ended. Chief Superintendent, by describing it as a
       frenzy of activity.  Perhaps you would like to develop how the
       scene was in a control box in a match like a Semi-Final,
       because of course Mr. Lock himself had not policed a Semi-
       Final. - A. I would probably shy away from the word "frenzy” .
       An extremely busy location.  The one at Sheffield Wednesday is
       fairly small and occupied by a number of people.  There is a
       tremendous amount of activity going on, a tremendous amount of
       involvement in radio communications, in telephone
       communications, in visual communications through television
       screens, in incoming and outgoing messages with other
       emergency services, in liaising with the football club through
       their radio and land line channels, and an extremely active
       nerve centre, similar as I described yesterday to a Police
       Station in isolation in a control room where everything is
       happening, and in the build up to an operation at phase l it
       is particularly active and in particular in the last 30
       minutes very active.  It probably calms down a little once
       kick off has happened and starts to settle, but again towards
       the end it builds up and becomes another hub of activity in
       the last hour of dispersal, etc.

    Q. In describing it as a mini-Police Station, that is because
       they have activities not only connected with the inside of the
       stadium, not only with the outside of the stadium, but into an
       area beyond the stadium and its environs? - A. In Semi-Final
       terms the operation extends well out to the motorway, the M.l
       at Tankersley at 36, at 33, the Parkway intersection, to the
       city centre, to Deepcar, Oughtibridge, Stocksbridge, because
       these are the routes that are utilised, and in intelligence
       terms it is essential to know that coaches are coming in that
       direction or vans or cars.  It goes to Kelvin Flats, roughly
       on the other side, an extremely wide area of activity, all
       related to the operation of policing the Semi-Final.

                                  /Q. Is it right....
                                   B.L. MOLE



Is it right that whilst you have the discretion to
decide whether you want to be in the Control Box at a
particular time or not, as the case may be, that so far
as the Ground Controller is concerned he has no such
discretion? - A. He has none at all sir. He is a man
whom I depend heavily upon in carrying out my overall
plan and policy.
And therefore he must be a bottom on seat in the Control
Room? - A. He is the linchpin in the whole operation sir.
He is the man who remains there in control and taking
into account every facet of an extremely large
operation, and as I have said earlier I selected
Officers and it would only be fair to repeat the
Officers I selected I know were extremely professional
and capable in carrying out that function and they had
my utmost respect and support sir.
Thus although the Ground Controller has the view which
the jury of course now have seen from the Control Box,
by and large his eyes and ears are the very men that
you have mentioned? - A. Yes sir.
And because he can't leave the spot the information
about what is going on has to be relayed to him? - A.
Yes sir.
It is possible because we have heard from Chief Inspector
Creaser, that perhaps an Officer of senior rank can at
a convenient moment pop into the Control Box? - A. Yes
sir.
But by and large save for those exceptions is the
relaying of information into the Control Box done by
radio? - A. It is sir, yes.
So would you agree with me, Chief Superintendent,
that the action of radio communication is fundamental
to the ability of the Ground Controller and his support
there to be able to carry out their function? - A.
Absolutely sir.
We know that in 1988 there was a radio problem? - A. A
little radio station interfered with my transmission
sir, yes.
And as a result of that did you make a provision in
1989 that there should be someone on hand? - A. An
engineer, a radio engineer capable of responding to
such activities.
In fact as we know in 1989 there were radio problems
again and I appreciate that you were not there? - A. Well
                                   B.L. MOLE



I was aware in that I arrived, there were still problems
because we were on talk-through and I got there at
5 o'clock-ish and had to use talk-through hand facilities
rather than the microphone on the desk, so I knew there
were some problems at that time.

You help me in any event, Chief Superintendent, by
mentioning "talk-through" and perhaps you could assist
us by the kinds of radio communications that are available?
- A. Well talk-through is what we are hearing now. If
I am speaking now you can hear it and when the response
is given you can hear it. If it is not on talk-through
then it is the response you can't hear, so as I as a
Controller would speak to you and only I would hear the
answer, so on the one hand you can hear both sides of the
conversation and on the other you can only hear the message
going out but the individual's response cannot be heard
universally, so they are the two facilities, talk-through
and without talk-through.
What system is ordinarily used for a match of this kind,
what is provided? - A. I generally provide on talk-
through because it gives an understanding, an overview
of what is taking place. It depends then if it becomes
extremely busy and it may well be that we have to
intercept and not have talk-through because you get so
many people trying to get in at once that they would
override each other and I forget the technical term,
but really switches it off.
So somebody pauses mid-sentence to take a breath in and
somebody else can .... A. It is like the comedian who
is intercepted when he is talking to you and it is half
a conversation.

You would therefore agree that if the radio were down
it would provide so far as Ground Control is concerned
an impossible situation? - A. Indeed it would. We would
have to resort to other methods which would cause
extreme difficulties.
When the radio comes back on again all the people who
either have been trying to get messages through and not
succeeded or perhaps thimk that they have got them through
are all then bursting to get back on the radio again?
- A. That is correct sir, yes.
And that in itself creates a difficult problem? - A.
Confusion; overriding; lack of messages getting through
in part.

We have talked about the necessity for the Ground
Controller to have the information. We have talked about
the individual Officers from P.C. upwards giving information
                                                        66

                                     B.L. MOLE



  either dealing with a situation, whether it is within
  their compass or not, and if it is outside their compass
  bringing other Officers into it.
        What expectation do you have so far as your Sector
  Commanders are concerned that they will by and large deal
  with the matters which are within their sector? - A.
  I would expect them in general terms to deal with every­
  thing that face them in their sector and to resolve it.
  If they are unable to do so then they would relate to
  Control for additional assistance, either my attendance
  to resolve something or back-up resources or reserves or
  whatever, but they would refer it through Control.

Q. So if we had a situation as pertained where Superintendent
   Marshall outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles radioed
   Control for some extra Serials to be sent round, that
   would be something that you would expect the Ground
   controller to deal with? - A. Yes sir.

Q. At the end of the day they are equal rank anyway? - A.
   Yes sir.
Q. But the Ground Controller is entitled to rely upon the
   expertise of the man chosen to be outside and would respond
   to it without saying: "Why on earth do you want those?"
   or anything of that nature? - A. In this kind of operation
   absolutely, that would be the case.
Q. And would it be right to say that if we are on talk-over
   mode on the radio, that if you had an Inspector, Inspector
   Sewell as it turns out in the gymnasium who heard that,
   that it would be expected of him to immediately contact
   Control and say: "I have heard that. I have got some
   spare Serials, shall we send them?" - A. That is right.
   Mr. Sewell, the Officer mentioned is a logistics man and
   would deal with the resources in that way.

Q. That is the example of team work? - A. Absolutely sir.

Q. Is that written into the Operational Order? - A. Not at
   all sir. Nor is the rest of the staff in the Control
   Room who are the back-up and support to the Controller.

Q. If Inspector Hand-Davis were to radio from the front
   of the Leppings Lane gates and say: "If there are some
   spare horsemen can they be sent round?" is that something
   which you would either expect the Controller to deal with
   or indeed one of the Controller's Sergeants or P.C.'s
   to deal with? - A. If Mr. Hand-Davis requested assistance
   of his horses then the Controller or his Assistant would
   deploy them.
                                                                    67

                                                   B.L. MOLE



          Q. But if we had a situation where as we know occurred,
             Superintendent Marshall was radioing to say: "Open the
             gates", that was a decision which had to be made by the
             boss? - A. Absolutely sir. He has the overview of what
    jjl      is taking place.

          Q. And to some extent you are assisted by the cameras that
             you have in the Control Box? - A. Yes sir.

          Q.    But to some extent as well, those only give a partial
               or restricted view? - A. Yes, they do sir.

          Q.    So although this is a most unusual request, indeed it has
               been suggested a unique request, at the end of the day
               you have a man outside the ground who fulfils all the
               criteria, as you have said he has been handpicked, he
               is professional, he knows his job and he knows what is
               going on because he is actually there and he is making
               a request, that is something which has to be considered
               very seriously? - A. Yes sir.

          Q. Not to say every request is responded to automatically,
             you are not just a yes-man, are you? - A. Oh no sir.

          Q. But an Officer has a right to rely upon brother Officers
             and particularly brother Officers of seniority? - A.
             Absolutely sir, yes.

          Q. Equally Mr. Marshall would have been aware of the general
             views as to the postponement of kick-off? - A. Yes sir.

          Q. Would you have expected that if he had believed as the
             man outside the turnstiles that he was not going to be
             able to get the fans in by reasonable time, that he
             would have alerted Control or yourself to that? - A.
             By reason of Mr. Marshall having been a Deputy Divisional
             Commander, which is what I described earlier, there would
             be occasions when he would take my role as the Divisional
             Commander and would be sat in that decision making process
             and therefore I would accept that he would look at it and
             make a decision in the knowledge of that experience as to
             whether or not he needed to seek a postponement.

          Q. We have looked at various scenarios as to less than
             half in before 2.30 and all the rest of it, but if you
             had this scenario that the people who were in the ground
             plus the people who were estimated, because that is all
             you can do in your mind's eye and with experience estimate
             the numbers there, are not at half-past-2 equal to, any­
             where near equal to the total number of people that you
             know tickets have been sold for, then obviously there are
             a considerable number of people who have not yet come?
             - A. Yes.




H
                                   B.L. MOLE


If you know that there has been no major accident? there
has been no hold-up on the motorway; there is no information
whatsoever to suggest a reason for these people not to
have come by now, what conclusion would you draw from
that do you think? - A. The conclusion would be that they
were not coming and I can draw from that in the fact that
I think some 3,000 plus of the capacity in 1988 never
turned up. The 54,000 gate became 51,000 and I had no
knowledge where that anticipated arrival of 3,000 were.

Would you consider at that stage delaying the kick-off
to see whether they were going to come or not? - A. In
the scenario you have described sir it would go through
my mind, my decision would be no.

We have   looked at the ability to count people and I turn
first of all to the ability to assess the people outside
the turnstile and whether 10, 15 minutes before a kick-off
they are likely to get in a ground. Can you help us with
your experience on that, Chief Superintendent? - A. It
is very difficult. There are timeswhen I have, if I
can usethe other end of the ground    first because I draw
the experience from that in that Sheffield Wednesday fans
have a rather bad habit over the years of coming in the
last 20 minutes and I can often have nothing on the Kop
and I am sure other Officers will agree with me, but it
all gets in in 20 minutes, and if I was to look at that
number arriving I would say: "There is 10,000, 15,000 to
get in" and it may well be much less or much more. It
is a very difficult assessment.

      To look at a train load arriving with 500 looks
quite a lot when it is all up to the turnstiles and it
is a matter of looking at the numbers and making your
best estimate but one cannot guarantee, and I must say ...
We have a little exercise, if I can use an example, to
guess the gate in the stadium and we are often very wrong
of the overall gate and that is human in nature that
you cannot be positive within hundreds sometimes. When you
look at a crowd and think you have got 2,000 you may
have 2,500. It is a fine balancing act and a decision
that an individual has to take with the best intentions
and taking into account all aspects that he can see and
feel.




                    Q. My learned friend
My learned friend, Mr. King, has put to you various
scenarios in which the terraces at the Leppings Lane
end were full in the middle and empty-ish at the sides
etc. There are ways of trying to utilise the available
people to have a view different from that which is in
the Control Box. First of all, there are, would you
agree with me, the Officers who are assigned to the
track side itself and whose duty pre kick-off is to
look into the crowd? - A. They are an essential part of
a plan, sir.

Following the line of your statement that you are
entitled to rely upon an Officer would you expect to be
able to rely upon a track side Officer looking into
that crowd to alert if there was something which they
considered to be unusual? - A. Absolutely, sir.

Equally looking at the track side would you consider
that swaying was usual? - A. Natural, sir.

Surging was usual? - A. Comes forward, goes back.     It
is like waves usually.

The good humour and good nature of the crowd by the
batting about of a beach ball? - A. All indications,
sir, that I mentioned yesterday.

When the teams were announced the punching of the air
or the cheering with hands in the air to greet the
announcement of the teams? - A. Yes, sir.

All things to suggest that there is nothing unusual
there? - A. They are all clear indicators, sir, on
which I can base assessments.

One of the things that was changed   I think, Chief
Superintendent, in the Operational   Order related to the
lifting up of fans in the previous   year from the
Leppings Lane terrace to the stand   seats above? - A.
Yes, sir.

Is it right the Operational Order instructed Officers
to be at the front and to look for people being lifted
up? - A. Yes, and to discourage it.

Did that perforce mean that they were looking down,
therefore, on the Leppings Lane terrace? - A. That is a
regular function, sir.

Again following the line of being alerted, would you
agree with Inspector Bullas who gave evidence before
the Inquest that that, in fact, is the very best view
of what is happening on the Leppings Lane terrace
below? - A. Without question, sir.

So in two respects we have a situation where, different
from the Control who had seven TV cameras up above and
who have radio messages, telephone messages, landlines,
and everything else going on, those are particular
areas with particular Officers who are really with
their eyes open for that particular situation? - A. The
eyes and ears on the ground, sir.

To go on with the question of monitoring, there has
been a difference of opinion between your evidence and
the questions put by my learned friend, Mr. King as to
what you saw of the responsibility of the Police and
that of the Club in relation to the Green Guide, namely
chapter 13, so far as the agreement to steward and pack
were concerned. What I think I want to know from you
very simply is, was there any formal agreement? Let me
start by saying this; was there any agreement that you
would have expected to have known about expressed
formally in writing with the Club so far as that is
concerned? Was there anything in writing? - A. About
the packing, sir?

Yes, about the matters in chapter 13, the stewarding? -
A. No, sir.

Page 56, Chief Superintendent? - A. Other than the
guidance for stewards which is produced by the Club
which gives their role. Nothing in writing that I
would be aware of, sir.

There were various pieces of correspondence between you
and the Club over a period of time? - A. Many pieces.

If there had been some agreement of this kind would you
have expected that this would have been put into
writing? - A. Oh yes, sir.

So far as information from the Club Control Room is
concerned, they had the ability to tell you how many
people had come through the turnstiles at a particular
section of the ground? - A. The various sections are
identified, yes, and they can consider giving me an
update.

They did not, of course, have the ability to tell you
how many were going through into one particular
turnstile or into one particular area? You did not
know, for example, how many were in pen 3 or pen 4? -
A. Oh no, not the pen. I would know the turnstiles A
to G.
It is a badly phrased question, Chief Superintendent? -
A. A to G for the whole 10,100, 6,000 had gone through
them. That is the information. I would also know that
each turnstile, how many had taken.

We had in Mr. Lock a man who has experience of Police
work? - A. Yes, sir.

A man who has done the jobs that we are talking
about? - A. Indeed, yes.

He was as aware as you were of what the numbers to come
in would be? - A. Yes, sir.

If we had a scenario as suggested by my learned friend,
Mr. King, that it was half past two and that less than
half the people had___

     MR. KING: With respect, sir, it was not a
speculative scenario. It was based on the figures
which have already been produced to this Inquest.

        THE CORONER:   Yes, Dr. Nicholson's.

        MR. KING:   Dr. Nicholson's figures.

     THE CORONER:      His graph. I have forgotten what
the graph is. Mr.      King put it to him that at half past
two less than half     had been through. I do not remember
the exhibit number     but...

     MR. KING: I will find it, sir, because it is
important. It is not a scenario. It is a fact.

     THE CORONER: I do not know whether it is that
important because Mr. Manning can ask the question.
You can either say, on the assumption that, or you can
say, we have been told. Put it as a positive fact
because that is after all what you are trying to find
out.

        MR. KING:   Sir, it was C.507.

     THE CORONER: I remember the graph quite clearly
and I recollect your line of questioning.

        MR. KING:   I think I identified for 2.30, did I
not?

        THE CORONER:   It was definitely less than half at
2.30.
     MR. KING:     I think it was 4,300.

     MR. ISAACS: Sir, just to try and help those
behind me. As I understand it, there has been no
evidence from anybody that anybody on the day knew that
those were the numbers, for example, from the Club, in
the Police Box or outside or anything like that. This
comes from Dr. Nicholson's count with the laser pen and
his studying of the films.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: Sir, I think actually the evidence
has been so far from Mr. Lock, not of precise figures,
but that the numbers in each section were provided. No
one actually said at 2.30, from Mr. Lock, that under
half was in but the figures would be provided and the
information fed.

     MR. KING: The evidence was that you could ask at
2.30 and could be given the figure if you asked.

     MR. ISAACS:     But nobody knows what the figure was
at that time.

     MR. KING:     No, with respect, that is not right.

     THE CORONER: I think what Mr. Isaacs is saying is
that whether or not those figures were available it
does not follow that anybody....

     MR. KING:     Asked for them.

     THE CORONER: Because nobody may have asked that
particular question.

     MR. KING: I     am not quibbling for that but the
evidence is, sir,    there was a means available that if
anybody had asked    at 2.30 "How many have gone through A
to G?" the answer    could be given.

     THE CORONER:     Yes, because it was on the computer
screen.

     MR. KING:     That is right.

     THE CORONER: All that Dr. Nicholson has done is a
reconstruction. That is your point, is it not?
     MR. KING:     That is right.

     MR. ISAACS:    Exactly, sir.

     MR. KING: In other words, if somebody had asked
at 2.30 this is the likely figure that would come out.
      THE CORONER:   Yes, that is right.

     MR. MANNING: Less than half had got in for half
past two. Would you have expected to have been alerted
if you had been in the Control Box to that fact by
whoever was monitoring from the Club? - A. I think I
would have someone to make the comment, sir, yes.

When Mr. Lock came out of his Club Control room at
something like six minutes to three he glanced quickly
at his monitor and saw that there were either 2,000 or
2,500 still to come in at the Leppings Lane terrace.
Bearing in mind that you have said to us that you have
known 3,000 not to turn up at all would you agree with
him that at that time when he made a quick look he did
not see the reason for any alarm at the fact that there
were still that number of people to come at that short
distance, whatever the time may be before the kick-off?
- A. As a fact in isolation it would not cause me
concern. I would need other factors and information to
surround it.

With regard to ticketless fans, Chief Superintendent,
it is right to say that ticketless fans are difficult
to deal with because they seem to have a variety of
reasons why at that moment in time they have not got a
ticket in their hands? - A. Yes, sir.

 I think it was suggested, and perhaps I can go back a
stage, that it might have been possible to do checks at
the top of the Leppings Lane and throw barriers across
there and check whether people had tickets or not.
Perhaps you might like to comment briefly on that? - A.
I would not wish to do that, sir. It certainly was not
a course I would encourage. I think I described
actually the method I adopt and that is manning the
road, by taking the ground I think I described it as
yesterday. To put barriers anywhere across a crowd is,
in my view, dangerous in that they would need
tremendous manning in manpower terms to ensure safety.
It does create frustrations. The only time I would
look at barriers is as we do in the operation and that
is the area around Vere Road and the roads at the side
to seal an area off but not as a checkpoint. I would
find that difficult to utilise and, of course, they
could be used as weapons if a determined crowd decided
that they wanted to go. They could quite easily be
picked up and used as an offensive weapon against my
Officers.

At the time your ability to police ticketless fans was
severely limited, was it not, and indeed ticket touts
as well? - A. No offence to come without a ticket and I
spent a great deal of time with the media asking people
not to come but as in every occasion people do come.

Would you agree with me that even a relatively small
number of ticketless fans, if they had got through,
could pose a major problem? - A. Absolutely because it
depends where they are going for their tickets. There
are situations where they may seek to enter through
turnstiles by, probably bribery is the wrong word but
seeking to pay turnstile keepers or block it, block the
system. They may try and obstruct areas by confronting
people. Robbery I mentioned yesterday, grabbing
tickets out of people's hands which in itself causes
disorder and public disorder. All sorts of facets
which can be a tremendous problem in dealing with the
operation.

And a small number in a restricted area? - A.
Absolutely, sir.




                            /MR. MANNING.
                                                 B. L. MOLE

     MR. MANNING:   I have no further questions for the
Chief Superintendent, thank you.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much. Miss
Addleman, I know you are not here on Monday, I
remembered that you have got another commitment, so is
there anything you would like to ask?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:    There is nothing, sir.     Thank you
for asking.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Russell, I am not going to ask
you because we can deal with it on Monday. Very well.
Monday, 10.30, please.

Please remember, as I said to you yesterday, you are
sitting in this Box until Monday morning, technically.
- A. Yes, sir.

    (In the absence   of the Jury and the       Witness)

     MR. CATCHPOLE: Sir, in relation to the matter of
Mr.Mackrell's evidence, could I invite you to read his
evidence on Day 53, page 20G-22G? That      deals
specifically with the systems.

     THE CORONER:   And the other passage which you
found was Day 52, page 38?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I do invite you, sir, very
closely to look at the questions that were actually
asked by my learned friend, to see whether the question
was ever put that this system was agreed to by the
Club, in those terms.

     THE CORONER:   Pages 38 and 39, is what you were
referring me to on Day 52. I have not got 53 in front
of me so I can't read it now.

     MR. PAYNE:    Those were the pages I referred to,
pages 38 and 39.

     THE CORONER:   Apart from that is there anything
else that we need to do this afternoon? Well, I hope
you all have a very nice weekend and we will see you
next week at 10.30.

     MR. ISAACS:    On Monday Mr. Mole continued and
Mr. Jackson, as I understand it?
                                              B. L. MOLE

    THE CORONER:    That is right.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, I should have said page 23,
right the way through to 23.

         (The Inquests were adjourned until
          Monday, 4th March at 10J o a.m.J~
