HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)



     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE
  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
            STADIUM DISASTER
         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before
. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP
         (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At
             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.
                   On
           21st January, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  Fro* the Notes of J.L. Harphaa, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT



                                           Page


E. SPEARRITT Sworn

     By The Coroner                          1
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne            10
     Cross-Examined by Miss Addleman        11
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell          11

A.J.R. WATSON Sworn

     By The Coroner                         12
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne            19
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning          19
     Cross-Examined by Mr. King             21

L.M. STEELE Sworn

     By The Coroner                         23
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning          31

P.P. STEELE Sworn

     By The Coroner                         32
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne            37
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning          38

D . PERRY Sworn

     By The Coroner                         39
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne            51
     Cross-Examined by Mr. King             53
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole        54
     Cross-Examined by Miss Addleman        56
     Further by The Coroner                 57
     Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King     58

M.R. COOPER Sworn

     By The Coroner                         58
     Cross-Examined    by Mr. Payne         65
     Cross-Examined    by Mr. King          65
     Cross-Examined    by Mrs. McBrien      69
     Cross-Examined    by Miss Addleman     71
     Cross-Examined    by Mr. Russell       72
     Further by The    Coroner              73

A.M. TAYLOR Sworn

     By The Coroner                         74
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne            81
     Cross-Examined by Mr. King             83
             INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT (Cont)


                                          Page


Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien              86
Cross-Examined by Miss Addleman             86
Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell               88
Further Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien      89
Further by The Coroner                      89
                   THIRTY-FOURTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                      MONDAY. 21st JANUARY 1991

              THE CORONER:   Good morning everybody.

B                       EDWARD SPEARRITT Sworn

                             Bv THE CORONER:

    Q. Now you are Edward Spearritt, is that right? - A. Yes.

    Q. Of                            in Runcorn, is that right?    -
       A. That is right.

    Q. I think you are a taxi driver by occupation. Mr. Spearritt,
       as I said to Mr. Hicks, I don't know whether you were here
       or not, but we are of course, I am of course, I had better
       say it for myself, very very sorry that you have lost your
       boy and I think I speak for everybody in that, I don't
       think there is any argument on that score.

         The second thing is that despite that, we are going to
D        take the evidence, we will take it in exactly the same way
         as every other witness.  It is in everybody's interest
         we should do it that way including yours.

         Now before I start there is just one trivial point which
         1 am trying to sort out and that is we know your name.
         What is your wife's name, just repeat it? - A. Janet
         Elizabeth Spearritt.

    Q. Could you tell me her occupation? - A. Housewife.

    Q. Now it is right, isn't it, that you and Adam had tickets
       for the match.  I believe that is right, isn't it? - A.
       Yes.
    Q. And you were coming to the 15th April 1989 semi-final here
       in Sheffield? - A. Yes.

    Q. Had you been in 1988? - A. No.

    Q. And you and Adam left at about 11.55 I think.     Is that
       right? - A. That is correct, yes.

    Q.    How did you travel? - A. We travelled by car. I think
         on my statement it says the Snake Pass. In fact it was
         the Woodhead Pass.

    Q.    You in fact arrived I think in Sheffield City at about
         2 o'clock. Would that be about right? - A. Yes, there
         or thereabouts.

    Q. I think actually that was in the City Centre? - A. No,
       as I say we had come down the road I know now as Halifax



H
                                                         2



                                        E. SPEARRITT


  Road and we travelled right down to the roundabout at
  Leppings Lane trying to find somewhere to park. We in
  fact turned into the coach park on the left and there was
  a couple of bobbies there who said we could not park so
  we did a 'U' turn and went back up Halifax Road and parked
  in one of the side roads.

Q. I see. Then I take it you made your way down to the ground,
   on foot of course? - A. Yes.

Q. So you came down Halifax Road.   Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. What time would you say you were walking down Halifax Road
   approximately? - A. By the messing around we had trying
   to find a place to park and that it must have been round
   about quarter-past, something like that, 20-past-2.

Q. And what was it like at that time? - A. There was a lot of
   people about but I mean I have been going to football grounds
   and big matches from a very early age so there was nothing
   unusual about the amount of traffic that was there or the
   amount of people that were there.

Q. Was there anything unusual about the amount of people
   carrying cans? I might as well ask you because you were
   walking down? - A. I did not see anyone drinking.

Q. And I take it from what you have said that you were quite
   satisfied with the standard of behaviour of the crowd.
   It was consistent with any big match that you had been to?
   - A. That is correct, no one that I saw was misbehaving
   or doing anything.

Q. What time did you arrive at the Leppings Lane turnstiles?
   - A. It must have been round about half-past-2.

Q. And what was it like around the turnstile area when you
   got there and as far as you yourself were concerned? - A.
   Well people were trying to queue. There was no way that
   Adam and I were going to join that so-called queue, so
   we stood to one side. We stood to the side and in my
   opinion we had tickets so there was no problem. We had
   the tickets and I knew we were going to get in, may be a
   bit later but I knew we were going to get in.

Q. Are you saying that you weren't concerned at that time
   or that you were concerned about the situation outside?
   - A. Well I stood to the side because I had no intention
   of joining these queues that were outside because Adam
   was with me and myself.  I have never seen queues like
   that before.
Q. Did you meet any friends? - A. I met a chap from work who
   I had actually given a ticket earlier on in the week for
   the Notts. Forest end and he had come down to the Leppings
                                                          3


                                           E. SPEARRITT



  Lane end to make sure his son had got in with some of his
  friends so I spoke to him for a few minutes and then he
  said he had to go because he had to walk right round the
  ground then to get to the Kop. To be honest my intention
  was that I was going to go in the Notts. Forest end and
  Adam ....

Q. Sorry, I have missed that? - A. My intention was if I
   could not have got a Leppings Lane ticket my intention was
   that I was going to go in the Kop and Adam would have
   been in the Liverpool end. God forbid that did not happen.

Q. Did you have a Leppings Lane ticket? - A. Yes, I have
   still got them.

Q. Both of them? - A. Yes, full tickets.

Q. How many Police Officers did you see? - A. I have obviously
   seen a video and things like that but I actually saw on
   that day one mounted Police Officer and a scattering,
   may be one or two Police Officers.  I was not going round
   looking.

Q. No, of course not. You and Adam were standing to the
   side, as you put it? - A. Yes.

Q. Where were you outside the blue perimeter gates or within
   the perimeter gates? - A. No, we were inside the perimeter
   gates.

Q. But on the side near the River Don.     Would that be right?
   - A. Yes.

Q. In that location you felt reasonably safe? - A. Well we
   were safe, yes. That is the reason I went there. We
   were just standing there talking and that is where I in
   fact met the friend.

Q. I see. How did you eventually get in? - A. I remember
   talking to the friend and he said he had to leave. He
   left and there was a blue gate which was open so I said
   to Adam:  "We must be able to go in here" so we went in
   fully expecting that we would then go through a turnstile,
   but we walked in and we eventually found our way right
   in front of the goal, right on the perimeter fence.




                     Q. Was the gate
1>N
                                                                   4



                                                         E. SPEARRITT


          Q. Was the gate wide open or not? - A. I honestly can't
             remember.

          Q. So you went down the tunnel without any difficulty,
             or I assume you went down the tunnel? - A. Yes, I
      B      think I must have done but I mean I do not remember
             actually going down the tunnel.  I asked the staff in
             the hospital why I couldn't remember certain things
             and they said that due to my injuries, your brain has
             a safety device and it cuts things off. The things I
             do remember must be so imprinted on my mind that is
             why I remember them.

          Q. By some means or other? - A. Yes, I mean I must have
             gone down the tunnel but I just don't actually
             remember that.

          Q. You got on to the terrace. Do you remember which
             terrace you entered? - A. Looking at the designs and
             all like that, how we worked it out was that I knew
             the actual perimeter gate was an arm's distance away.
             So working it out from the goal and that, it was Pen
             4.
      D
          Q. Did you make your way to the front of that? -   A. Yes,
             we got right down to the front.

          Q. Can you remember with what degree of ease or
             difficulty you made your way down? - A. As I say, I
             have been going to big matches and you always have
             people who stand at the back, because it is their
             choice and that is where they want to stand.   They
             quite willingly let people go passed. They turn and
             you go through but when we actually got down to the
             bottom by the gate there was room there.  It wasn't
             packed.  It was packed higher up but not right where
             we were because I even said to Adam about, this was
             okay.

          Q. I think you actually discussed with him the players,
             did you not? - A. Yes, that was later on. What I did
             say to Adam, the first words to Adam when we actually
             got down, "This is okay". Then I said, "Well, this
             is crazy". I still had my two tickets in my inside
             pocket and all the problems we had had about getting
             the tickets and we hadn't gone through a turnstile.
             We hadn't seen any Police or stewards to take them
             off us.

          Q. Can you remember when you first got down there and
             you said to Adam, "This is okay" what, if anything,
             was happening on the pitch? - A. There was nothing
             happening on the pitch.

          Q. At that point there was nothing? - A. No.




      H
02-
                                                               5


      A                                                E. SPEARRITT


          Q. Tell me your story. You say it was okay at that
             point and you then said, "Look, it is crazy. We have
             got our tickets in our pockets after all the fuss"? -
             A. We stood there then for a couple of minutes and
             the players come out. As the players actually come
      B      out of the tunnel, Alan Hanson was in there and
             coming out. He had been injured all season and Adam
             and myself regard him as being like the kingpin
             really of Liverpool's team. We regard him as being
             very good. So I said to Adam that the bossman was
             playing, meaning Alan Hanson. He said, yes. He was
             happy about that. Then it just got unbelievable.

          Q. We know that you lost Adam and I also know that you
      C      were yourself injured and so clearly it was something .
             a bit unusual. What I am trying to do is to pinpoint
             when it happened so far as one can from the people
             who were there.  It sounds to me from what you have
             said, and correct me if I am wrong, that at the point
             when the players came out and you saw Alan Hanson,
             you and Adam were still in a position where you could
             actually discuss the merits of the match, so to
             speak, and the players. Would that be right? - A.
      D      That is correct, yes.

          Q. It is very difficult but can you give any estimate as
             to how long after that? - A. It was only a matter of
             seconds. We didn't actually see the players coming
             down to the goal. The crush came, and I have heard
             this word several times but I don't reckon they are
             right, this word surge. It wasn't a surge.   It was a
             like a vice just getting tighter and tighter and
      E      tighter.  I turned Adam round to me. He was
             obviously in distress. There was a Police Officer
             just slightly to my right about five or six feet away
             and I started begging him to open the gate. When I
             say in my statement that I was screaming, I literally
             mean screaming. Adam at this time had fainted and my
             actual words, although they are not on a statement,
             were, "My lovely son was dying" and begging him to
             help me and he didn't do anything. He just stood
      F      there looking at me.  I realised he wasn't going to
             do anything and so I grabbed hold of Adam. He had a
             track suit on and I grabbed hold of his lapels or
             kind of lapels and I tried to lift him over the
             fence, and the fence is 10 feet thereabouts with
             spikes coming in. I couldn't lift him. So I then
             started punching the fence in the hope that I might
             punch it down. The consequences of that is that I
             wasn't successful and all I managed to do was make my
      G      hands double in size and full of holes where I had
             actually punched the fence. No one opened that gate.
             Right at the beginning when I was begging the Officer
             to open the gate, if he would have opened it then I
             know I could have got Adam out. I know that because
             I was there and know what the situation was.



      H
                                                         6



                                               E. SPEARRITT



Q. What is your last recollection because you fainted,
   did you not? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. What is your last recollection of events on the
   field? - A. On the field?

Q. Yes? - A. All I can remember of things actually
   happening on the field was when the players came out
   of the tunnel.

Q. So that is the only thing you can remember? - A. Yes,
   I don't remember the players coming down to the goal
   area.

Q. Did you at any point see the gate open? - A. No.

Q. You may not have done because you may have been
   unconscious but what I am trying to find out is
   whether you at any point saw the gate open? - A. No.

Q. You have told us in very graphic detail, and
   obviously very painful for you as well as for
   everybody else, what it was like for you and how you
   felt. You have also told us the words you used.
   Could you hear anybody else making appeals near you
   so far as you remember? Do not say what you have
   seen on videos or what people have told you. Just
   simply tell us what you yourself heard at the time? -
   A. To be perfectly honest I wasn't aware of anybody
   else. My prime consideration was for Adam.

Q. I will ask you but I do appreciate it is almost
   impossible for you to get an accurate answer. From
   the time that this vice as you have described it took
   hold, I think you said you then turned Adam round.
   You then called the Police Officer who took no notice
   so far as you were concerned? - A. I turned Adam
   round facing me.

Q. Then you called the Police Officer and you have told
   us what you said? - A. Yes.

Q. Then you tried to lift Adam up? - A. Yes.

Q. Do not guess if you do not know but what period of
   time was that over? If you do not know just simply
   say it is impossible? - A. Everything started from
   when the players came out. That is the only time I
   have.  I have been told since that the players came
   out at 2.54. All this happened inside roughly a
   minute and so you are talking about 2.55, five to
   three.

Q. I take it if you did not hear people near you, you
   did not hear what was going on behind you either
c
                                                       E. SPEARRITT




           because your mind was simply and solely, quite
           correctly concentrated on your lad? - A. That is right.

        Q. would it be right from what you have described that
    B      whatever happened, it was a very sudden thing as far as
           you were concerned? - A. Well, Adam fainted fairly
           early.  It is one of the problems I have got because I
           have since been told that Adam was passed from pen 3 to
           pen 4 at roughly 22, 23-minutes-past.   That really
           means that Adam was in the pen for 25 minutes.   All the
           information that we have had is that Adam, through
           someone fainting, within 15 seconds, then 3 minutes
           later they are more or less dead, but that wasn't the
           case with Adam because he was taken out and a special
           bobby, Police Constable, actually took Adam's pants
           down and felt his pulse in his groin, and from that the
           bobby worked tremendously hard and done a great job
           really, and took him up to the hospital, even went to
           the hospital with Adam, and Adam eventually died
           because his heart gave in at quarter-to-5. So, I mean
           I know when Adam fainted and Adam fainted round about
           5-to-3, yet tie was in the pen for 25 minutes before
           anyone got him out.

        0. That may well be so, but we are not exploring that
           aspect of the matter at the moment.  You yourself went
           to hospital, you were quite poorly yourself for quite
           some time, weren't you? - A. I was put on a ventilator
           and they told my brother and my wife that I would have
           brain damage and I might not come through the night,
           but I did.

        Q. I just want to go back now to outside for a moment.
           How good is your recollection that today? - A. It is
           fairly good in a sense that the things that I actually
           remember.  I didn't join the queue because as I said
           before I have been going to football matches for years,
           since I was a kid, and I have been in queues that have
           gone right round Anfield, and they have been queues.
           These were just people coming back from the turnstiles.
           Taere was no gaps in tnem.  It was just like one solid
           mass.

        0. We know that at about 2.50 or thereabouts when these
           big gates were opened, which presumably is when you
           went in although you didn't look at your watch and you
           can't remember the times, but were there a lot of
           people going in with you, can you remember that? - A. I
           can t remember that.  All I actually remember is, as I
           say, I spoke to my friend, turned round, the gate was
           open and I said to Adam, "Oh, here you are, we must be
           able to go in this way", and that's what we did.




    H
                                                               8

                                                      E. SPEARRITT




    Q. You feel you were at the ground at 2.30? - A. There or
       thereabouts, yes.

    Q. What I was interested in was what it was like at 2.30.
g      We know what it was like, because we have heard lots of
       other witnesses, at say 2.50 or 2.45.   What I am
       interested in is what you saw at 2.30.   Is that what
       you have now told me? - A. Yes.   I had no intention of
       joining that and that is why we stood to the side.

    0.    The reason why I ask you is because it isn't quite in
         line with what you said in your statement, and I have
         to check and see which account you feel you want to
         stand by. What I suggest is that I will give you page-
         2 of your statement.   If you look down that page, about
         line 10 from the bottom. - A. It says, "Anyone drinking
         beer from cans or similar..."?

    0. Yes, and then it says, "We arrived at ...".  Could you
       read it to yourself first of all, down to the bottom of
       the page? - A. Yes, I do remember that and that is
       basically what I am saying.

    0.    In that case could you just read that to us? - A. "We
     -    arrived at Leppings Lane end at about 2.30.   William
         and Anthony went to the corner shop.    I stayed with
         Adam.   There were no problems with the crowds at the
         time.   Some supporters were queueing at turnstiles,
         others were milling about.    There was one Policeman on
         horseback at the turnstiles.    I met a friend passing
         and I talked for a while.    At this time there was no
         need to be anxious about getting into the ground,     ily
         son and I had tickets and there seemed no problem.
         William and Anthony made their way into the seated part
         of the stadium because of their tickets they had
         bought".

    0. My impression of that is that at 2.30, whatever might
       have happened later, the position outside the ground
       .... - A. That is what I am actually saying.  That is
       the position.  The queue was there at 2.30, and I am
       actually saying that in there,  when I say that tnere
       is no problem, Adam and I didn't join it, ws went to
       the side, there was no problem in the fact of actually
       getting into the ground because of the tickets that we
       had.  Tnere was no rush as far as I was concerned.   We
       weren't going to join it. There was no problem with us
       getting into the ground because we had tickets.   It
       wasn't as if we had to pay, and if you had to pay you
       have got to get in the queue.

    Q. In other words, what you are saying is that when you
       say you weren't anxious and there were no problems, you




H
                                                    E. SPEARRITT




         knew that you had the means to get in? - A. That's
         right, yes.

    Q. The worst that could happen was that you   would be a bit
g      delayed? - A. That is right.

    Q. It also sounds to me, correct me if I am wrong, that as
        far as you were concerned you had no difficulty in (a)
        talking to your friend, and (b) stepping aside and
        standing wherever you wished? - A. No.

    Q. You were not compelled to move in any particular
       direction? - A. No.

    0. Sorry, were you going to say something?  A. It was only
       because we had gone to the side by the river and we
       were away from everybody else.

    0. The point is you were able to do that, that is what I
       am asking? - A. Yes.

    0. One final question - I am going back into the ground -
       I just want to deal with the Police Officer once more.
       You have told me what you were saying to him? - A. Yes.

    0. In relation to yourself how close was he? - A. He was
       about five or six foot.   I was there, the gate was in
       arm's distance, I was more or less right next to the
       gate, and he was just off to the right.

    0.    Can you recollect whether he was the only Officer there
         or whether there were others? - A. As I said before, my
         prime consideration was Adam.

    0. If you don't remember, you don't remember. - A. He was
       the only one I actually seen.

    0. Had you seen him earlier,   this Officer? - A. No.

    Q. You can't remember wnere he came from or whether he had
       been there .... - A. In all honesty I wasn't looking,
       we got into tnere and down the bottom, there was room
       right down at the bottom, and there was them words that
       I said to Adam, so I wasn't looking round me really.

    0.    That is fair enough. Mr. Spearritt/ would you be kind
         enough to do what everybody else has done?  Could you
         mark a plan for me.
         (The Witness marked his position on Exhibit C368)




                                        /0. Just one other ....




H
                                                         10


                                                   £. SPEARRITT


Q.        THE CORONER:  Just one other question about Adam
     fainting.   You mentioned he fainted? - A. Yes.

Q.    Are you sure inyour mind he had fainted at that point,
     or are reconstructing that? - A. No, he had fainted.

Q.   You knew he had   fainted? - A. Yes.

Q.    This was in this period you have described and obviously
     before you lost consciousness yourself? -A. Yes.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. PAYN E :

Q. Mr. Spearritt, when you got down to that position near to
   the gate, when you first got there, did you think that,
   you and Adam would be quite safe there? - A. Yes, there
   was room there.   What generally h a p p e n s a t football
   grounds is that people have their favourite positions.
   Right at the front is not a favourite position, so what
   people do is they stand on the steps.        When Adam and I
   got right down, you have the steps and then you have like
   a little passageway and in that passageway there was room
   for Adam and I.

Q. Can you estimate how long it was after you had got there
   that the vice-like crush came upon you? - A. We were
   there for a couple of minutes, a minute, and the players
   came out.    As soon as the players came out, that is when
   it happened.

Q. How quickly did that crush happen? - A. With Adam?^ Well,
   when I term it a vice, that was more or less immediate.
   The players came out - we didn't even see the players
   running down the end.   They came out of the tunnel and
   as soon as they came out of the tunnel it just got
   tighter.   No-one actually hit me in the back and I went
   forward.   That didn't happen.    It just got tighter and
   tighter and that is why I say there was no surge, because
   I wasn't hit in the back.

           K . MANNING:  Mr. Spearritt, I just want to say how
     dreadfully upset I feel at hearing your evidence today
     and to offer condolences.   I am sure that goes all the
     way down this bench, to go anywhere and for a father to
     lose a son is an impossible situation and I don't want
     you to think as you give your evidence today the word
      blame" comes into this.   It is something that has
     happened and God forbid any of us has to live through it.
     I wanted to say those things to you so that somebody at
     least in addition to the Coroner would say that to you.

          MR. SPEARRITT:   Thank you.
                                                        11



                                                     E. SPEARRITT


            THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I will come back to you, if
       I may.

                  Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN:

B   Q. Mr. Spearritt, a very difficult question, but can you
       give us some idea of.when you think you lost
       consciousness? - A. No, I have no idea at all.   It was
       obviously after I had come to the fence.

    Q. Wholly understandably, you have already told us when
       asked whether you were aware about whatever people doing
       or saying around you, that you weren't aware of anything
       your prime concern was, of course, Adam? - A. Yes, in
       that my prime concern was trying to get the Police
       Officer to open the gate.

    Q. The point is you don't know what others were doing at
       that time? - A. No, no idea.

    Q. Similarly, you don't know what others were saying? - A.
       No.

    Q. Would I be unfair in suggesting to you that you didn't
       know at that point what the noise level was? - A. No, it
       wouldn't be unfair at all.

    Q. You have told us that the Police Constable just stood
       looking at you? - A. That's right.

    Q. Would I be correct in saying that it appears he wasn't
       reacting? - A. He didn't react at all.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

    Q. After your friend had gone off to take his seat   at the
       other end... - A. Well, he didn't have a seat.He was
       going in the Kop.

    Q. To take his place at the other end, you say you turned
       round and the blue gate was open? - A. Yes, that is my
       impression of how I remember the situation.

    Q. It was open, you didn't see it opened, is that right? -
       A. No.

    Q. Can you remember whether it was wide open or only
       partially open? - A. No, I can't remember whether it was
       wide open or partly open.

            THE CORONER:   Mr. King?

            MR. KING:   I have no questions.   Can I say so that
       Mr. Spearritt can hear and so he knows, that he has




H
                                                         E. SPEARRITT


covered everything which I know he wanted to say to you
and the jury.

     THE CORONER:   I am most grateful to you for that
because this is one of the prime reasons why I invite the
families, because it gives them an opportunity to say
what they want.

     Mr. Spearritt, thank you for giving evidence.    We
have already said what we think about your loss.   It
applies to you, to Mr. Hicks, to everybody.  It is
strange because occasionally you get evidence from -
after all, a loss is a loss, but the evidence sometimes
touches you more and yours did.

     Mr. Watson, please.

               ANDREW JOHN RICHARD WATSON Sworn

                        By THE CORONER:

You are Andrew John Richard Watson? - A. That's right.

Is it s    t    i   l   l   R   u   n   c   o   r   n     ?    - A.
Yes.

You are   a machine setter? - A. Yes.

You are a regular attender at Liverpool, akeen
supporter? - A. Yes.

I think you went to see a match in...           Well, you came to
see the semi-final? - A. Yes, I did.

Did you go and see the semi-final in 1988 as well? - A.
No.

Let's just deal with the 1989 semi-final.               You came by
car? - A. Yes.

Do you recollect what time you left home? - A. It would
have been approximately half past eleven in the morning.

Do you know what time you arrived in Sheffield? -A. It
would have been roundabout five to two.

Then you arrived at the ground at about what time? - A.
that would have been - we got to Leppings Lane at
approximately two o'clock, five past two.   A friend of
mine went to the local corner shop.   We then made our
way to the ground.   It would have been about ten past
two.
                                     A.J.R. WATSON



10-past-2? - A. 10-past, quarter-past-2, round that area.

Are you sure it was as early as that? The only reason,
it does not matter, well tell me what it was like getting
in and we will know? - A. Could you repeat the question
please?

Tell me what it was like as far as getting into the ground
was concerned? - A. There was no problem at all. Each
turnstile was relatively clear. There might have been
four or five people in each queue, there was no problem.

It does sound as if you were quite early. The reason why
I ask you is because in your statement you say 2.45 but
that could be a typographical error. You would stick with
what you have told me now? — A. Yes. We are talking about
the semi-final, aren't we?

Yes, 1989? - A. Yes.

Ah yes, I think you also told us of another match, didn't
you. 1989. Having got through the turnstiles which way
did you go? I am sorry, I made a mistake. You are right.
I have got it wrong. - A. We went towards the main tunnel
underneath the West Stand. As we proceeded through the
tunnel we took a position to the right of the goal.  I
think it is Pen 3. Roughly a quarter of the way down the
terracing.

At that point I take it you had plenty of room or not.
We are talking about 10-past-2? - A. Yes, there was room
but not as much as you would normally expect at that time.

So your impression was that that pen at that time was
already fuller than you would have expected? - A. Yes.

Even though it was a semi-final? - A. Yes.

What happened then? - A. Well prior to entering the tunnel,
we made our way to the mouth of the tunnel. We got to the
end of the tunnel and myself and my two friends we decided
where we were going to take our position. Now I like to
buy a programme as a souvenir each time we go to the game
so not having bought one on the entrance to the game I
mentioned to my two friends that I was going to go back and
get a programme, so I went back out of the tunnel, bought
a programme and again I went back through the tunnel and
met my two friends inside the stadium.

Can you say what time your second entrance on to the terrace
was? - A. It was only a matter of minutes afterwards.

I see, so it was a short time? - A. Yes.
,&' I                                                                 14



                                                      A.J.R. WATSON



            Q. And then you were happy. You were in the right place, you
               had your programme and you were behind the goal which I
               take it is where you wanted to be? - A. That is right, yes.

        jj Q. So did you and your friends have any conversation at that
              point, relevant conversations? - A. Just normal things, yes.

            Q. Did you say anything at all about the terracing at that
               point, quarter-past-2 we are talking about? - A. It was
               may be a little bit later, 20-past, 25-past-2 and I was
               quite surprised because the crowd was still building up
               inside the pen and I did pass a remark to my two friends
               that the gates at the mouth of the tunnel I was expecting
               them to be closed at any time because it was getting rather
               full.

            Q. The gates you say? - A. Yes.

            Q. We will come back to that in a little while, okay. Forget
               what happened at the gates because I take it you stayed
               on the terraces? - A. Yes.

            Q. You never left them again until after the disaster, would
               that be right? - A. That is right.

            Q. So how did the position change? 2.25 you thought the gates
               might be closed. What happened as time went on? - A. Well
               as the crowd increased it was just a gentle increase in
               pressure, more people entering the stadium. Myself and
               my friends we got split up. It would have been round about
               10-to-3, 5-to-3, round that area when the players came
               out of the tunnel. I was stood on my own really, you know,
               people around me but nobody to talk to. I recollect seeing
               a person over my shoulder, I just happened to look round
               looking for my friends.  I could not go anywhere, there
               was nowhere for me to move because the crowd was that
               intense, but I recollect seeing somebody over my shoulder
               who later on I saw on the balcony of the West Stand. This
               was after the crush had happened. When I eventually got
               dragged out of the crowd I saw this person that I had
               earlier seen up in the Stand.

            Q. How did   it feel   until the players came out as far as you
               were concerned,     you personally? - A. It was gettingrather
               claustrophic.   I   am only small myself so I was struggling
               to keep my head     above the crowd really.

            Q. Had you   been at big matches before? - A. Yes.

            Q. At that point did it compare with what you had experienced
               at other big matches? - A. No.

            Q. In what way did it not compare? - A. It was a lot worse.




        H
                                     A.J.R. WATSON



At what point would you say it had changed, in your
experience, from being what you had experienced at other
big matches to being a lot worse? - A. At the other big
games I have been to in the past when you experience a
large crowd there usually gets a point where the increase
in the crowd stops and things sort themselves out and you
can relax a little bit more then, but at the semi-final
this never seemed to happen, everybody was always on edge,
they were always worried. You could feel the atmosphere.
The atmosphere was tense.

What time was that? Well if you don't know don't say.
Can you say? - A. Not really.

Can you relate it to anything occurring on the pitch? -
A. It would have been round the time when the players
were coming out.

So that was really the marker as far as you were concerned?
- A. Yes.

Can you remember the teams being announced? - A. Over the
Tannoy system?

Yes? - A. Yes, I can, yes.

Can you recollect what it was like for you at that point?
- A. People were excited with the team news. As always
at any large game they listen out for their favourite
players to be mentioned, it is just excitement.

So at that point your impression was that it was excitement
and normal. Would that be fair or is that unfair? - A.
People were excited but at the same time they were rather
worried about the intensity of the crowd.

You can't actually say what other people were thinking. -
A. I was worried about the intensity of the crowd.

You weren't thinking of leaving at that point, were you?
- A. No.

Did you notice whether people were punching the air, you
know when the players are announced some people do that.
I don't know whether it is your habit.  Is it your habit?
- A. No.

Did you see people around you doing it, whatever their
motive? - A. No.

You didn't see? - A. No.

Apart from this chap whom you recognised as having come
from your terrace who you later saw above, did you see
                                     A.J.R. WATSON



anybody else going up into the Stands? - A. After the initial
crush, shall we call it crush ....

That is when the players came out are we talking about or
before? - A. It would have been when the players came out.
When the problem happened I looked round and I saw lots
of people being dragged up on to the balcony.

You were ahead of them, were you, they were further back
than you? - A. Yes.

Do you remember whether you saw anybody going up, I keep
on calling it going up but you know what I mean,between
2.40 and 2.45? - A. No, I can't recall.

I put the times to you because again you refer to these
times in your statement and I just want to be quite sure.
Times are so difficult, everybody has difficulty, you are
not the only one, but you in your statement said:

      "By about 2.40, 2.45 the pressure was beginning
      to build and I saw people behind and to the
      right of me climbing up into the balcony above
      thus to escape the pressure and about 3.10 p.m.
      the pressure around me had become so intense
      that it was almost impossible to move."

A. Yes.

That is quite a big span. What I am asking you, is you
have told me that things got hot, shall we say, really
bad when the players came out? - A. Yes.

Is that your best estimate or do you want torevise your
answers in the light of what I have read to you? - A.
I think ....

I want you to tell me the truth, that is all we are
interested in? - A. Yes, yes. You see the way I remember
is,as you have just stated you recall from my statement,
I think you said 2.45. The players would have come out
about 2.50 anyway.

They came out at 2.54 actually.    We know what time they
came out. - A. Ithink you will    find the times would
almost overlap anyway.

So these times in your statement are guesses, they are
not, when I say "guesses" intelligent guesses but you
had not actually looked at your watch? - A. That is right.

Now let's go to an earlier occasion.    In 1989 you came
to Hillsborough as well? - A. Yes.
                                      A.J.R. WATSON


Who was playing? - A. Sheffield Wednesday and Liverpool.

It was a league match was it? - A. Yes.

And on that occasion you arrived at 2.45? - A. Yes.

And again you had a terrace   ticket? - A. Yes.

You were intending, you were hoping   to go behind thegoal,
is that right? - A. Yes.

What happened? - A. We made   our way to the turnstiles. We
got through the turnstiles with no problem, a small queue
nothing extraordinary. As we approached the tunnel, I had
never been to the ground before but, I had not been to many
grounds before.  I knew roughly where to go. I saw the
tunnel behind the goal and as I approached it there was
two Police Officers at the mouth of the tunnel. As I recall
one of the gates was shut and the other was partially shut.
One of the Police Officers he turned round to myself and
my two friends, he said:   "I am sorry lads but this area
is full, you will have to go to the side of the ground" and
he pointed for me which way to go. I followed the stadium
wall round to, as you are looking at the pitch it would have
been the right-hand side. I think it is Pen 1, is it?
We came round the corner and the crowd was quite dense
at the top of the stairs so we managed to work our way
through and we proceeded down to a lower position on the
terracing which was empty.

The gates which you saw at the tunnel, I just want to spend
a minute or two on those. Were they metal or wooden gates
as far as you remember? - A. I think - I could not be sure
- I think they were metal.

What colour were they, can you remember that? - A. I think
they were blue.

Were they solid gates or were they slatted gates as far
as you remember? - A. They were solid I think.

Your clear recollection is that one of the leaves was shut?
- A. Yes.




                      Q. And the other one
                                                 A. J. R. WATSON


Q.   The other one was partially shut? - A. Yes.

Q.   You are absolutely positive about that? - A. Yes.

Q. Which match was it you are talking about? - A. This
   is the League game in January 1989.

Q.   Between Liverpool and Sheffield Wednesday? - A. Yes.

Q.    Did you look across to the central pens just as a
     matter of interest on that occasion? - A. We did,
     yes.

Q. What did it look like to you? - A. They were quite
   full.

Q. This is what you meant when you were talking to your
   friends when you were in the pen in 1989. You
   expected that somebody might be doing the same? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Can you show us on the plan where you were in 1989? -
   A. At the Semi Final?

Q. Yes, at the Semi Final.  I am not interested in where
   you were at the League match. - A. Yes.

     MR. GRIFFITHS: Do you want to know the position where
he started off or where he finished?

Q.       THE CORONER:    I want to know your position when
     the players came out. Put a Figure 1 against that.
     Were you moved at some point? - A. As the crowd
     increased I was pushed along that way.   I wasn't
     pushed forward at any point just sideways.

Q. Sideways? - A. Yes.

       MR. BEECHEY:   That will be C.369, sir.

Q.        THE CORONER:  Were you passed the overhang of
     the stands or were you underneath it? You know what
     I mean by that, do you not? - A. Yes, I was in front
     of it.

Q. You are certain that there was a barrier quite close
   to your head in front of you? - A. Yes.

Q. How did you get out in the end as a matter of
   interest? - A. As the crowd increased, as I say, I
   was pushed to the side.  I saw people who were
   climbing on that dividing fence and people were
   leaning over the balcony and pulling them up and that
   was the way I went.
                                                A. J. R. WATSON


Q- You went up? - A. Yes, I climbed on top of the
   dividing fence and people were leaning over and they
   pulled me up on to the balcony.

Q. Were you distressed at that point?   - A. Yes.

Q. Was this when the     match had finishedor       wasit still
   in play? - A. It had stopped by this time.

Q. Did you see it start at all? - A. Yes.

Q. Where were you when it started? Where you have
   marked or were you moving along already? - A. Where I
   have marked.

Q. It was later that you were moved along? - A. It was
   gradual.

Q. You had obviously been before. Did you know there
   were gates at the back of these radial fences? - A.
   No, I didn't.

Q. Openings   I should say? - A. No.

Q. You did not know? - A. No.

Q. Could you see them on the day? Did you notice that
   there was an opening there? - A. No.

                 Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE:

Q. At that League match in January 1989 from your
   position in Pen 1, did you see across the width of
   the terrace? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you happen to notice whether     all the penswere
   occupied by Liverpool supporters or whether any of
   the pens were given over to other supporters? - A.
   Again with me only being small Icould only see the
   pen next to me and that was definitely full of
   Liverpool supporters.

Q. That was the pen that you would have gone into   if you
   had been able to go down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. There is something I would liketo follow up.  In
   front of you is a black folder.  Can you find
   photograph C.258? Do you recognise the layout shown
   in that photograph? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you happen to remember which turnstiles you went
   through at the January 1989 match? I do not want you
   to guess or speculate.  If you do not remember then
   that is quite all right? - A. No, I do not remember.

               Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING:
                                          A. J. R. WATSON



Mr. Watson, I just want to look at, so far as the
Semi Final Match is concerned, the lifting up into
the stand above. Towards the end of last week we
heard from a witness who had been at the match the
year before. You had not been there but he told us
that in the previous year people had started getting
lifted into that stand at half time. When he went
this year he could see that well before the match
started that people were being lifted into what is
the seats. Although we call it the stand it is
actually the seats above the terrace itself? - A.
Yes.

What I want to ask you is what was the earliest time
that you saw somebody climbing either on the wall or
on the railing to be lifted up into that seating
area? - A. It would have been approximately ten to,
five to three.

So you would not then agree with that witness who saw
rather earlier than you people being lifted up or at
least you did not see anybody being lifted up at an
earlier time? - A. I never saw anybody, no.

What that person said was that it seemed that some
people at least knew there was a way in which they
could get into the seating area for which the tickets
would be more expensive by having people who would
put their hands down and give them a lift up? - A.
Yes.

In other words, an intention to do it regardless of
the push or crush or whatever it was in the terrace
area. What I want to suggest to you is that when you
first saw people being lifted up that was not at a
time that you felt so uncomfortable that you felt you
were being crushed and needed to get up there for
safety purposes? - A. It did feel uncomfortable but
it never entered my head at that time to climb up on
to the balcony.

You have very fairly said it did not enter your head
actually to leave the terrace at all. You were there
to watch the match and you did not feel so
uncomfortable that you could not continue to watch
it? - A. That is right.

Although you are relatively small, you are   about the
same height as me and so you must be about   right,
that aside you were able to watch what was   going on
and you saw the teams come out and you saw   the play
until play was stopped? - A. Yes.
                                                A. J. R. WATSON


                  Cross-Examined bv MR. KING:

Q. Mr. Watson, could you look at C.263 in your bundle
   please? - A. Yes.

Q. That is a photograph of the tunnel entrance leading
   on to the terraces. Do you remember that? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you see in that photograph the two gates, one on
   each side of the entrance to the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. Do they accord with your recollection of the gates
   you saw in 1989 at the League match? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you help us, using the photograph if you can, as
   to exactly what you saw in the League match when you
   attempted to go down the tunnel? - A. The gate that
   you see on your left hand side that was shut
   completely and the gate on the right hand, that was
   partially shut.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, could you ask hiin whether it
is the one beneath the B or the A because it depends which
way you look at the left and the right?

Q.        MR. KING: Mr. Watson, I know it is unfair to
     you but could you start that description again? It
     is very good but using A and B as opposed to left or
     right? - A. Yes, the gate under the letter B, that
     was the gate that was totally shut.

Q. Where were the Officers standing? - A. Directly in
   front of the gate.

Q. How much gap was left by the time they had shut one
   completely and one partially? - A. I do not think
   there was a lot of room.  It is hard to remember now
   how much exactly.

Q. Coming back to the Semi Final, you told us that it
   was about twenty to twenty five past two that you
   passed a remark to your friend that you were
   expecting the tunnel gates to be closed at any
   time? - A. Yes.

Q. Tell us again, why did you form that view at twenty
   to twenty five past two at the Semi Final game? - A.
   As I mentioned earlier on, I have been to large games
   before and the crowd has been to such an extent that
   they have shut the gates anyway to prevent more
   people coming in. Now the crowd, it was very large
   as you are well aware and I thought that the Police
   might have taken the same action as they did in
   January, closed the gates to prevent more people
   entering that section of the ground.
                                                          22


                                                A. J. R. WATSON


         THE CORONER:   Mr. Watson, I am most grateful to you.
    Thank you very much indeed for being here this morning. We
    will pause for coffee. We will have our standard quarter
    of an hour whatever that means.

B                       (Short Adjournments




D
                                                        23

                                                   L. M STEELE




             LESLIE MORRIS STEELE Called (Sworn)

                        By THE CORONER

Q. Good morning.  You are Leslie Morris Steele, aren't
   you? - A. That is correct.

Q. And you, Mr. Steele, are another dad, aren't you? - A.
   Y es.

Q. Just as I said to Mr. Spearritt, and indeed to Mr.
   Hicks, we can't express correctly in words what you
   feel about the loss which you and your wife have
   suffered, so I am not going to try and do it, but we
   are conscious of it. - A. Thank you.

Q. We are going to deal with you, if you are going to give
   evidence, in exactly the same way as everybody else.
   It is easier for you, for me, for the Jury, for
   everybody.  Okay? - A. Fine.

0. I don't want you to think that I am just being nard or
   anything like that.  I think it is the only way to do
   it.  You are Leslie Morris Steele, I think we have
   established? - A. That is correct.

0. Is it still                    |, is it? - A. Yes.

0. And that is                           in Cheshire? - A. No,
   Merseyside.

0. You are a buyer, I believe? - A. Not any more.

0.   But you were at the time? - A. At the time.

Q.   Perhaps you had better tell me what you are doing now?
     - A. I am self-employed at the moment, working for a
     construction company.

Q.   I know your wife is going to give evidence as well but
     I might as well ask you, what are her full names? - A.
     Dolores Pnilomena Steele.

0. Has she got an occupation? - A. She is a housewife now.

Q. What occupation has she had? - A. She was an office
   clerk then.

0. I tnink I have explained this before, but for some
   reason or other the Registrar of Births and Deaths
   likes to know the occupations of spouses - I think it
   is for fairness sake - when people are under 16 who
   have died.  It is just a quirk, so I am picking that up
   as we go along, so to speak.  I triink I am right in
                                            L. (i STEELE




saying that on 15th April you came with your wife and
two boys to watch the semi-final? - A. That's correct.

And one was Brian and the other one was Philip, is that
right? - A. Yes.

You I think had stand tickets, you and your wife, is
that right? - A. Well we had two stand tickets and two
terrace tickets, and I asked my sons the previous night
where they wanted to go, and they both of them decided
they wanted to go on the terraces.

So you agreed, why not indeed? - A. Yes.

Had you been to the '88 match, as a matter of interest?
- A. No.

I think you set off by car, I believe, is that right? -
A. That is correct.

Do you recollect what time you left? - A. Between 10
o'clock and half-past-10.

I think you arrived in Sheffield about 2 o'clock, is
that rignt? - A. I would say round about quarter-to-2,
to 2 o'clock.

Then you parked your car somewhere, I think you said it
was .... - A. It was actually Marion Grove, but it was
Middlewood road, we have since found out.

Did you then make your way down to the grounds, tne two
boys and you and your wife? - A. We had some sandwiches
and some coffee and cold drinks in the car, and the two
boys decided, they were excited, they left and walked
down.

So you split from them, in effect? - A. They left us in
the car, excited, to get into the ground.

So they probably got into the ground before you? - A.
well before us.

You then followed down when you were ready, you and
your wife? - A. About five minutes later we walked down
and then when we got to Leppings Lane my wife showed
her ticket to a Policeman, and he must not have
understood the ground layout and sent us right round
the ground, and we ended up walking round the ground
for 15 minutes, and eventually got back to Leppings
Lane approximately 20-past-, 25-past-2.

So that was certainly an inconvenience, if nothing
more, but at least you were back at the right place.
                                                             25

                                                      L. m s t e e l e




         Did you then show this ticket to somebody else or did
         you decide not to risk that again? - A. We did ask
         somebody else on our way round and that is when we were
         directed - we ended up just walking the whole perimeter
B        of the ground, and ended up back where we started.

    0.   When you  say you walked the perimeter of the ground,
         were you  able to get right round the ground, close to
         it, or were you walking down roads? - A. The corrected
         route round the ground.   We came back from Leppings and
         turned to the left and tnen right round the ground
         where the Notts. Forest supporters were all walking.
         That is when we realised we were obviously at the wrong
         end, and then we just asked somebody else and ended up-
         back where we had started.

    0.   Were you  able to get into the ground relatively easily
         at tnat point? - A. Altnough there were quite a few
         people around we did not have any problems.   I don't
         remember what turnstile we went in, but we didn't nave
         any problems getting in.

    0. Were you searched, as a matter of interest? - A. No.

    0. Did you see other people being searched at that time? -
       A. I didn't notice any.

    0. You and your wife then made your way up to the stand,
       is that right? - A. That is correct.

    0.    'which bit of the stands were you in? - A. We were in
         the West Stand.    I was in row 20, I think, and my wife
         was a few rows in front of me, further over to the
         left.

    0. But were you at the South Stand side of tne stands, or
       the Nortn Stand side?  If you look at the model, will
       it nelp vou? Just walk up to it.     I am just wanting to
       find out wnich end of the ground   you were at? - A.     We
       were just above pen 3.

    0. How many rows back were you from      the front of the
       stand, can you remember? - A. As      far as I remember           I
       was in row 20.

    0.   u'aen you were sitting, once you had sat, you obviously
         could see the pitch, couldn't you? - A. Yes.

    0. You could see the Kop? - A. Correct.

    0. You could see the North and the South Stands? - A. Yes.

    0. How much of the terracing could you see, sitting? - A.
       I could see the front part of the terraces.




H
Lk
                                                                26

                                                           L. rt STEELE




         Q. There were people in there, of course, but what I am
            trying to find out is how far down the people could you
            see?  Do you know what I mean?  You might have been
            able to see their heads but could you see their feet? -
     H      A. Well at the time we went in, which would be about
            25-past-2-ish, I looked down at the terraces, obviously
            seeing if I could see my sons.  I noticed the side
            terraces were very sparsely populated but the centre
            two terraces was quite crowded at the front.  I
            couldn't see at a certain point because obviously ....

         0.   Going further back, yes. - A. The stand roof was
              obviously covering so much of the terraces, and from
              there it looked pretty crowded at that time.

         Q. Can you remember whether you made that assessment when
            you were still standing, or when you were sitting? - A.
            When I first went to sit down I just looked quickly.   I
            sat down and they were still quite empty, the stands.
            As people are on a sort of decline you can sort of see
            pretty well down into the terraces, so I could see as
            well sitting down as stood up.

         0.   This would be what time? - A. Round about 25-past-,
              half-past-2 when we got to our seats.

         Q. Then you presumably waited for the match to start,
            would that be right? - A. That is correct, and I was
            looking round and weighing up things, and I think on my
            statement I just happened to think there was not as
            many surveillance cameras as I am used to seeing at
            Anfield.

         0. Not so many what? - A. Surveillance cameras, and also
            they di dn ’t seem to be going round. When you are
            waiting half an nour or 45 minutes for a matcn you tend
            to look around at things, and I also noticed when we
            did go into the stands how little stewards I noticed
            than I ani normally used to seeing.

         0. Do you remember the players coming out? - A. I do, yes.

         0. Do you remember the match kicking off? - A. Yes.

         Q. Between taking your place and having had this
            preliminary look at the terracing, and you have told us
            what else you had seen, did you look at the terracing
            again, consciously that is? - A. Probably sub­
            consciously, I still noticed the sides were still, they
            were filling up slightly but they still weren't full
            and that pens 3 and 4 were still as dense as I had
            noticed at the earlier period.




     H
                                                             27

                                                   L. M STEELE




    Q. Could you see the front barrier from where you were
       sitting - the pitch fence I mean? - A. Yes.

    0. You could actually see that.  Could you just see the
H      top or could you see right down to the bottom? - A. On
       reflection now I would probably just say I could only
       see the top, but I would not be 100 per cent sure.

    0. Did you notice whether people were pressed against it
       prior to the match starting? - A. I can't say I did..

    Q. I think the game then kicked off, didn't it? - A. That
       is correct.

    Q. And quite correctly you were watching it - that is what
       you were there for? - A. I was watching it and then I
       tnink my wife shouted to me, "There's something wrong",
       and then I nad noticed before the kick-off slightly
       there was people being brought onto the pitch, and I
       just put it down to at various matches at Anfield, when
       tnere is a bit of overcrowding in one area, they let
       them come out to the front to go into other areas which
       they can get into, and I just thought maybe they were
       sorting them out into the empty part of the terraces
       either side of pens 3 and 4, and I just saw some people
       going to lie on the pitch and I thought it was, because
       there were so many people in 3 and 4 I thought people
       were fainting and I didn't realise the serious
       implications at that time.

    0. When did you first notice people on the line of the
       pitch, as far as you remember? - A. Possibly I think
       round about 3 o'clock - possibly - but as I say I was
       listening and watching the players kicking about, so
       although I could see them coming along I wasn't taking
       100 per cent notice of it, and if something was going
       wrong you didn't think it was going to happen to your
       sons at that particular time.

    0. Are you actually saying that you, saw injured people on
       the pitch before the match took off? - A. When I say on
       the pitch, I mean between the perimeter fence and the
       goal line.

    0. Are you saying that they were lying down at that point
       or not? - A. There was some, I think, to my right that
       seemed to be lying down, but as I say, as I was sort of
       glancing at the players still, and there was people
       standing up in front of me, you are just catching
       glimpses, because obviously the people further in front
       were more aware of what was unfolding there.




H
                                             L. i-i STEELE




How certain are you with regard to the timing?. - A. I
wouldn't be absolutely certain because you just
wouldn't be looking at your watch.

Indeed, that is wny I keep on asking, as you have
probably discovered, what time the players were on the
pitch, did you see the kick-off, because one remembers
that much better than times.  Can you try and relate
what you have told me in relation to the events on the
field? - A. What I remember is, whether it was just
before or just after the kick-off, is seeing an amount
of people starting to be on the perimeter between that
and the goal line.  I just put it down in my mind that
there was overcrowding and they were moving people
around to the empty terraces, probably a couple of
minutes after the kick-off etc.  I could then see part
of the front of the fence where people were trying to
call attention, to get the gate open.   I couldn't
actually hear the voices but I could hear people in the
stand snouting down, "For God's sake open the gates,
there is trouble down below", and my wife, whether
people had been lifted up to the stand, or whether
tnere was a few people in the passageway, and I think
she was near the passageway, somebody had obviously
said something about down below.   As I say, as you
stopped watching the game then and you were watching
what was going on you could just see people begging
Police Officers to open the gates.   You could hear lots
of people then shouting, "Open the gates".




               /Q. What time do you say
V '
                                                                 29




                                                            L. M. STEELE


          Q.    So what time do you say you heard that in relation tothe
               others going on the pitch?  Was it after kick-off?
               Before? - A. Just after the kick-off and obviously up to
               the time the game stopped.
      B   Q. Were you able to see the gate at all? - A. I couldn't
             because I think there were a lot of people then trying to
             climb up in that fence there and I couldn't make...   I
             saw somebody trying to open the gate, but it wouldn't
             open.

          Q.    What I want to find out is what your recollection is
               regarding when...   Did you see the get open at all?   I
               don't mean opened, but open? - A. Later on, yes, but not
               in that time between the kick-off and the match being
               stopped.

          Q. So you never saw it either open or opened in that period?
             - A. Not in that period of time.

          Q. Did you see Beardsley hit the crossbar? - A. I can't say
             I did, no.
      D   Q. Did you see any Police Officers or, indeed, anybody else
             on the perimeter fence, either shouting or signalling in
             towards the crowd? - A. I could hear the shouting but
             what they were shouting I couldn't make that out.

          Q. Did you see any hand movements? - A. Well, I could see
             people in the crowd trying to do with the fencing, either
             trying to break it open so people could get through, or
             what.   Trying to force the railings apart or do
             something to get out.

          Q. Yes, but you haven't answered my question yet.     Didyou
             see anybody, be they Police Officers or fans, on the
             perimeter fencing, on the outside, of course, signalling
             by hand movement to the crowds in the terrace? - A. I
             didn't notice that.

          Q. I think you had better read page 2 of your statement.
             This is a statement taken on the 15th of April, so on the
             day.    Just look at that.  It starts with the words,
             "However, the centre sections..."    Can you see that? -
             A. Yes.

          Q. Read it first of all to yourself and I suggest that you
             read about...   Well, you can read to the end of the
             first paragraph. - A. Yes.

          Q. Now would you say that is a correct account of what...? -
             A. I would say it is correct, but not 100%, because the
             statement I made was at ten o'clock that night, after I




      H
                                                          30



                                                    L. M. STEELE


       had identified my son.   I was in a very distressed
       state.

    Q. Let's just go through it.   You can correct it, if I can
       use that word, where you feel it is in error. - A. Yes.
B
    Q. Read then beginning from the word "However" and pause
       when you get to the end of a sentence which you feel
       doesn t give quite the right... - A. Yes:

            "However the centre sections appeared fairly
            crowded.    During the time between my arrival and
            the game starting promptly at 3.00 pm the Leppings
            Lane terrace became very crowded.    I could not see.
            however from where people were coming into the
            terrace.    Immediately prior to the start of the
            game I was not aware of people in the terrace being
            pressed against the barriers bordering the track
            side.    About 7 minutes into the game I became aware
            of hundreds of people between the crowd barrier and
            the playing field touch line at the Leppings Lane
            end of the ground.    My attention had been on the
            game prior to this and I cannot say how these people
D           came to be there.    I could see people attempting to
            climb over the crowd barriers from the crowd onto
            the field.    I could see people against the barrier
            pleading with people to go back.    I could see
            people laying on the playing field being treated by
            the St. John s ambulance brigade and Police
            officers.    A Police officer then spoke to the
            referee who stopped the game and took the players
            from the field. We remained seated for about 25
            minutes at which time we left the ground at the
            request of the Police."

       I would just say although I was saying "About 7 minutes
       into the game I became aware", I was aware of it during
       the seven minutes, between watching the game and watching
       the people.   As I say, when you are the statement at
       that time in the evening - I was questioned for about an
       hour.   I was very, very distressed and it was only
       afterwards, obviously, thinking about, this is the first
       time...

    Q. We know the game only lasted less than seven minutes. _ I
       quite understand that.   You remember the Officer running
       on to the pitch, stopping the game? - A. Yes.

    Q. Can you work back from that? - A. Yes, because there were
       people on the pitch being treated.   There were people
       trying to climb the barriers and there were people
       shouting and quite a lot of other things going on.




H
                                                L. M. STEELE


Having now read this you mentioned you did see people
signalling, "pleading with people to go back" is how you
put it in your statement. Does that refresh your memory
because what you told me was you couldn't recollect any
of that? - A. Yes, there were people at the front of the
terraces shouting for people to go back and there were
people in the stands shouting down, "Get back. Get
back."
So you do remember that being said? - A. I do, yes.

Let's go back to this gate for a minute. - A. Yes.

You haven't mentioned it in here, but that doesn't matter
because it wasn't necessarily in the forefront of your
mind at that time and you explained why that should be.
What I am interested in is how much of the gate you could
actually see, be it from the position you were in? -A. It
was very hard to think back to how much of the gate I
would have seen, but it would depend from where the
people were stook, where the gate was.

Yes, but how much did you see?   This is the point.   You
are actually making my point, the thing that is
concerning me.   I want to know from the position where
you were, given your location, the fact you were seated,
the slopes, the heights, the people and so on, how much
you actually saw at the time.   We know what happened
because we have got all the videos. - A. I would probably
say 50% to 75% of the height of the gate.

Could you see the locking mechanism? - A. No.

By the time you first noticed the gate were there already
people along the front fencing climbing over or
signalling or doing anything in fact, or did you notice
the gate before any of that? - A. I can't say I would
have noticed the gate before that because I probably
wasn't looking for a gate.

Of course we know unfortunately you lost one of your
lads.   Thank God that you didn't lose the other one. -
A. I had another son behind him as well who had travelled
on his own.

It could have been even worse. - A. Yes.

            Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING;

Mr. Steele I wonder if you can help me with regard to
people being pulled up into the sitting area where you
were.   Did you see that happening? - A. From my position
where I was seated I could see people leaning over and
                                                          32



                                                    L. M. STEELE


       then I saw people coming up so I could only assume they
       were being pulled up.

    Q. I know time is a funny thing, but again with the
       reference point that you have got of the kick-off etc? -
B      A. I would say it would be just after the kick-off.
       Between 3.00 and 3.06, but I wouldn't pinpoint the time
       because I wouldn't be looking at my watch.

    Q. You- are the first person we have heard from who was in^
       that seated area. We heard from a young man this morning
       - were you here when he gave his evidence, Mr. Watson? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. He was saying that that in his view was about ten to
       three or five to three.   You didn't see anybody that you
       can recollect being pulled up? - A. I can't recollect
       that.

    Q. The only perception you can help us with so far is the
       looking down, looking down on people's heads, which is^
       obviously not the easiest thing to do, but the perception
^      of that so far as you were concerned was that it was
       full? - A. That is correct.

            MR. MANNING:   Can I finish, Mr. Steele, bysaying
       to you and our wife how very sorry I am to hear of your
       loss as well.

            MR. STEELE:      Thank you.

            THE CORONER:     Mr. King?

            MR. KING:     I have no questions.

           THE CORONER:   Mr. Steele, I am very, very grateful
      to you for coming. Thank you very much indeed.
      Mr. Steele would you be good enough to mark our plans for
      us.

            MR. BEECHEY:     That is C.370.

            THE CORONER:     Mrs. Steele, please.

                   DOLORES PHILOMENA STEELE Sworn

                             Bv THE CORONER:

    Q. Mrs. Steele, what I said to your husband is exactly the
       same for you, and what can I say, apart from saying I am
       sorry.   You are Dolores Philomena Steele? - A. Yes.

    Q. The address is the same as your husband's? - A. Yes.




H
                                                     33



                                                D. P. STEELE


Q. Your husband very kindly told us you were an office
   worker? - A. Yes.
Q. You would agree with what your husband said about coming
   by car and the time of arrival and the parking and that
   you had some sandwiches? - A. Yes.




          Q. And that the boys went
'V
                                                                  34
*


                                               D. P. STEELE ■



         Q. And that the boys went off earlier than you did because
            they wanted to get there, quite understandable, after all
            they are youngsters, aren't they? - A. Yes.

         Q. You then followed them down in a slightly more leisurely
     B      way? - A. That is right.

         Q. You got in, your husband says, without too much difficulty
            to get through the turnstiles. You would agree with that,
            would you? - A. That is right.

         Q. You entered, in fact you had seat tickets which are called
            Stands and you got into the area? - A. Yes.

         Q. I think you were sitting a little bit in front of your
            husband, were you? - A. Yes, I was. I was sitting to the
            left of Gangway Y and I was in Row 18 where Les. was in
            Row 20 so we were just a couple of rows.

         Q. So you could see    him but you were not sitting next to
            him? - A. No.

     D   Q. Bad luck I suppose. Again, just as I asked your husband,
            how much of the terrace could you actually see sitting
            down, not standing up, sitting down I am interested in?
            - A. Well I did not sit down, I just stood all the time.
            I was chatting.  I was right by the gangway. There was
            a gentleman next to the gangway and then I was next to
            him so I did not sit down, I just stood and talked to him.

         Q. So you were actually standing despite the fact you had
            a seat? - A. That is right, yes.
                                    \

         Q. Okay then, I will put the question another way. How much
            of the terracing could you see standing up from where you
            were? - A. Well probably a few yards from the front working
            backwards.

         Q. Inward? - A. Yes.

         Q. Presumably by the time you got there it would be about
            2.30 I think we decided wasn't it? - A. Round about there,
            may be a little before.

         Q. There were already quite a lot of people in the terrace.
            Would that be right? - A. Yes.

         Q. What was your assessment of it at that time when you
            looked at it? - A. Well I just looked down. Well we
            looked to see if we could see the boys as we walked in
            and I thought it looked fairly full but I am not very
            experienced looking on terraces like that. That was
            the first match I had been to, you know big match I had
            been to.




     H
                                                           35



                                         D. P. STEELE .



    Q. What you said in your statement was:  "I could see the
       area of the terraces below was fairly full but looked
       comfortable". Would you stick by that? - A. Yes, I was
       not worried about it.
B   Q. Then I think you talked to this gentleman and no doubt
       looked around and passed the time of day. Did you see
       the players come on to the pitch prior to the actual match?
       - A. Yes I did, I saw them.

    Q. I think you actually saw them toss the coin, didn't you?
       - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you see the match start? - A. No.

    Q. Tell me what happened between that, why didn't you see
       the match start between seeing the coin tossed? - A. Yes,
       I was aware of them coming on to the pitch.   I saw the
       coin tossed and after that I was aware of something going
       on directly below where we were standing and the man I had
       been talking to said:  "I wonder what is going on?" and
       I saw what I thought looked to be somebody fainting. This
D      person was close to the gate and I could not understand
       why the gate was not opened and the person was not taken
       out so this gentleman and I just decided:   "Oh he has
       changed his mind, he must be all right now they have left
       him there".

             After that I just could not believe it then. The
       next thing was I saw three or four Police Officers standing
       outside the gate looking in and by this time people to
       the left of me were standing and they were probably two
       rows behind me again but to the left and they just started
       screaming for the gate to be opened that something terrible
       was happening and they were actually saying:  "People are
       dying down there. Open the gates". The Police were just
       standing still at that point as if they were unaware of
       what was going on.

             The next thing I saw, I saw one Policeman or woman,
       I could not see, come towards the gate.   It looked as if
       he was trying to open the gate and did not succeed and he
       seemed to run off and get another Police Officer. They
       came back and that was when the gate was opened.

    Q. Can you relate it to what was happening as far as you
       remember when that happened on the pitch? - A. I can't
       because I just did not look at the football any more.  I
       just could not believe what was happening down there.

    Q. I appreciate what you are saying and I don't want you to
       do any guessing, but are you saying that you have no idea
       whether the match had kicked off or not when this happened
       or was it before the match had kicked off that this had




H
                                                          36


                                          D.P. STEELE



     happened? - A. No, I am pretty sure the match was in progress
     at the time just by the noise that was around. You could
     hear fans around the ground shouting, so you know I can
     assume the game was in progress.

Q. You said that some of the people close by were saying:
   "Open the gates, open the gates", were all the people on
   the terrace saying that? - A. Well they were yes, they
   were screaming, well they just could not understand why
   the gate was not opened, you know. That was it.

Q. You said you heard cheering and so on from around the ground,
   where was that coming from? - A. Well from the Stands either
   side of us.

Q. So it was not everybody who was screaming. That is what
   I am trying to establish. Was it everybody in that Stand?
   - A. No, I mean from the North Stand and South Stand, not
   from the West Stand.  I think certainly in the vicinity
   I was in everybody was screaming for the gate to be opened.

Q. Did you see anybody being pulled up into the Stand from the
   terracing? - A. Yes, lots of people were coming up and in
   fact the gangway was getting quite crowded.

Q. What did they look like? - A. Well they were distressed and
   one man asked if he could squeeze into the row where I
   was sitting and as he passed by I said:  "What is happening?"
   He said:  "Oh its terrible down there, people are dying" and
   I said back to him:  "Oh my God I have two boys down there".
   His reply to me was:  "Oh don't worry about the boys because
   the men will look after the boys. The men will always get
   the boys out safely".

Q. Tell me where he was aiming to go when he tried to squeeze
   past you? - A. I don't know, I don't know, I think he was
   just looking for somewhere to go and just be away from the
   gangway.

Q. To go there would not have taken him out of the Stand, would
   it? - A. No, no.

Q. The way out of the Stand would have been to go up the
   gangway, wouldn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. So he didn't evince any effort to leave the Stand? - A. No,
   he was not doing that, no.

Q.    Did you see any of the others attempt to leave? - A. No,
     as they were pulled up they were just coming up the gangway
     and just generally telling what was happening below.

Q.    So are you then saying that all these people who came   up,
     or at least all the ones that you saw and heard, were    all
     fully aware of what was going on in the terrace which    they
     came from? - A. Yes, they had been pulled up from the    terrace
                                     P.P. STEELE



Yes, I realise that, but what I am asking you is from what
you heard them say to you were they aware, as you appeared
to have been aware, that something was happening within
the terrace? - A. Oh I think so.

So the people at that level who had been pulled up could
see what was going on in the front? - A. Yes.

And that is because they actually told you that, is that
right? - A. That one man did, I did not ask anybody else.

I see, there was one person who told you that? - A. Yes.

The other people you don't know? - A. No, no.

I don't want you to say more than you know because it is
has implications. You can obviously say what you saw and
what you heard.

Did you see people on the fence signalling? - A. I saw I
think it was two Police Officers motioning to the crowd
to move back.  I could not hear what was being said of
course.
Was that before or after the Officer who you said went to
the gate, appeared not to be able to open it and disappeared
again and then came back with somebody else? - A. Yes.
I am not sure, I think probably afterwards but I am not
certain.

      THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne?


              Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Mrs. Steele, just on the question of the sequence of
events.  I wonder if you would take the folder which is
in front of you and open it at the first page where I hope
you will find a list of items 277, and if not Sergeant
Griffiths will help you. You can remember the teams tossing
a coin? - A. Yes.

Now I would like to see when that was likely to have been
according to this list of events. Do you see on the left-
hhnd side of the page there are two columns, one headed
"External" and next to it "Internal"? - A. Yes.

Now if you run your eye down the internal column you can
come down to 14:54.08, Liverpool team on to the pitch?
- A. Yes.
And then a little bit further down 14:55, Nottingham Forest
team on to the pitch? - A. Yes.
                                         D.P. STEELE


So the toss up with the coin must have been after 5-minutes-
to-3? - a . Yes.

Now if you go   a little further down       you can come to 14:59
Gate 4 open? - A. Yes.

So that is four minutes after Nottingham Forest have come
on to the pitch? - A. Yes.

Then a little      further, 14:59.20 Gate 3 open? - A. Yes.

Now that time   has been taken from a  photographwhich shows
that Gate 3 was open at 14:59. Do you see? - A. Yes.

The photograph does not show at what time it had been
opened before that, all we know is it was open at 14:59.
- A. Yes.

Then the next entry is 14:59.30 kick-off? - A. Yes.

Now I am not criticising your memory at all, Mrs. Steele,
but if this is correct then Gate 3 was opened before the
game kicked off, if this is right? - A. Yes.

And the time during which you noticed that something was
wrong was between the toss up after 5-to-3_and the time
that Gate 3 was opened at about l-minute-to-3 in that
four minute space? - A. Yes.

That is when you noticed that something was wrong? - A.
That is right, yes.

      MR. PAYNE:     Thank you very much.


                Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Mrs. Steele, I want to see if you can help me along the
same lines as the point I put to your husband and that
was with regard to what we are curiously calling the
"pulling up". That is the people who were down below
on to the terrace into the part that you were seated in.

      You were here this morning and heard Mr. Watson
give his evidence about it? - A. Yes.

Can you help us in any    way to confirm your own view. Was
it as early as 10-to-3    or perhaps even earlier still that
some people were being    pulled up into the Stand? - A. I
did not notice anybody    being picked up as early as that.


                                Q. What sticks
                                                               39.


                                                  L. M. STEELE


Q. What sticks in your mind was that this chappie who
   had apparently been pulled up had wanted to squeeze
   into your row? - A. Yes.

Q. Effectively, of course, if all the seats on the row
   were taken what he wanted to do was sort of share
   seats? - A. Yes.

Q. Put two bottoms on to one seat or three on to two
   seats, something like that? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. Steele, thank you ever so much.
There is a plan which I would like you to mark. - A. Yes.

                      LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT

                       DAVID PERRY Sworn

                         Bv THE CORONER:

Q. You are David Perry? - A. Yes.

Q. What is your address? - A.                    , Liverpool
   4.

Q. You are a Liverpool supporter?    - A. Yes.

Q. You had managed to get a ticket forthe SemiFinal            on
   15th April 1989? - A. Yes.

Q. It was a terrace ticket? - A.Yes.

Q. I think on that day you left Liverpool at about 9.30
   by car, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q.   You got to Sheffield without any particular problem
     by about 11.20 or so, is that right? - A. Something
     like that, y e s .

Q. Fairly early anyway? - A. Yes.

Q. You parked I think in some car park near apub       or on
   a pub car park? - A. Yes.

Q.   There were four of you I think? - A. Yes.

Q. Three friends and you. You went in and you had a
   drink or two I suppose? - A. Yes. A pint, may be two
   pints.

Q.    Whilst you were there you were approached by a few
     people who wanted spares, tickets? - A. Yes.

Q. Not that many I think, just four or five? - A. Just
   four or five young lads.
                                               D. PERRY


You could not help them.   Do you know the name of the
pub by chance? - A. No.

Was it full or empty? - A. There was a good few
people in there. They were all like mixed
supporters, Forest and Liverpool.

In fact I think oddly enough whilst you were being
approached by these lads a steward came? - A. It was
later on we found out he was a steward.

Somebody who you thought to be a steward? - A. It was
later on I found out he was a steward.

A man came? - A. Yes.

He told these lads he could get them in, is that
right? - A. Yes.

Did he tell   them   he couldget    tickets for them? -A.
No, he just   said   he couldget    them in, that isallI
heard.

You did not   hear   anything else? - A. No.

How did you find    out later he   was a steward asa
matter of interest? - A. I was going to the toilet
and he was in the passageway with the lads and he was
discussing a price with them and he had an
identification card on him.

At that point when you first heard him he just said,
"I can get you in"? - A. Yes.

Later on in the pub you saw him again? - A. A couple
of minutes later it was.

He then had his steward's identification with him.
You saw that? - A. Yes.

He was talking about how much he was going to charge
them, is that right? - A. He reckoned he could get
them in for £5 each.

You did not see any tickets changing hands? - A. No.

Nor did you hear him refer to it? In fact it was
less.  £5 is less than the cheapest ticket, is it
not? - A. Yes.

Having had your couple of pints you left the pub and
went down to the ground? - A. Yes.

You got there about 1.30 or so or thereabouts? - A.
Yes, it must have been.
                                                 D. PERRY


I take it you had no difficulty getting through the
turnstiles at that time? - A. No, just a couple of
people at the turnstiles and we just walked in.

Were you searched as a matter of interest? - A. No.

Did you see anybody else being searched? - A. No.

Were your mates searched? - A. Well, there was only
another mate. The other two lads went into one of
the stands.

So it was just a pair of you by now? - A. Yes.

Then I take it you entered the terraces, is that
right? - A. Yes.

Did you go down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

No problems there? - A. No problems.

What time would you say that you entered the terrace?
You know what I mean by the terrace, do you not? - A.
On to the actual terrace?

Yes? - A. It must have been two o'clock, just after
two o'clock.

What did you do between 1.30 and 2? - A. Just hanging
round.

Outside in the concourse area? - A. Yes.

Go to the loo and things like that? - A. Yes.

You got on to the terrace at about two? - A. Yes.

Which one did you go into, do you know? - A. We went
down the tunnel and just went to the left.

We call that Pen 4 or Terrace 4 or Enclosure 4. What
was it like when you got in there? - A. It was pretty
full then.

That was at two o'clock you said? - A. Yes.

At what point did you make the assessment that it was
pretty full? Just as you entered it or later? - A.
As we were working our way through the crowd to get
to round about where we normally stand at a football
match....

Where do you normally stand? - A. Just to the left,
about ten foot back from the front.
                                                 D. PERRY


From the front do you say? - A. Yes, from the goal,
to the left of the goal.

Did you manage to get to that position? - A. No, we
never got quite that far.

I am trying to establish whether it was more crowded
at that point at the back or at the front. What was
it like? - A. It was pretty crowded then.

Throughout? - A. Throughout, yes.

Have you been to big matches before? - A. Yes.

Did you go to the 1988 match at Sheffield? - A. Yes.

Were you in the same area? - A. No, we were in the
stands that year.

In that case we will not pursue that for the time
being. At two o'clock we are talking about now, how
full is full? How would you describe it? - A. You
couldn't get many more in. There was room but there
wasn't a great deal of room. There wasn't large
gaps.  It was all taken up. Everyone was standing
free at that time but there weren't gaps around you.

At that point you were not concerned except that you
did not think many more people would be coming in? -
A. No.

What happened after that? - A. There was just a
gradual build up of the crowd and you were just
getting pushed forward and forward and that was it.

What I want to know is, when can you remember the
first time that you were pushed forward? - A. It must
have been around quarter to three, three o'clock some
time, some time between then.

Quarter to three to three o'clock? - A. Yes,
something like that.

Three o'clock was kick-off time, of course? - A. Yes.

Are you saying that until that time you were able to
maintain your position ? - A. You could maintain it
but you weren't going anywhere. Just before then we
were packed tight.

That is what I am trying to find out.  I want you to
take it a little bit slower. You have shot through
three-quarters of an hour? - A. It was a slow sort of
build up and you were just getting crushed and
crushed and crushed.
                                                    43



                                                    D. PERRY


Q. I do not suppose you were looking at your watch? - A.
   No.

Q. I ant going to try and give you a few incidents to see
   if you can remember and we will try and pitch it by
   that. Can you remember the players coming out and
   kicking the ball about? Not when they came out just
   before the match but earlier? - A. No.

Q. You cannot remember that? - A. No.

Q. Can you remember the teams being announced? - A. No.

Q. You cannot remember that? - A. No.

Q. You do remember the players coming out on to the
   pitch? - A. Coming out on to the pitch for the start
   of the match.

Q. Were they at that point in the position in which you
   have just described to me? - A. Yes.

Q. Had you been moved forward at all at that point? - A.
   Yes, we had been pushed.

Q. How far? - A. A couple of feet.

Q. Not very far at that point, in other words? - A. No.

Q. How did it feel at that point in time? - A. We were
   like sardines then.

Q. Had you been in that sort of situation before, not in
   Hillsborough, of course, but elsewhere? - A. Many
   years ago on the Kop but we knew it would ease u p .
   You used to get the push and you would be crushed but
   you would go back again but this year you never. You
   stayed.

Q.   We know that, of course, because lots and lots of
     people have said that? - A. Yes.

Q.    What I am trying to find out is at that point in time
     if you were to compare it with your Kop experience
     which you have just mentioned are you saying it was
     the same except that in the Kop it then eased off? -
     A. It would ease off back again. The pressure came
     off, yes.

Q. Were you, therefore, at that point concerned? - A.
   Yes.

Q. When did you actually become concerned? How many
   minutes or so before the players came on to the pitch
   did you yourself become concerned? - A. I know it was
   packed tight.  I wasn't really that concerned.  I
                                               44/45/46


                                                 D. PERRY


   thought gradually after the first five or ten minutes
   the crowd will disperse itself and the pressure is
   then taken off you.

Q. You told me that this was actually when the players
   came on to the pitch? - A. Yes.

Q. In your statement you actually gave it at aslightly
   earlier time.  I will tell you what you said in your
   statement. What I am trying to do is establish
   which is right. You say:

        "At about 2.30 the whole crowd surged
        forward a couple of feet but unlike a
        normal football crowd surge we didn't
        move back and were crushed up and we
        couldn't move our arms or move about. We
        were like this until about three
        o'clock."

  That is what you said then? - A. Yes.




                    Q. And then you go on
                                                          47

                                                        D. PERRY




    Q. And then you go on, "We were like this until about 3
       o'clock"? - A. Yes.

    Q. There is a very big difference between 2.30 and 5-to-3
B      when the players came out, approximately? - A. Yes.

    Q. What made you say in your statement that it was at
       2.30? - A. It must have been that I was in there, and
       you are crushed but you can still breathe, and then as
       more are coming you get crushed more. You are
       permanently moving, trying to keep your feet.

    Q. I appreciate what you are saying but what I am trying
       to establish is on what basis did you pick 2.30? - A. •
       Just a rough estimate.

    Q. You have told me this afternoon that this movement
       actually occurred when the players came out? - A. We
       had movements when the players came out.

    Q.   So you were crushed earlier but the real problem was at
         about when the players came out? - A. Yes.

    Q<   Would that be right? I don't want to put words in your
         mouth. - A. No, you got a jerk and that was it.

    Q.   I want to be sure that we get it as it was as far as
         you are concerned.  Can you remember the game starting
         at all? - A. No.

    0 . You can't remember it at all? - A. No.   I heard the
         roar of the crowd but you were too busy staying up
         then.

    o,   I see. Are you then saying that from the point when
         the players came out you were less interested in what
         was happening on the pitch and more interested in what
         was happening to you? - A. Yes.

    0. Were you being moved forward at that point, do you
       remember? - A. No, not really.  It may be a matter of
       inches your body is swaying.

    Q. So you were actually stationary in your position? - A.
       You are actually stationary yourself, yes.

    Q. Did you feel any surges? Do you know what I mean by a
       surge? I mean a sudden push, or was it a gradual build
       up of pressure? - A. Not at that time, no. It was just
       gradually getting tighter and tighter.

    Q. Did you feel any pushes? - A. No, not until later on.
       There was a surge later on.
                                                           48

                                                         I). PERRY




    Q. When did you feel the surges later on? - A. From what I
       can gather it was later on in the game, after a few
       minutes.

B   Q. It is important to know that. You say later on in the
       game - I thought you said you had not seen the game? -
       A. We knew the game had started by the roar of the
       crowd and we were all just trying to stay ....

    Q. And after that,   some moments after that,you did feel      a
       surge, is that right? - A. Yes.

    Q. What happened when that occurred? - A. You just moved,
       the top half of your body went.

    Q. Did it then get any worse, in fact, than what it had
       been, or not? - A. No, it couldn't get any worse. You
       were as tight as you could be at that stage.

    Q.    So as far as you were concerned, and fortunately of
         course, you were able to continue breathing, because
         you are here.    You are saying thatthe pressureon you,
D        certainly fromthe time the players came    out,
         throughout the game, didn't actually alter, though
         there was some more surging, is that right? - A. You
         were constantly under pressure, the whole time.

    0. Did you see people climbing up into the stands? - A.
       That was later on in the game.

    0.    Did you see anybody climbing into the standsbefore the
         players came onto the pitch? - A. No.

    Q. You didn't see anybody climb up until after the match
       nad started, whatever time that was? - A. Yes, it had
       about started.

    0. Do you remember, you said you didn't see it but I will
       ask you anyway, at one point in  the match iiearasley nit
       the crossbar? - A. No, I didn't  see that.

    0. You never saw that.   I will ask you about the people
       climbing up.   You say this happened after the matcn had
       started? - A. Yes, that's right.

    0. Were these people behind you or in front of you, the
       people who were going up? - A. They were behind me.

    0.    Did you see people climbing over the radial fences? -
         A. Later on I seen people climbing to get out.

    0.   Wnat about people going over the front? - A. There was
         a couple of people trying to get up but they were
         getting chased back down again.




H
                                                  D. PERRY




At what time was tnat? - A. This was early. Before     the
game started and when the game was started.

Let's try and be as precise as we can. At what point
did you see people, in relation to the players coming
onto the pitch, okay? - A. Yes.

Because you know that.  In relation to the players
coming onto the pitch, at what time did you see people
going over the front fence? - A. There was people
starting to climb up just as the players were coming
out, people were trying to climb up and they were just
getting chased back down again, told to get back in.

How many Officers were doing the chasing? - A. Three or
four maybe.
I want you to be careful before you answer.  I want you
to be sure how many Officers were doing it at that
time? - A. Well up and down, tney were just telling
them to get down again, that was it.

wnere were these Officers? Were they on the track or
were they standing ...? - A. They were on the track by
the goal.
So were they just signalling to them to get down? - A.
Yes, just telling them to get down.

They weren't physically knocking them down? - A. There
was one later on in the match who did actually.

Ho, I am talking about .... - A. Wot at that stage, no.

And the people responded, tney came down? - A. They had
to, yes.

well, they did? - A. Yes.

As far as you could tell? - A. Yes.

So you could see Officers signalling and people
responding? - A. Yes.

Tell me then what happened - this was before the match
started, you said, but after the players nad come out?
- A. When the players were on the pitch.

You then said there was an incident later. Tell me
about that, about people being pushed back? - A. When
the game was on there was one young lad tried to get up
and the Policeman was chasing him down, and he just
ignored him and started to ....
                                                                 50
M#
                                                                D. PERRY




         Q. Sorry? - A. He ignored him and told him, he gestured
            that he wasn't getting back in, and the Policeman just
            started pushing him back down through the ....

         Q. Did you see the match finish at all?     Did you see the
     B      players come off? - A. No.

         Q.   Are you able to time it in any way, as to what was
              going on, on the field? - A. Not until the actual
              pressure was taken off us.

         Q. No, when you saw this incident? - A. No, all I know is
            it must have been 10-past, quarter-past-3, something
            .... I couldn't swear on that.

         0.   Yes,that's a long time after the  incident you see, but
              you don't really know, do you? - A. No, because we were
              too busy at the time staying upright.

         Q.   What did you actually see the Officer do? - A. He just
              sort of walked over, and where the lads hands was o n , .
              just sort of touching him.
     D   Q. Did you see the perimeter gate, the pitch gate? - A.
            When I came in I seen them.

         Q. Did you see them during all this episode open or shut?
            - A. No.  I wasn't looking for the gate opening and
            shutting.  I wasn't watching for that.

         Q. At the point in time when you say an Officer was
            knocking this chap back, whatever he was doing, what
            was happening on the pitch - not about play but what
            was the situation like on the pitch? - A. I don't know.

         Q.   Were there people on it? - A. I don't think so.

         0.   When I say people I mean fans? - A. No, I don't think
              so.

         0. Were there any fans on the perimeter track? - A. No, I
            don't think so.

         Q. You don't think so? - A. No, I was still busy keeping
            upright. That was just a glance, when I seen that.

                   MR. PAYNE:   I have asked Sergeant Griffiths to be
              kind enough to put up C344. The reference is DB16 and
              it has got a 31 in the top right-hand corner.
                                                I). PERRY




            Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

This photograph, Mr. Perry, is of the pen that you were
in, which is pen A, and in the bottom right-hand
corner, you can see in the back of the Policeman's
tunic tne number 15, can't you? - A. Yes.

That is the date then a bit further over to the right,
not very clearly, you can see some more red lettering
wnicn when one looks at it carefully is 15.46? - A.
Yes.




                       /0. So this photograph
                                                  D. PERRY


So this photograph is timed at just after quarter to
three? - A. Yes.

Just to make sure it is pen 4, if you look in the top
left hand corner of the crowd you can see the entrance to
the tunnel? - A. Yes.

With one chap standing on the dividing wall there just
crouching down underneath the overhang? - A. Yes.

Then just to his right there are two boys perched up on
the little stud wall that sticks down into the terrace
there?- A. Yes.

I am asking you to look at this photograph to help you
about your timing of events, because you have said there
was a time came when you were as tight as sardines? - A.
Yes.

Look at this photograph and look down where we can see
through the   mesh of the perimeter fence. - A. Yes.

Can you see   the characters standing there? - A. Yes.

You can see   their chests, some of them are facing in
different directions.    They  are not crowded
particularly, are they? - A. No.

If you look   back up into the terrace, does it look toyou
at that stage as if they are as crowded as sardines?- A.
No, not from that angle, but when you are in there the
shapes of bodies are different.   There are spaces
between the heads.

So what you are saying is if you are looking at it from
outside, as you are in this photograph it may not look so
crowded but if you are actually in it, it is? - A. Yes.

Does this help you with your timing, that the severe
crushing came sometime after this photograph was taken? -
A. It might have.   I couldn't actually swear on it.

There is just one other topic.   The jury has been told
by another witness that at a   big game, and before the
kick-off, it gets tightly packed in a pen andthen a few
minutes after kick-off the crowd finds its own level? -A.
Yes.

You agree with that straight away? - A. That is the
normal situation, yes.

That is what you expected was going to happen here? - A.
Yes.
                                                    D. PERRY


             Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Could you just put in your own words what you meant when
you said that when the team came out it was like sardines
then.   What do you mean by "like sardines"? - A. We were
packed tight then.

What ability to move did you have? - A. Not much.     You
weren't going anywhere.

For how long, if I can put it this way, had you been like
that, even before the team came out? - A. Well, it was
just a gradual build-up.

You clearly were concerned about it because you said in
your evidence to the learned Coroner, "I was then
concerned" and then you said a bit later on you weren't
concerned.   I just want to investigate that. What were
you concerned about, this state of being like sardines? -
A. Well, it was pressure but it wasn't normal pressure.
When you go to big games you get the pressure but you get
like a relief every so often.   At this game you weren t
getting it.

What I want to find out a bit more from you was when it
had got like that in relation to the teams coming out.
Earlier in your evidence you said that "At about auarter
to three and three o'clock I remember a big push.'    Let
me take quarter to three, which was before the teams came
out. Were you like sardines then? - A. Yes.    Not as
tight at the end, but we were tight.

You say you were able to maintain your position because
you weren't going anywhere because you were packed so
tight? - A. Yes.

Leave aside for the moment   when you saw this event
happen, but could you tell   us again what gave you the
impression that the Police   Officer was putting the young
lad back into the crowd he   was trying to get out of?
What did you see him do? -   A. The lad was exchanging
words with him.

Where was the lad? - A. He was standing on the wall
holding the railings and he was just making gestures to
look into the crowd and the Policeman didn t want to
know.   He just wanted him off that fence.

What did he do, the Officer, to get him off? - A. He was
just sort of touching his hands.

What happened to the lad? - A. In the end I think he got
down.   I think he got down, I couldn't swear on that.
                                                    D. PERRY


Got down where? - A. Back into wherever he went.

What, back into the pen or on to the pen? -A. That is
what I couldn't swear on.   I don't remember after that*

What was the state of the pen around you at that stage?
What was it like? - A. It was packed.

Do you recall any particular distress of anybody in
relation to barriers? - A. There was a lad earlier on who
had been trapped on them but he had got himself off.
That was one of the surges.

At what stage did that occur in relation to the team
coming out? - A. I think they were out then, but it was
all right then.

How had he been trapped?   What did he look like?     In
what way was he trapped? - A. Across his stomach.

You went to the semi-final in 1988? - A. Yes.

Can I ask you whether you experienced any checks before
you reached the ground in 1988 in relation to your
ticket? - A. Yes, we were stopped further on up the road.
When we were coming into Sheffield we were checked.   The
car was checked for anything and then last year there was
more or less a cordon of Police along the road, away from
the stadium and you were stopped and searched, just a
general frisk, and asked to produce your ticket.

Did you enter the Leppings Lane end in 1988? - A. No, I
was in the stands that year.

Yes, I realise you were in the stands, but you had to go
to Leppings Lane to get into the stands? - A. Yes.

How far away from the Leppings Lane turnstiles was this
cordon of Police Officers? - A. A good few yards up the
road.

           Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

Mr. Perry, how long did it take you to walk from the
public house to the Leppings Lane turnstiles? -A. About
five or ten minutes.

Just going back to the time you arrived in Sheffield.
You arrived at 11.20? - A. Yes, thereabouts.

Then you parked.   Did you actually park in the pub car
park or did you park nearby and walk to it? - A. In the
pub car park.
                                                    D. PERRY


You went into the pub.   Did it take you very long to get
served? - A. No.

So you were sitting down and you had a pint. You were
there for how long? - A. For about an hour. We were
talking.

At some stage people came up to you and asked you if you
had got any spares? - A. Yes, just young lads.

Was that after you had been there a little while? - A.
About fifteen minutes, something like that.

We are talking around midday? - A. Yes.

Then you saw a gentleman who claimed to be a steward? -A.
Yes.   Well, he never claimed at that time.   He just
claimed he could get them in the ground.

You then saw him in a passageway.   Were you going to the
toilet? - A. Yes, I was going to the toilet.   He was
with the same young lads discussing the deal.

Was this before you were going off? - A. No, it was just
when I was going to the toilet.

Just roughly how long had you been there?   Are we
talking about another fifteen minutes or so? - A. No,
just a couple of minutes later.

So it was shortly after midday? - A. Yes.

Does it come as any surprise to you to know that
certainly the evidence before these Inquests and there
may be further evidence, that all the Sheffield Wednesday
stewards had to report at the ground some four hours
before the match kicked-off? - A. No.

So that would have been eleven o'clock? - A. Yes.

Of course, you weren't particularly worried about getting
tickets because you had got one? - A. Yes.

You weren't particularly worried, this was just something
you were noticing as you were sitting in a pub? - A. Yes.

When you went past you said you saw some identification?
- A. Yes, he had like a badge.   Like a card in a folder.

Presumably you weren't too concerned about it because you
had a ticket and you didn't inspect it, did you? - A. No,
I just glanced and carried on walking through.
                                                               56



                                                           D. PERRY


       Is this a fair assessment: all you could see was he had
       some kind of official badge? - A. Yes, but he was showing
       it to the lads and the lads accepted it.

B   Q. As far you could see, you weren't able to tell what it
       said on that badge? - A. No.

    Q. What was there and so you could not actually say for
       certain whether what he was saying to the lads was true?
       - A. True.
                  Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN:

       Forgive me if you have already given this evidence,
       Mr. Perry, but I am not sure whether you told the court
       whereabouts you were in pen 4? - A. I must have been
       about ten or fifteen feet from the front and to the left,
       a couple of feet in from the fencing.

            THE CORONER:     Shall we get him to mark the plan?

            MISS ADDLEMAN:    I think that would be helpful.
D           THE CORONER:   Walk round and mark the plan.       (The
       witness marked the plan)

            MR. BEECHEY:     C.372, sir.

            MISS ADDLEMAN:   You have told us about seeing at
       some point an Officer, as you thought, telling a fan to
       get down off the fence? - A. Yes.

       Then this Officer then touched this lad's hand? - A. Yes,
       he appeared to touch him.

    Q. There were words exchanged? -A. Yes.

    Q. Do I take it you couldn't hear what was being said? - A.
       No.
      So it follows   from that that clearly you don't know the
      reason why he   was being asked to get down? - A. I don t
      for sure know   the reason why but I knew why the lad
      wanted to get   out.
       You have told us in your evidence in chief that you have
       put that at about ten past, quarter past three? - A.
       Possibly, yes.

    Q. Quite late on? - A. Yes.

    Q. This lad you have said was standing on the wall? - A.
       Well, sort of like where the caging joins the wall.




H
                                                                    57



                                                                  D. PERRY


        Q. I would like you to think about this carefully.   Could^
           you see this young man's feet standing on the wall?   Did
           you simply assume because of how how he was?~ A. Yes.

        Q.   The   latter?    How high he was? -     A.How highhe was.
    B
        Q.   That you thought he was standing on     the wall? - A. Yes.

        Q.   You couldn't see his feet? - A. No.

        Q. Therefore you don't know actually what he was standing
           on? - A. No.
                             Further bv THE CORONER:

V       Q. You obviously had a clear vision of this particular
           event? - A. Yes.
        Q. How clear is your vision in relation to this event as to
           what was happening beyond the fencing? ~ A. Beyond which
           side of the fence?   Our side?

        Q.   No, the pitch side. - A. I could see.
    D
        Q.   What did you see? -A. I just saw the Policeman      there.
             He was gesturing with the supporter.

        Q. You could just see the one Policeman? - A. Yes.          That
           was all I was concentrating on at that time.

        Q. That is     what I am trying to find out. Areyou saying
           that the only thing that has remained in your memory is
           this one Policeman and this one lad and you don t know
           what was going on around him? - A. No.

        Q. Or are you saying that you do know what wasgoing  on
           around him and that there was nothing happening? - A.
           There may have been other people standing round but they
           weren't doing anything, so I was not particularly paying
           attention to that.
        Q. In a normal match, do you expect a lot of people on the
           pitch side of the fence? - A. You see the occasional
           steward.
        Q. That is     not quite the same things as a      lotofpeople.I
           want to try and pin you down as to whetheror not you saw
           a lot of people pitch side or not? - A. No.Well, there
           would have been bodies there but I would not have been
           paying attention to them, like.

        Q. You have no idea really? - A. No, I couldn't swear on
           that.




    H
                                                                  58



                                                                 D. PERRY


              THE CORONER:      Miss Addleraan, anything else?

              MISS ADDLEMAN:     Nothing arising out of that.

              MR. KING:   I don't know whether anybody asked him
B        whether the game was still going on at that stage.

              THE CORONER:      I don't think I did.    I think he
         said he...

              MR. KING:      I can't remember, sir.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   I did ask you that. - A. I never saw
         any part of that football match.

    Q. You remember it starting because you heard the roar? - A,
       Yes.

    Q. But you didn't actually see it start? - A. I didn't see
       anything actually starting or any football players.

              MR. KING:     Could I ask him one question, sir?

              THE CORONER:      Yes.

                          Cross-Examined by MR. KING

    Q. You may not know why, but do you remember anything which
       led you to believe the game was being stopped? - A. No.

              THE CORONER:    Mr. Perry, thank you very much
         indeed.   PC Cooper.

                      MARTIN RUSSELL COOPER Sworn

                               By THE CORONER:

    Q. Martin Russell Cooper? - A. Yes.

    Q. PC 2185? - A. Yes.

    Q. I think you were part and parcel of Police Sergeant
       Swift's serial? - A. That's right.

    Q. We have heard from some of your colleagues already - not
       today, on another occasion.   We don't need to go into
       what your duties were.   I think you were at the Midland
       Station? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Did you all return together? - A. Yes, we all came back
       on a PSV bus.

    Q. I think your recollection is that this journey was at
       about half past two? - A. Yes.
                                             M. R. COOPER


You turned into Leppings Lane eventually? - A. Yes.

Did you notice a lot of fans around at that time? - A.
Yes, there was.

In fact you never got off the PSV.   You saw Police
Officers and various incidents and things but you just
carried on? - A. That's right.

Together with your colleagues, of course.   Eventually
you finished up in the gymnasium? - A. Yes.

Which is where you were supposed to be to have a drink of
tea or coffee? - A. That's right.




      Q. Did you manage to get a drink
                                    M.R. COOPER



Did you manage to get a drink before you were sent out
again? - A. No, we weren't there very long at all, less
than a minute I would think.

What happened, were you asked to leave the gymnasium with
your Sergeant? - A. Yes, the Sergeant just asked us to
come straight away with him.

You then exited from the gymnasium and you came round and
I think you were walking along the North Stand towards
Leppings Lane.  Is that right? - A. That is right.

In your recollection do you remember or not whether the
match had kicked off by then yet when you are going along
the North Stand? - A. No, the players were just kicking
about just waiting to kick off.

I think you were walking, everyone was walking in single
file, is that right more or less? - A. Yes, that is right.

The one nearest to you was P.C. Packer.    Is that right?
- A. Yes, I believe he was in front of me.

When you got to the corner of the North Stand and the
West Stand is it right that the Sergeant stopped at the
corner and you all walked past him? - A. That is right.

Were your instructions to spread, fan out across the
terracing? - A. Yes.

So you then walked in fact from the North Stand towards
the South Stand. Right? - A. That is right, yes.

Where did you take up your position? - A. Itwas just to
the left of Gate 3 if you are looking from the pitch towards
Leppings Lane.

I see, so you walked past what we know to be Pen 4 and Gate 4,
well you walked past 7, 6, 5, 4, 3 and then you stopped just
to the left? - A. That is right, just to the left of Gate 3.

Was P.C. Packer ahead of you? - A. That is right, yes.

When you got to that position, you were walking of course,
I take it you were looking as well? - A. Yes sir.

What if anything was happening on the pitch as far as the
game is concerned? - A. I can't remember at that time
because I was concentrating on the cr6wd in Leppings Lane.

Okay, tell me then what you saw with regard to the crowd?
- A. I just saw that a number of fans were pushed up
against the front of the fencing in Leppings Lane.
                                                         61


                                          M.R. COOPER



Q. Were there any other Officers there other than you and
   P.C. Packer, in other words other Officers other than
   members of your Serial? - A. I believe there was an
   Officer on the gates.

Q. Do you remember by chance where he was? - A. I don't know.

Q. When you say "on the gate” do you mean that was his job
   or was he on the gate or was he away from it? - A. He was
   stood outside the gate but I can't remember exactly what
   position he was stood in.

Q. So are you saying then that your Serial were the first
   Police Officers to appear at that scene other than the
   gate Officers as far as you remember? - A. As far as I
   remember yes, we were the first Serial.

Q. And you got to your position there and you were looking.
   When did you first notice that people were being pushed
   against the, I think you said "pushed" against the fencing.
   That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, as I was walking along
   you could see they were being pushed but in my own opinion
   it appeared, I thought it was just a push that would let
   itself work back which does happen in crowds at football
   matches.

Q. You obviously had to pass Pen 4 to get to Pen 3? - A. Yes.

Q. What had you noticed about Pen 4 as you walked past it,
   or had you not noticed anything? - A. That appeared fairly
   full as well.

Q. Did you see whether people were being pushed against the
   fence in that pen as well* as you went past? - A. I believe
   they were, yes.

Q. You could see people being pushed forward but you took it
   this was just part of a forward movement which would come
   back? - A. That is right, yes.

Q.   That is how you interpreted it? - A. Yes.

Q.    How long did it take you to realise that it wasn't? - A.
     I would say a minute, two minutes from what I can recall
     but obviously at the time you are not looking at your
     watch but that is the sort of time lapse I believe it was.

Q. Had the match already kicked off at that point or not or
   do you still not know? - A. I am not sure because I had
   got my back to the football match itself, obviously.

Q. Could you, apart from seeing the people, could you hear
   any sounds? - A. There was a lot of shouting and screaming
   but obviously this was from the people that were being
   pushed at the front. As I say I just thought that would
   work its way back.
                                                        62


                                        M.R. COOPER


Q. I see, so you could hear shouts and screams as soon as
   you arrived. Could you hear what they were saying? - A. I
   can't remember exactly what was being said, no.

Q. But your interpretation was:  "Yes, they are shouting and
   screaming but it is only a matter of a moment or two and
   then it will release"? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. It is like a wave isn't it what you are saying, it comes
   forward and then you expect it to go back. Is that what
   you are trying to describe? - A. That is what I expected
   to happen, yes.
             \
Q. Perhaps the best thing for you to do is for you to tell
   me what happened then? - A. We stood nearby the gate.   I
   remember a gate being pushed open by fans and the fans
   being pushed back in and shortly after, I would say
   probably 30 seconds if less, this is the point that
   personally I realised there was something a bit more to
   the matter.   I remember the gate being opened, I don't
   know by whom.   I remember going towards the gate and then
   deciding to come away to allow the fans to come out and
   move further towards Gate 2 to guide them into the pen
   at the side which was not as full in order to keep them
   going so that we could get more people out but I did not
   realise at that time even then how serious it was. In fact
   I just realised that they were getting squashed at the
   front so we moved them to the next pen which does occur
   at football matches. We do move them from pen to pen.

Q. I want you to go back to the first opening of the gate.
   You said that the gate as far as you could tell opened
   because of pressure from the inside. Is that right?
   - A. I believe so. I just remember seeing to my right,
   I can't remember which gate, I think it was Gate 3, the
   gate opening with fans. I just remember them being
   pushed back.

Q. Now who pushed them back? - A. I don't know.

Q. Was it Officers? - A. Yes, I believe it was Police
   Officers but I can't remember who it was.

Q. Was the gate then actually shut once more? - A. I honestly
   can't remember.

Q. But you do remember it opening; you remember fans being
   pushed back and then a relatively, you say 30 seconds or
   so afterwards, who opened it then? - A. I don't know.

Q. But you remember it being open? - A. I remember going
   towards it. I don't know what made me, obviously I
   realised that spmething was wrong. The gate was opened
   and I came away to allow more space for fans to come out
   and I thought if I went further down towards Gate 2 it would
   help push the fans towards Pen 2 and obviously make it
   quicker.
                                                          63

                                        M.R. COOPER



Q. Obviously the ones who were pushed back you don't know
   anything about those, do you? - A. No, nothing.

Q. The ones who came out after the gate opened, whoever opened
   it, what condition were those initial fans in? - A. They
   did not appear serious and the first few were walking
   towards Pen 2, I believe it is Pen 2, were actually walking.
   They were not collapsing. One or two of them were holding
   their stomachs but most of them were walking and they did
   not appear too serious.

Q. At what point did you realise that there was serious
   problems in there? - A. I think ....

Q. What you are saying is that you saw them, you decided to
   come back and guide them into Pen 2? - A. That is right,
   I went probably about halfway down the track, one to keep
   them off the pitch and just keep them flowing towards
   Pen 2.

Q. When did you begin to appreciate that this was more serious
   than that? - A. I think gradually as more fans came out
   they appeared more seriously injured.  I remember seeing
   one lady at the front at the fencing looking to be having
   problems.

Q. Did you approach Gate 3 at all yourself? - A. At that
   stage?

Q. Yes, or at any stage? - A. I think the first recollection
   of going near the gate was when we formed a type of
   conveyor belt with lines of bobbies to pull them out.
   Actually before that I believe we were pulling a large
   gentleman out that was trapped at the bottom of the gate
   but the bottom half of his body was trapped inside the
   pen due to the pressure from other fans obviously that
   were trapped against him. This caused a blockage in
   the gate and we were unable to get anybody out and we
   tried to pull this gentleman out but we just could not
   get him out.




                          Q. In fact I think
N |
                                                                  64



                                                            M. R. COOPER


          Q. In fact, I think you again stood back because you
             found too many Officers at the gate was actually
             causing more problems than they were worth? - A. That
             is right. To me at the time I thought that any more
             than three bobbies at the gate itself would be too
      B      much because it would block the entrance.

          Q. Had you policed any major matches? - A. Yes, I
             believe I had been at a Semi Final at Sheffield
             before but I had been to some of the big matches.

          Q. Once the gate was opened after it burst open and been
             shut, did it shut again so far as you remember? - A.
             After when, sorry?

          Q. You said the gate opened, some fans came out, and
             they were pushed back in. A period of time passed
             which you have told me was thirty seconds but it
             could have been longer, could it or not? - A. I do
             not think it would have been.  I honestly think it
             was very soon after.

          Q. Once it was then opened? - A. That was it, it was
             left open.

          Q. You are sure about that? - A. I am convinced, sir.

          Q. Did you have it in view most of the time? - A. It was
             just the way the stream of fans were coming along the
             track that made me think that way. Obviously I was
             concentrating on moving them.

          Q. Did you see anything at all of the match or it
             starting? - A. No.

          Q. You know nothing about what was going on behind
             you? - A. No, except for what I have seen since but
             at the time I can't remember.

          Q. You mentioned the Gate Officer, do you remember? - A.
             That is right, yes.

          Q. You saw him there initially. Did you see him again
             at any point? - A. No, bobbies obviously gradually
             came on to the track but I never took any notice of
             the Officers who was on.

          Q. You do not know where he was, what he did or
             anything? - A. No.

          Q. Apart from having caught a glimpse of him right at
             the beginning? - A. I just remember seeing a Police
             Officer stood there and that was it.

          Q. Who you took to be the Gate Officer? - A. That is
             right, yes.



      H
                                                     65



                                               M. R. COOPER



                Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE:

Q. Mr. Cooper, one of the things the Inquest is
   interested in is how it was it took such a time for
   the Police to realise how serious the position really
   was. Do you understand that? - A. Yes.

Q. From your point of view when you first arrived, can
   you explain why those moments passed? - A. The
   moments passed because when policing football matches
   you tend to get used to people being pushed forward
   and then going back. Obviously it takes a short
   while for you to assess the situation fully and take
   the appropriate action.

Q. In your experience have you ever had to deal with a
   dreadful crush like this before? - A. Never one as
   serious as this, no.

Q. Were you expecting that this was going to happen? -
   A. No, not at all.

Q. When you first saw the gate open, what was your own
   reaction to that? - A. When I first saw the gate open
   I thought they were just trying to get on to the
   pitch.  I didn't realise what actually was occurring.

Q. What is your understanding normally of the rule about
   the gate, about whether the gate should be open or
   closed? - A. Normally the gates were to be left shut.

Q. What is the reason for that normally? - A. To stop a
   pitch invasion.

                Cross-Examined bv MR. KING?

Q. Officer, do I take it from your answers that you
   yourself had been given no briefing or instructions
   to look out for overcrowding or crushing? - A. Not
   that I recall.

Q. So you had not been given any instructions on how to
   spot it or how to see it? - A. Not that I recall.

Q. Police Constable Hooson, he was in your serial, was
   he not? - A. Yes.

Q. You know him? - A. Yes.

Q. He gave evidence on Friday of the same journey
   basically which you took up to Pen 4. You went
   passed Pen 4 to Pen 3 but he was taking the same
   journey as you were up to Pen 4 where he stopped. Do
   you recall whether he was ahead of you or behind you?
   - A. I don't recall, no, sorry.
                                                            66



                                                   M. R. COOPER



    Q. You yourself said that you could hear as you went
       passed the pen shouting and screaming from within the
       pen? - A. That is right.

B   Q* PC Hooson was able to tell us that he heard people
       screaming, "Let us out. Oh God, help us". Could you
       hear that? - A. I can't remember exactly what they
       were saying, I am sorry.

    Q. You may not have remembered exactly what they were
       saying but was the nature of the screaming, the way
       in which it came over, the screaming of people in
       considerable distress as PC Hooson was indicating? -
       A. The screams was obvious that there was a squash or
       a pushing to the front and, yes, they were in slight
       distress or a lot of distress but personally I didn't
       realise how bad it was.

    Q. No, I appreciate that but you accept that the
       screaming you heard indicated to you people in a lot
       of distress? - A. Yes.

    Q. You then went passed to where Pen 3 was and Gate 3
       and you have described how you had seen fans pushed
       up against the front of the perimeter fence. Was
       that in Pen 3? - A. Yes.

    Q. Could you tell us how - I do not mean how it had come
       about - and in what way they were pushed? Were they
       right up against it? - A. Yes, they were against the
       fence.

    Q. Were they faces squashed against the fence? - A.
       Their faces were up to the fence, yes.

    Q. Did it look as if they were squashed and crushed
       against the fence for whatever reason? - A. I am not
       sure.  I can't recall exactly their state at that
       time.

    Q. Did you look at those faces? - A. I was looking at
       those faces as well as the ones just behind, yes.

    Q. Those faces were in considerable distress, were they
       not? - A. They were in distress, yes.

    Q. Considerable distress, were they not? - A. They were
       in distress.

    Q. It was at that stage that you saw that gate, Gate 3,
       opening up as if by the pressure of the people within
       the pen? - A. That is right, yes.

    Q. They clearly were trying to get out to escape the
       crush, were they not? - A. At the time I just thought



H
                                                            67



                                                   M. R. COOPER


       they were trying to come on to the pitch,   I didn't
       appreciate how bad the situation was.

    Q. I appreciate you did not understand how bad it was
       but you have given evidence that you realised that
B      the screaming you had heard was the screaming of
       people in distress. You have told us that? - A. That
       is right, yes.

    Q. You have told us also that at Pen 3 there were people
       who were pushed up with their faces against the
       perimeter fence and your words were "in distress".
       That is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

    Q. This was the very pen from which people were trying
       to get out of the gate? - A. That is right.

    Q. The gate was very narrow, was it not? - A. Yes.

    Q. It is a great difficulty to get out, is it not,
       through that gate? - A. That is right, yes.

    Q. Those fans were clearly having a struggle to get out?
       - A. From what I recall just a few came out on to the
       track and were pushed back.

    Q. It was a struggle clearly to get anybody out of those
       gates, was it not? - A. You mean when the Police
       Officers were trying to get them out?

    Q. When that was happening, yes? - A. Yes.

    Q. It was the same gate through which the people came
       out who were pushed back in? - A. Yes, I believe it
       was.

    Q. Those fans were pushed back in by other Police
       Officers? - A. That is right, yes.

    Q. Could you demonstrate how they did it? - A. I just
       remember them being pushed back into the gateway.

    Q. Were they physically got hold of the fans? - A. I
       can't remember.  I think they were just pushed. They
       were physically pushed.

    Q. Pushed indicates that some hands were put upon them
       and they were pushed back in? - A. I believe so. I
       can't be 100 per cent about that.

    Q. Then the gate was shut behind them? - A. I believe
       so, yes.

    Q. You told us that later on you remember forming a line
       to pass those who had been injured or affected by the
       crush out of the pen, do you remember that? - A. Yes.



H
                                                     68



                                               M. R. COOPER



Q. That was quite late on, was it not? - A. I believe it
   was, yes.

Q. Do you know Chief Superintendent Nesbitt? - A. I do
   know him by name.  I don't know if I could put a face
   to him.

Q. Let me try and press it this way; when that line was
   formed, do you remember it was somebody, a Chief
   Superintendent who had arrived? He was not there
   originally when you were there but he arrived later
   and he formed the line, do you remember that? - A. I
   remember there being a senior Officer there who was
   organising the lines.

Q. I want to try and press a bit of time with you
   because you may be able to help us. The information
   seems to be that Chief Superintendent Nesbitt arrived
   at about twelve minutes past three and then when he
   arrived he organised this line. Would that be about
   right? In other words, it would be about twelve
   minutes past three that the line was formed? - A. I
   am not sure.

Q. Would that fit in with your recollection of events?
   It sounds like it? - A. The line came after the
   initial people came out, yes, but I can't say exactly
   what time it was.  I lost track of time after.

Q. You at one stage took the initiative to come back
   from the gate because you took the view that there
   were too many Officers at the gate which was really
   making matters worse, that is right, is it not? - A.
   I took the view that too many Officers round the gate
   would cause problems and I came away.

Q. Obviously they were causing problems and you decided
   to get away, is that right? - A. I saw us all go in
   there, yes, and so I backed off and the fans started
   coming out.

Q. Do I take it from that, and this is no criticism of
   you, that you were acting on your own initiative in
   doing that, were you not? - A. I was, yes.

Q. There was not a senior Officer there at that stage
   organising the rescue at the gate. That must be the
   case, must it not? - A. I cannot remember anybody
   being there but I am not saying there wasn't.

Q. No, if there had been one would expect that senior
   Officer to say perhaps, "Right, you, you and you do
   that, you do that and you do this" giving directions
   and orders. That clearly was not happening, was
   it? - A. The actions I took were of my own accord.
                                                         69



                                                   M. R. COOPER



Q. There was nobody there organising you what you should
   be doing when you were originally there? - A. I
   didn't see anyone, no.

Q. That is correct, is it not? - A. That is right.

Q. The rescue at the gate was not being organised. It
   was just happening, that is right, is it not? - A. As
   far as I recall, yes.

                 Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Officer, have you ever seen fans crushed up like this
   against a perimeter fence before? - A. I am sorry?

Q. Have you ever seen fans crushed like that before
   against a perimeter fence? - A. Not really, no.

Q. You said that you thought it was a surge and it would
   go back? - A. Yes, I have seen surges before and they
   have got pushed against the fence. Obviously it
   weren't as bad as the one that occurred on this
   particular day but that is what I believed it to be.

Q. Didn't it look something entirely different that day?
   - A. Initially I honestly believed that it was a push
   that would go back.

Q. You did not think it called for immediate attention?
   Didn't you feel there was no time to assess things?
   They were in agony those people?

        THE CORONER:   What is it you are trying to achieve,
M r s . McBrien?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I am asking the Officer if he felt
immediate attention should be given to these people.

     THE WITNESS: A split decision in certain
circumstances can cause things to be worse and it was
basically that I had to assess in my own mind what was
happening before I could react.

Q. How many Officers were trying to get the large man
   through the entrance of Gate 3? - A. I believe there
   was two or three of us and all we could pull on was
   his arms.

Q. I believe you moved away from that area. Was that at
   that time when this large man was being pulled out
   through the gate? - A. No, that was before that.

Q. Have you any idea how long it took to achieve this,
   to get him out of the gateway? - A. I have no idea
   because we tried pulling and obviously we were
                                                              70



                                                       M. R. COOPER


           causing him more pain by pulling his arms but I think
           basically the other Officers then pulled people from
\          inside the pound but I can't remember how that
           gentleman got out from the gate.

    B   Q • When you walked away did you go towards Pen 2 at the
            time? - A. I came away from Gate 3 on the track and
            was probably halfway between Gate 3 and Gate 2 in
            order to guide the fans towards Gate 2.

        Q. You did not think it might be helpful to stay near
           Gate 3 as some of the fans may need resuscitation? -
           A. At the time, as I have explained earlier, the
           initial fans who came out were walking and didn't
           appear serious.




    D




    E




    F




                                       /Q. Did you see any.




    H
                                                              71


                                                   ri.   R.   COOPER




    0. Did you see any who appeared to be seriously crushed,
       or did you move away before you saw anybody in that
       state? - A. I saw those people later on while we were
       trying to get people out of the gate itself.  That was
B      later.  I came back.  After I had done that, we came
       back, as we had been trying to pull the large gentleman
       from out of the gate.

                 Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN

    0. Officer, when the gate burst open on the first
       occasion, when the gate opened, are you able to say how
       many fans came onto the track after that occurred?  Was
       it a small number.

    0. I think it was a very small number.  I haven't got a
       hundred per cent recollection of how many came out.  I
       just remember some fans coming out and being pushed
       back.

    0. When that small number came out did that appear to you
       like a struggle, that those fans had had to struggle
       out, or simply walked out? - A. I can't remember, I'll
       be quite honest.

    0. What I am getting at is this, was there anything to
       indicate to you, to put you on notice when the gate
       first of all burst open, that there was a serious
       incident occurring? - A. My feelings at that time was
       no, there wasn't a serious incident.

    0. When did it first occur to you that it was a very
       serious incident? - A. It was shortly after that.   I
       don't know what made me realise, but it just became
       apparent.

    0. And by that time could the gate have been opened again?
       - A. Yes, it was opened again.

    0. And tnat you would say is about 30 seconds later? - a .
       As far as I recall.  Obviously I wasn't checking my
       watcn.

    0. Is tnere a possibility it could have been a shorter
       time than 30 seconds? - A. It is a possibility.  I
       can't recall exactly what the time was.  I am only
       estimating at 30 seconds.

    0. When the gate first of all sprung open can you recall
       how many Officers were standing at that gate at that
       time? - A. No I can't, I am sorry.




H
                                                         72

                                                   M.    COOPER




                  Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

    Q. Officer, can I start at the point when you recall the
       gate opening for the second time, after which as I
B      understand your evidence it remained open? - A. That's
       right.

    0 . You recall the first people to come out of the pen on
        that occasion were able to walk out, and did not appear
        to be hurt? - A. That is right.  There was one or two
        that was holding their stomachs but they didn't appear
        serious.

    0. By and large they were able to walk along the perimeter
       track towards the entrance to pens 1 and 2? - A. That's
       right.

    0. And you stood back and were able to watch that
       procession of fans along the perimeter track? - A.
       That's right, I guided them on towards the other pens.

    0. You have got a bundle of photographs there.  I think it
       will have in it one with a reference C360.  Could I ask
       you to have a look at that? Have you got that
       pnotograph, Officer? - A. Yes, I have.

    0. You can probably tell us where that is, but that is of
       ttie perimeter track in front of pen 2. You can see the
       gate open in the left-hand corner that goes into pen 2,
       and to the right along that perimeter fence, off to the
       right of the picture, is the entrance to pen 3.  Is
       that the route of the supporters that you are
       describing, going from the entrance to pen 3 towards
       the entrance to pen 2? - A. I believe so, yes.

    0. This photograph we know was taken at about 3-minutes-
       past-3.  You can see in that photograph people walking,
       by and large walking from right to left along tne
       perimeter track, can't you? - A. Yes.

    0. Try and think back, I am interested in the apparent
       state of well-being of the people that you remember
       seeing, and how does that recollection accord with the
       apparent state of physical well-being of the people we
       can see walking along the perimeter track from right to
       left in that photograph? - A. Very much the same.

    0. I appreciate that you did you look at your watch at
       this time, but could you help me with this, if I can
       first of all get the sequence of events and then find
       out the timescales of them, when the gate opened for
       the second time you first of all stood back to act as a
       directing device, a funnelling device, for those
       supporters that we see in photograph C360? - A. Yes.




H
                                                                  73
It                                                           R. COOPER




         Q. After a while you went back to gate 3 to take part in
            the actual evacuation, physically manhandling
            evacuation of supporters from pen 3, didn't you? - A.
            That's right.
     B   Q. You went   back, you told us,   at a time and I think to
            use your   phrase, a conveyor belt was being formed? - A.
            Yes, that is how I remember it.

         0.   By that you mean a chain? - A. Yes, there was two
              lines, a Police Officer either side of the gate.

         Q.   I appreciate the time probably went very quickly and if
              you don't know the answer to this question say so, but-
              how long do you trtink it was between when the gate
              first opened and you stood back to allow the supporters
              to walk from rigiit to left, as we see in the photograph
              you have open in front of you, and when you went back
              to assist yourself   in the physical removal of fans from
              tne pen?   - A. I am sorry, I have no idea. I lost total
              track of time.

         Q. Very early on in this Inquest another Police Officer
            called Sergeant Michael Tissington - is he someone you
            know? - A. No.

         0. Told the Jury that his abiding recollection was of a
            Police Officer beside gate 3 shouting "Form a chain,
            form a chain". - A. Yes, I think that was shouted by
            someone but I don't know who.

         Q. You remember that being shouted?  Although I am not
            asking you for the moment who might have been shouting
            that, do you remember that being shouted? - A. Yes.

         Q. Do you remember that being shouted when you went back
            to join in or assist with the formation of the conveyor
            belt? - A. I believe it was, yes.

         0. Sergeant Tissington identified the person who was doing
            tne shouting as Superintendent Greenwood.  Do you know
            who Superintendent Greenwood is? - A. I have heard his
            name but I couldn't put a face to him.

         Q. As far as your evidence is concerned, you don't know
            whether the person you recall shouting "Form a chain,
            form a chain", you don't know who that was? - A. No, I
            d o n 't.

                             Further by THE CORONER

         Q. I just want to ask you one more question, about when
            the gate opened, people came out and they were pushed
            back.  Can you remember how difficult that was?  Did
                                                              74


                                                       A. H. TAYLOR




    you form any impression about the difficulty of getting
    the people back in? - A. I can't remember, I'm sorry.

                   ADRIAN MARK TAYLOR Called (Sworn)
B                            By THE CORONER

    Q.    You are Adrian tiark Taylor, Ibelieve,   isthat right? -
         A. That is correct.

    Q. P.C. 12? - A. Yes.

    Q. You were another Sergeant Swift serial man? - A. That
       is right.

    0.   I ttiink we will skip how you got    from the Midland
         Station to the gymnasium but you     were carried there by
         PSV, is that right? - A. Yes.

    Q.    You went into the gymnasium for a cup of tea or
         something? - A. We did go in there but we did not
         actually get one.
D   0.   You never got one? - A. No.

    0.    Were you asked by your Sergeant to get outside, so to
         speak? - A. We were asked to go outside and we followed
         him onto the track, leading down to the Leppings Lane
         end.

    0. You tnen walked along the North Stand and you were
       going to take up a position by the West terracing, is
       tnat right? - A. Once we got to the West Stand corner
       of the North Stand, the Sergeant directed us to spread
       out.

    0. Do you remember whether the game had started at tnat
       point or not? - A. I know tnere were Liverpool players
       on tne field but I don't know whether tney had started
       or they were just kicking tne ball around.

    0. I want to just check and be absolutely sure about this.
       Did you at any point notice that kicK-off had taken
       place? - A. I don't recall it, no.

    0. I'll show you page 4 of your statement.   I am not
       trying to trap you, on the contrary I   am trying to make
       sure that we get it right.  If you count   down    five
       lines, tnen read from there to yourself, down to "...
       along the track", okay? - A. Yes.

    0. Just read that and when you have read        it tell me. - A.
       Yes.




H
                                                        75

                                                 A. ft. TAYLOR




Q. Does tnat in any way refresh your memory? - A. I am now
   aware that the kick-off had taken place.

0. Just read us what it actually says? - A. "We were to
   take up a position on the track by the field, in front
   of the West Stand.  I was aware that the kick-off had
   taken place but did not see any football being played.
   On reaching the corner adjacent to the North-West
   enclosure at the West Stand, Sergeant Swift directed us
   to spread out along the track".

Q. Before you give an answer, this clearly says that kick-
   off had taken place as you were coming along, doesn't
   it? - A. Yes.

0. It doesn't matter to me whether kick-off had taken
   place or not, or what it says in here.  What I am
   trying to establish is in your recollection, having
   refreshed your memory, do you recollect that kick-off
   had taken place as you were coming round the North
   Stand towards tne West terrace, or were the players
   simply on the pitch as you have described it to me a
   few moments ago? - A. I didn't take particular notice
   of what was taking place on tne ground, although in my
   own mind I thought the match had actually started.

0. And tnis is based upon your re-reading of this
   statement? - A. Yes.

0. You came round the corner, Sergeant Swift having
   stopped at the corner, is that right? - A. Yes, that's
   right.

Q.   You were  going to fan out in front of the front
     terrace? - A. The fence.

0. Where did you walk to and where    did you stop? -   A. I
   walked as far as the gate, gate    3.

0. And you then stopped, is that rignt? - A. That is
   right.

0 . Is it because somebody else was already ahead of you
     and had taken up a position and you were lining up, or
     wnat was the reason? - A. I was aware of P.C. Parker
     and P.C.  Cooper and another Officer ahead of us.

Q.   Did you look at what was going on at this point in
     time? - A. I was more interested in keeping an even
     spread of Officers in front of the fence, like the
     Sergeant requested us.
                                             A. II. TAYLOR




Did you notice what was happening within the pen? - A.
I only noticed that it was a very well packed crowd.   I
had never seen one quite so packed.




                        /Q. Did you notice
n
                                                                77


                                                           A. M. TAYLOR


        Q. Did you notice - I think we have called him the Gate
           Officer - did you notice him? - A. Yes, I acknowledged
           him.
        Q.   Where was he? - A. He was stood in line with the gate,
    B        but back from it against  the bill posts on the actual
             track edge.
        Q. At right angles you are saying to the gate? - A. I'm
           sorry?

        Q. If the gate was over here, was he standing in this
           position or alongside, or where was he standing? - A. He
           was facing directly at the gate.

        Q. Facing the gate? - A. Yes, with his back to the bill
           boards.

        Q. In feet or yards or metres, how many was he back from the
           gate? - A. About three to four feet.

        Q. Did you know him beforehand or had... - A. I had never
           met him before.   I just nodded.   He wouldn't have heard
    D      me if I had said hello.

        Q. It was very noisy, was it? - A. Extremely noisy.

        Q.   Did you stop in line with him or just passed him or... -
             A. I stopped to his right as he was looking at the gate
             so I was just to the right of the gate myself.

        Q. At that point have you any recollection of what was going
           on On the field? - A. None at all.   I never saw the
           football again.

        Q. You were looking then at the terracing, presumably? - A.
           Yes.

        Q. Tell me what happened at that point.   You had just taken
           up your position, you had seen the Officer, you had
           acknowledged him.   What happened? - A. As soon as I
           acknowledged him the gate flung open, swung back, as it
           opens outwards and five football supporters ran out
           towards us.   I took hold one and I presume the other
           Officers took hold of the others because they were all
           placed back in the terrace.

        Q.    How was the placing done? - A. He was coaxed back in. ^ I
             had hold of his right arm, I believe, and coaxed him with
             my left arm towards the gate.

        Q.    Did he speak to you at all? - A. If he did I can't recall
             what he said.




    H
                                                       78


                                                  A. M. TAYLOR


Q. Did you have any particular difficulty getting him back
   in, if I can put it like that? - A. None whatsoever.

Q. What about the others?   Did you notice whether they had
   any difficulty getting them in? - A. I know they went
   back into the terrace but I can't recall.

Q.   Just before this, or at this time, did you hear any
     shouts or screams or anything like that? - A. Only once
     the gate was closed behind them.

Q. Once you had closed the gate? - A. For   the first time.

Q. At this point as you were putting the fan back in, did
   you notice what was happening at the front of the
   fencing? - A. No, I was paying more attention to the
   centre section of the stand.   I wasn't looking at the
   front at all by the fence.

Q. Did you see anybody squashed up against the fencing? - A.
   No, I didn't notice at that time.

Q. You put him back, the gate was shut. Do you know who
   shut it?   Can you remember? - A. I might have. It might
   have been another Officer.   I can't recall.

Q. Anyway it was shut.   You say you then noticed or heard
   something. What was that? - A. We were beginning to get
   a lot of abuse from the fans inside the terracing and we
   were being spat at and things were being thrown towards
   us.   I have experienced this at other matches so I
   didn't pay much attention to it.

Q. Did you at that point think there was anything seriously
   wrong with the crowd in the terracing? - A. Me
   personally, no.

Q. Were people climbing   up either the fencing or into the
   stand at this point?   - A. I didn't notice it, no.

Q. What happened then? - A. The Gate Officer who was in
   charge of that gate, he was trying to call on the radio.
   I couldn't hear what he was saying into the radio because
   of the volume of supporters and so I put my own personal
   radio to my ear.

Q. You had a radio? - A. That's correct.    The messages on
   the radio were constant.    There didn't seem to be any
   pauses between them at all.    You couldn't tell where the
   messages were coming from.    The only message I can
   recall was, "There is a gate giving way.”    I don't know
   where it was, who said it or what.     As that was said, I
   put my radio back to my chest as the gate opened again
   and three fans ran out.
                                                A. M. TAYLOR


It wasn't opened by Officers, it opened spontaneously, as
far as you recall? - A. I don't know how it was opened,
because they usually have to pull the latch back before
it can open, so I don't know.

Presumably you were intending to do exactly the same
again, put the fans back? - A. Three supporters ran out
and I again took hold of another one.

What happened then? - A. I began to lead him back towards
the gate and then I noticed people beginning to disappear
into the crowd.

Beginning to... - A. Disappear below the heads of other
people.

What else did you see at that point? - A. I saw a youth
in his twenties run on the heads and shoulders of other
people to my right in the crowd and supposed he had been
lifted out from the back.

I'm sorry? - A. Lifted into the seating area at the back
and I realised something serious was going wrong.

So what did   you do with the supporter whose arms I
presume you   were holding at that point? - A. I just let
go of him.    I don't know where he went.    I began to pull
people from   the crowd through the gate as quickly as I
could.

You are saying, as far as you recollect, that when you
got there your impression was...   You didn't see any
particular about the crowd, the gate opened, five fans
came out, you and at least one other Officer helped to
put them back in? - A. That's right.

That was the Gate Officer, was it? - A. As well as the
Gate Officer there was PC Tattershall from our Serial.
Other than that I can't recall any other Officer being
present.   There were three.

The three of you.   You managed to do that without any
difficulty? - A. No difficulty.

Then the gate was shut by somebody?   It could have been
you? - A. That's right, it could have been myself.

At that point still you didn't appreciate any problems
within the pen? - A. No, just the usual boisterous crowd.

You then got some abuse and spitting and what have you.
Then the gate opened again? - A. That's right.
                                                          80



                                                    A. M. TAYLOR


    Q. You were intending to do it again and then you realised
       that something wasn't right? - A. Yes.

    Q. And you started getting people out as fast you could? -
       A. Yes.
B
    Q. You had difficulty biecause there is a step up from the
       well of the terracing? - A. That's right, yes.

    Q. Did you just assist at the gate or did you also climb on
       to the fencing? - A. As people were stepping up from the
       gate they were tripping over with the force of the crowd
       behind them which was knocking them to the ground.   The
       weight of the crowd on top of them prevented them from
       being pulled away and as Officers and other supporters
       pulled people the momentum of the necessary force to pull
       them out caused the Officers to move, or the supporters,
       to move back on to the actual pitch itself.   Other
       people took their place at the gate.   There wasn't room
       for more than three people at the gate at any one time
       due to the gate opening to the right and the lean-to
       support at the left.   There was just no room to get in
       so there was no way you could keep going back to the gate
D      because it was always packed with somebody trying to
       help.
    Q. Did you see people right at the front at this point who
       were squashed, or do you not have any recollection of
       that? - A. I didn't actually look at the people directly
       in front of the fence straight away. I did climb on to
       the fence at some point and wave my arms to people to
       move back, those around the centre area, which didn t
       seem to have much of a response from anybody in
       particular.




                 Q. At some point you did.




H
                                                          81


                                         A.M. TAYLOR



Q. At some point you did actually notice I think a couple
   of girls near the front, didn't you? - A. Yes, I moved
   away from the fence.  I moved round to the right of Gate 3
   and there is a section of mesh at that area which has got
   wider spaces than in the other section.  I saw two girls
   stood there. One of the girls was pressed right up against
   the fence and in my own opinion she was already dead.

Q. Can you say how long that was when you noticed her after
   the gate was opened? - A. At no time from leaving the
   gymnasium did I look at my watch.  It could have been
   seconds, it could have been minutes, it could have been
   longer.

Q. You have no idea? - A. It seemed to go very slowly to
   myself but in actual fact it went a lot quicker.

Q. It was Marian McCabe, you identified her later, didn't
   you? - A. Sorry?

Q. It was Marian McCabe whom you identified later as this
   girl whom you saw? - A. I never saw the girl again. I
   have not identified her.

Q. You haven't? - A. I saw the two girls in the terrace,
   both appeared dead and I have never seen them since.

Q. But you don't know who they are? - A. Never identified
   either of them.

         THE CORONER:   I beg your pardon.   Thank you.
   Mr. Payne?


                 Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q. Officer, I would like to just tie up the evidence about
   your reaction when you first arrived at Gate 3 with the
   Operational Order as it applied to Officers on the perimeter
   track. Do you follow? I would like you please to find
   the place in the Operational Order which is in the black
   folder in front of you at page 19. Now I appreciate
   that this part of the Order does not apply directly to
   your Serial and also that you yourself will not have
   seen it. Do you understand that? - A. That is correct,
   I have not seen this, no.

Q. But I would like just to go through this and then I want
   to ask you a question about your own reaction as it
   relates to what is set out in the Order here, not to
   criticise you but so that you can show your reaction
   in the context of what is set out in the Order. Do you
   understand? - A. Yes.
                                                          82


                                         A.M. TAYLOR



Q. Do you see "Serial 1" at the top left-hand corner? - A.
   Yes.

Q. "PERIMETER TRACK. Phases 1 and 2 (Before and during
   match)". Do you see that? - A. Yes.

Q. Will you follow just while I read it through?

         "Twenty Police Constables - perimeter track
         (Equidistant spread around ground). The
         Sergeant will remain in the vicinity of
         the player's tunnel throughout this duty and
         the Officers on the track will follow his
         example by standing and facing the crowd at
         the following times:-

         Before kick-off, half-time and full-time and
         also during any stoppage of play or when there
         is any crowd unrest. This will be indicated
         during the game and shortly before half and
         full-time by the sergeant leaving the player's
         tunnel and standing near the touch line.
         Particular attention should be paid to prevent
         any person climbing the fence to gain access
         to the ground. The gates must remain bolted
         at all times except when in use.   NO ONE IS
         TO BE ALLOWED ACCESS TO THE TRACK FROM THE
         TERRACES WITHOUT CONSENT OF A SENIOR OFFICER
         (EXCEPT TO RECEIVE MEDICAL ATTENTION)

         Phase 3 (After match)"

   We can pass over that. Then just go down to "Emergency
   Evacuation Procedure" immediately underneath that.

         "In the event of such a situation arising
         (indicated at item 3.16 in the Serial
         instruction). PC's at either end of the
         ground will take up positions at the fence
         gates. These gates will only be opened if
         a specific message to evacuate is given on the
         public address system."

   Now I appreciate that is not the Orders that applied to
   your Serial at the Railway Station on the day? - A. The
   usual emergency procedures common throughout South
   Yorkshire and drilled into us even before this incident
   took place what the actual message was to open all the
   gates.

Q. When a message was given ....   A. Over the Tannoy system,
   yes.

Q ..... to open all the gates? - A. Yes, a special message.
                                                       83


                                         A.M. TAYLOR



Q. Yes, quite, but the general drift of this Order is that
   the gates must be closed except in special circumstances?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. Now I want to ask you - against that background - I want
   to ask you about your own reaction when the gate first
   sprang open and the people came out. Do you follow that?
   - A. Yes, the people who came out showed no signs of
   distress whatsoever. They were running. They were not
   confined to the terrace whatsoever and they showed no
   signs of panic and they were pushed back.  I thought it
   was just a pitch invasion.

Q. And what was it that made you come to that conclusion
   straightaway? - A. Previous experiences of football fans
   at football matches.

Q. Had you ever had the experience of having to deal with
   a situation like this disaster? - A. No disaster.  I have
   never been in such circumstances before.

Q. No, have you ever been in a situation where the crush has
   been so terrible inside a pen that as an emergency the
   gate has had to be opened to let people out to escape?
   - A. I was not aware that the gate had opened for that
   purpose. As I said I thought it was pitch invasion.

Q. Of course if you had known what the true situation is
   what would you have done? - A. I would have opened the
   gate straightaway.

         MR. PAYNE:   Yes, thank you very much.


                 Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. Officer, is the gist of the explanation, the failure to
   recognise what was happening, that you were under orders
   only to open the gates to put people back in in effect if
   they tried to get out.  Is that the position? - A. Reading
   between the lines, yes.

Q. Reading between the lines of the Order which has been put
   to you by Mr. Payne for your comments, is it your under­
   standing therefore from that Order that the Gateman was
   there as a matter of law and order duties, that he was
   there to keep law and order, to stop troublemakers getting
   out and to put them back in if they came out? - A. There
   is the proviso in this briefing that should an emergency
   arise the gates would be opened to allow supporters to go
   on to the field. No order was given. We took it upon
   ourselves to open the gate to save as many as we could.

Q. It may not be your fault at all Officer and I am not here
   putting the blame on your shoulders, it would be quite
                                                         84



                                         A.M. TAYLOR



  wrong of me so to do, you were just an Officer who were
  under your instructions. Do I also glean that in any
  briefing you received the briefing never touched upon
  the detection or avoidance of overcrowding on the terraces,
  you received no such briefing.  Is that correct? - A. That
  is correct, yes.

Q. You told us that you thought it was a pitch invasion
   because of the manner in which the fans came out through
   the gate? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. How did you get hold of the particular fan you got hold
   of? - A. As I recall he was just running past me and I
   just managed to catch hold of him.

Q. How did you get hold of him? - A. By his right arm, forearm.

Q. Did he try to resist? - A. No.

Q. Did he try to escape on to the pitch? - A. He was running
   in that direction but he did not try and escape, no.

Q. Did you see anybody run on to the pitch? - A. At that stage,
   no.

Q. Let me go back in your evidence, again a matter which
   concerns me. You were asked by the learned Coroner as
   you were walking to the position which you eventually
   reached whether you were aware of what was happening on
   either side of you and my note is that you said you were
   more keen in keeping the distance between you and the
   Officer in front. Is that right? - A. The Sergeant had
   already asked us to keep an even spread of us along the
   track at that section of the fencing and I was keen on
   keeping that spacing and doing a good job.

Q. So you regarded your job as simply in the first instance
   keeping this crocodile line, if I can put it, with the
   right amount of distance between you and the Officer in
   front? - A. Keeping the spacing, yes.

Q. Did   you hear while you were so concentrating screams from
   the   crowds which we know P.C. Hooson heard. Did you hear
   any   screams from the crowd? - A. The crowd was very loud
   but   I do not recall any screaming.

Q. Do you know P.C. Hooson? - A. Yes sir, I did work with
   him at Barnsley.

Q. And he was in the same Serial as you? - A. That is correct.

Q. He was in the same line of Officers as you? - A. That is
   right.
                                                         85



                                         A.M. TAYLOR



Q. Did you not hear people screaming:   "Let us out.    Oh God
   help us" from the pens? - A. No.

Q. What you did tell us was that you had never seen a crowd
   so packed. That is what you told us? - A. That is correct.

Q. Help me on this: in what way was the crowd packed that
   you are able to say you had never seen one so packed. What
   was different about the crowd from the normal crowd? - A.
   They were shoulder to shoulder. You could not see anybody's
   chests or their neck and directly around the shoulder area.

Q. This clearly to your eyes was not a normal crowd? - A. Not
   normal in respects of what I have seen in the past, no.

Q. So it was a crowd which was abnormally packed even to your
   eyes? - A. Yes.

Q. When you did turn to look at the gate you must have been
   able to see the fencing to the left and the right of the
   gate because it is adjacent to it, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. Again could you not see the faces of people crushed up or
   pushed up against the fence in this abnormally packed
   crowd? - A. As I have already said I was looking at the
   centre area where the fans were gesturing towards us and
   throwing things and spitting.

Q. At some stage you must have been looking at the level of
   thegate because you saw the fans come out of the gate
   and   you took the fan back and pushed him back    intothe
   gate and the gateway so you must have had your eyes at
   gate level at some stage? - A. When I was escorting the
   fan back to the gate I was concentrating on the fan I
   was escorting not on the actual crowd.   I do not recall
   looking at any of the people directly behind the fence.

Q. The Officer who has given evidence immediately before
   you, Police Constable Cooper, you were aware of him being
   there weren't you? - A. Yes.

Q. He was able to tell us that he saw and could see a number
   of fans pushed up against that perimeter fence "in distress"..
   Those were his words. Did you not see any of that at all?
   - A. Not at that stage no.

Q. All   you can help us on is that you were aware that it was
   an abnormally packed crowd? - A. Yes.

         MR. KING:   Thank you.



                       /Cross-Examined by Mrs McBrien
                                                           86



                                                  A. M. TAYLOR


                 Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRlEN

Q. Officer, when fans came out of Gate 3 you said you
   caught one fan and put him back and other Officers
   put other fans back. Didn't you notice any signs of
   fear or panic or anything whatsoever on those people
   who you were putting back? - A. None that I recall.

Q. There were no indications of any sort that they had
   panicked inside and that is why they had come out of
   the pen? - A. No.

Q. When you put them back into the pen, didn't they
   scream as you were putting them back in? - A. As I
   have already said the crowd was extremely loud.  It
   was all garbled what people were saying. Some was
   abusive, some was just shouting, I don't know in
   particular what.

Q. But you had one to one. Whatever the rest of the
   crowd were doing you were very close to the person
   who you were taking back to the pen and so was there
   no conversation between you at all? - A. Not that I
   can recall, no.

Q.    So this fan didn't object at all? - A. He may have
     done but I can't recall.

Q.    When you put the fan back did you not realise that
     where you putting him back, the place where he was
     going, was grossly overcrowded? Didn't it seem that
     way to you? - A. If I had seen that he wouldn't have
     gone back.  I realise the error now and I wish I
     could change it but I can't.

Q. Can you relate that incident with the    incident where
   you saw the two girls crushed against    the fence?
   What is there in time? - A. The events   escalated.    I
   lost track of time. Everything seemed    to go very
   slowly,  it could have been minutes.     It could have
   been longer.  I don't know.

               Cross-Examined bv MISS ADDLEMAN;

Q. Constable Taylor, you have been asked about whether
   you saw at an early stage people squashed against the
   fence at the front. I would like to ask you
   something about the natural eye view you had of the
   terraces, when you are actually standing on the
   perimeter track.  It may be of some assistance to you
   to look in the black folder in front of you at C.268?
   - A. Yes.

Q . We can see there looking at the pens, particularly
    Pen 3, where you were involved that there clearly is
    a well, as it were, beneath the perimeter track? - A.
                                                               87



                                                      A. M. TAYLOR


         Yes, the terrace does go below the level of the track
         itself.

    Q. Where does your eye naturally fall when you are
       standing on the perimeter track and looking towards
B      the terraces? - A. I am quite tall and it would be
       two or three people back into the crowd I would say.

    Q. If you are actually going to look at the very front
       of the terraces where the perimeter fence is situated
       you would have to avert your eyes and make a
       conscious move  to look downwards? - A. Yes, I was
       trying to assess the whole situation and not just one
       or two people at the front.

    Q. Would I be right in suggesting that from what you
       could see that  is what the Gate Officer was doing? -
       A. I can't really say what the Gate Officer was doing
       at that time.

    Q. You told us that he was standing about three or four
       feet I think you said from the gate? - A. Yes, he was
       just at the edge of the grass directly in front of
D      the gate, looking at the gate.

    Q. Where was he looking into the terraces so far as you
       could see? - A. I can't really say. All I know is
       that he was looking at the crowd at the gate area.

    Q. So you do not know really where his gaze was falling
       at that time? - A. No, sorry.

    Q. When you were escorting the fan back to the terraces
       you have told us I think in total that five came out
       of the ten? - A. That is correct, yes, the first
       time.

    Q. Did any others, other than the five who clearly did
       get out of the pen, make an attempt so far as you
       could see to get out or did it just stop at five? -
       A. So far asI remember it stopped at five.   I can't
       recall anybody else trying to get out.

    Q.   So far as how it looked to you is concerned, was
         there a great rush? - A. No, no.

    Q. Clearly then nothing to indicate that people were
       scrambling to get out? - A. No.

    Q.    You have already told    us that you did not speak to
         the Gate Officer when     you arrived on the scene? - A.
         He wouldn't have heard    me if I had wanted to speak to
         him.   I just nodded in   his direction and he nodded
         back.




H
                                                       88


                                               A. M. TAYLOR


Q. At that point you were a matter of feet away from
   him? - A. He would be about two foot, three foot.

Q. You knew he would not have heard what you were saying
   just simply from a distance of two feet? - A. Yes.

Q. Clearly you are describing a scene which must have
   been very noisy indeed? - A. Extremely noisy.  I had
   a personal radio round my neck which was level with
   roughly about there (indicating1 and I couldn't hear
   anything on it whatsoever.  I had to lift it to my
   ear.

Q. Was it at all possible to make out any of the words
   that were being said at that stage? - A. From the
   crowd?

Q. Yes? - A. Odd words but nothing I can recall. Some
   were swearing, some were just shouting.  I can't
   recall any of them.

Q. Nothing to suggest they were in imminent danger from
   what you could hear? - A. No.

Q. Are you able to say how long you had been on the
   scene when you realised something was wrong? - A. I
   believe it was seconds from arriving, acknowledging
   the other Officer there to the first time the gate
   opened right through to the second time the gate
   opened.  It must have been seconds.

Q. Then when you realised something was wrong, you have
   already told us you began getting people out? - A.
   Yes, I don't know how many.

Q. You do not know how many people you got out, is that
   right? - A. I have no idea.

Q. You are really indicating, are you, Officer, that you
   reacted, in understanding what you have already
   described, very quickly to what the real situation in
   fact turned out to be? - A. Could you outline that
   one again, I am sorry?

Q. You have already indicated a matter of seconds from
   you arriving on the scene? - A. Yes.

Q. To escorting a fan back? - A. It seemed too quick to
   believe.

              Cross-Examined bv MR. RUSSELL:

Q. Whatever was the cause, as I understand your
   evidence, it is your evidence that first of all the
   five and then the three were able to make their way
                                                         89



                                                 A. M. TAYLOR


   out of Pen 3 without difficulty? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. But as I also understand your evidence, there came a
   time when those people making their way out of Pen 3
   did have difficulties in doing so? - A. At a point it
   became difficult. People had tripped over the step
   leading out of the terrace area. People then fell
   over them and it became eight deep in people at the
   gate. They were unable to move because of the
   pressure from behind.

Q. You say the step but there are in fact three steps up
   on to the perimeter track level? - A. I am only aware
   of one step at Gate 3.

Q. However many there are and I need not concern you
   with that, Officer, it was your recollection that
   that was a source of difficulty for people getting
   out of the pen because, for whatever cause, there was
   a tendency to trip on the step. Those people went
   down and they had difficulty in getting up because of
   the people behind them also trying to use the gate,
   is that right? - A. That is right.

Q. Again this is perhaps obvious, it follows from that,
   Officer, that that problem of people falling and then
   being prevented from getting up by the people behind
   hindered the evacuation from the terrace rather than
   helped it? - A. A great deal, yes.

       MRS. McBRIEN:     I have one more question please, if I
may.

       THE CORONER:     Yes.

            Further Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Officer, you have no idea how many people you helped
   out.  I know it is difficult to give actual numbers
   but could you say if it was a small or a considerable
   number? - A. I know of one particular young man I
   helped out by climbing inside the fencing and hanging
   from the interior of the fence. Other than it was
   just youths and other people I pulled through the
   gate itself.  I lost count of the amount of times I
   went back to the fence and the gate to pull people
   out.  I couldn't tell you.

                       Further bv THE CORONER:

Q. Just to get it right, this young man whom you helped
   out in fact is a survivor, is he not? - A. That is
   correct.
                                               A. M. TAYLOR


Q. You know who he is, do you not? - A. Yes, I have kept
   in touch with him.

Q. You are in touch with him, are you? - A. Yes-

Q. I do not think we need to pursue that.   Thank you
   very much indeed. - A. Thank you.

     THE CORONER:  Ladies and gentlemen, that is it for
today. Ten o'clock tomorrow.

               /The Jury retired from Court!

     THE CORONER:   Tomorrow we have got Mr. Hamilton, Mr..
Barron, Mr. Duckworth, Mr. Gillett and Mr. Kaye. Mr.
Gillett is actually a St. John's Ambulanceman but he is
coming because he can give evidence in relation to Mr.
Barron actually. That is another Mr. Barron, of course,
not the one who is the witness. We may have one or two
more supporters but I will have to tell you about that
tomorrow plus or minus PC Packer if all is well.  It
depends really how well we do.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: Sir, I just wondered whether you were
able to form a time estimate as to how long these
proceedings are likely to last and whether you are prepared
to share that information.

     THE CORONER:   It is a very difficult question. I do
not know is the short answer. My best guess at the moment
is towards the end of February.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: Obviously no one is holding you to it
but it is so that we can give other people an indication.

     THE CORONER:    That is presently my best estimate.
The difficulty is estimating the length of time some of the
principal witnesses are going to take. To a certain extent
I am in your hands there. Not quite because I could say,
"No more questions" but I do not want to do it. That is
the difficulty.   If I were to revise my view on it then I
will tell you because it is very difficult I know.   It is
hard because you have got planning for other things to do.
I want to remind you that on Wednesday we have' having Mr.
Butler and Mr. Bownes who are definitely out of sequence.
It is just one of those things. We will have to do the
best we can but, on the other hand, I hope we will not be
overly long with them. We may have some others but it
depends what we do on what. Mrs. McBrien, you were going
to ask me something.
     MRS. McBRIEN:     Sir, I am rising regarding the
matter I raised on   Friday the 18th.

     THE CORONER:     Is it about thetranscript?

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.

     THE CORONER:   I remembered it once I got home at
the weekend, and I am afraid I had forgotten it again
today, but we will check it for you. The shorthand
writer tells me that she has told you that they have
checked it.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, she mentioned it this morning
on the stairs when I met her at the hotel, and I was
wondering, you said there was another system as well.
I was wondering if you had checked that as well?

     THE CORONER:    No, I haven't done that yet. I
think it is Day 30, page 26. We will do that and then
we will tell you privately, and if it is wrong we will
do whatever is necessary, but I fear that the
transcript is right.   I would not worry about it, Mrs.
McBrien, please let me say that - I am quite satisfied
in my own mind that Superintendent Marshall understood
your question. He knew what you were asking.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, he did.   There is no doubt
whatsoever about that.

     THE CORONER:   Which is the only thing that
matters in the end.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I think the best thing I can do
is, I think I will accept that I made the mistake.

     THE CORONER:    We have all done it.   We all do it
all the time.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I was very surprised when I read
that word because that matter, as you know, features
very largely in my theme, so I would like to apologise
to the shorthand writers.

     THE CORONER:   I am sure they are pleased to hear
that, but nobody is worried.
                                                 92




     MRS. McBRIEN:    I think the way I put it over was
not very good and I will accept that it was I myself
who made the mistake.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.

       (The Inquests were adjourned until the
            following; morning at lO a.tiTT)
