HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)
                                            10
     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

           30th November, 1990




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT



STATEMENT BY THE CORONER

     S. A. BERRY Sworn

             By The Coroner
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Hale
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Payne
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Manning
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. King
             Cross-Examined   by Mrs. McBrien
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Russell
             Further By The   Coroner

     J ■A . McGAULEY Affirmed

             By The Coroner
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne

ARGUMENT

     J .A . McGAULEY Recalled

             By The Coroner

     S.K. BOARDMAN Sworn

             By The Coroner
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning
             Cross-Examined by Mr. King

DISCUSSION
                            ''S')s'-"''’ }V-';

                                      *■■■.' ,
    ■:W;:   ?                 ■   :   ' '




B




                •   -   •     ’             .   -   ■




                                        : ■
                                          :
                                          •
                                          ' ••;::.-
                                        ' -
                                          ,;•'. f
                                                t
                                                -
                                                .
                                        -                -
                                         . : - 'v       •

                                            ■ V ;
              TENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

            FRIDAY, 30th NOVEMBER 1990

     JIHE CORONER: Ladies and gentlemen* I am sorry
about the delay and the reason for it is that our
first witness has not turned up. That is a great pity
because I wanted him here and i t i s obviously not very
convenient.

     We will take steps to issue the appropriate
summonses so that he will come in due course because
the practice has been this. I will tell you this and
you might be interested to know what we did. We
circulated all the witnesses whom we provisionally
identified as potential, and (a) alerted them to the
possibility that they might be coming, and (b) asked
them specifically whether they would come on a
voluntary basis because that is my normal practice. I
do not normally issue subpoenas because it is not
necessary.  In fact, for all practical purposes there
was a handful of people who either had good reasons
why they did not want to come, medical reasons, or one
or two said, "We are not comimng unless we are
subpoena’d". But nearly everybody else said, "No, we
will come if you ask us to", and that is, in fact, the
way we are proceeding.

     So this witness who has not turned up has not
been ordered to come, he has been invited to come.
So, in that sense, he can refuse the invitation. But,
of course, if he does - and I think this witness is
quite an important witness - I am going to have to
take whatever steps are necessary and if it happens
again, which it might do of course, we might run into
the same difficulties where people are not entirely
predictable, we will have to do the same for others
too, if we really think we have to have them and I
think this particular witness we need.

     So I am sorry about that, but we will do our
best. We have found another one whom we can slot in
at very short notice, and we will see how we go along.
I think the first witness is Hr. Berry.

             SIMON ASHLEY BERRY Sworn

                  By THE CORONER

You are Simon Ashley Berry, I think? - A. Yes.

What is vour address? Is it
__________________________ ,1       is that right? - A.
           , yes.
                                S. A. BERRY
                                — mmmmm— mmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmtmmia




     In fact, you are a Manchester United supporter, I
     believe, is that right? - A. I am, yes.

Q.   That is perfectly permissible! Nevertheless, you
     wanted to come to see the semi-final because
     presumably it was a big match and you have an interest
     in football? - A. Yes, I do.

Q.   In fact, you got your ticket from Nottingham Forest,
     from the club? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q.   I take it it was a ticket for the Nottingham Forest
     end, is that right? - A. It was, yes.

Q.   Was it a standing or a seated ticket? - A.                     Spion Kop.

Q.   You had a friend, I think a Mr. Shaw? - A.                     That is
     correct.

Q.   Eric to you, I am sure? - A.         Yes.

Q«   Both of you came by car to Sheffield on that day,
     didn't you? - A. Yes.

Q.   Of course, you were coming from relatively close and I
     think I am right in saying you had no problems getting
     here? “ A. No problems at all, no.

Q.   You arrived in Sheffield between 12 and 12.30, would
     that be about right? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q.   You parked, in fact, near a pub which is known as The
     Fox public house, is that right? - A. That is
     correct, on Fox Hill.

Q.   Did you actually know that pub? Did you aim for it,
     or was it just a fluke that you parked there? - A.
     The year before when Liverpool played there, Eric, who
     we were with, he had parked there the year before.

Q.   So you went back to the same place, in fact? — A.
     Yes.

Q.   I assume you went into that pub, did you? - A.                      We
     did, yes.

Q.   And had a few pints, or something? - A.                     I was
     driving, so I didn’t, no.

Q.   So you did not, but your friend had a few pints? - A .
     Yes, he had a few.

Q.   I am not saying that he had many;                 I am just saying
     that you had a drink? - A. Yes.
                                                             3
A
                                   S. A . BERRY


    Q.   Just give me your estimate. How long did you stay?
         What time did you leave? - A. It was about 10 minutes
         away from the ground and we left about half-past 2.
B
    Q.   So you were there for a good long time, about 2 hours?
         - A. Yes, that is right.

    Q*   Give me* just as a matter of interest, your estimate
         of the number of people who were in that pub at its
         peak, at its height, when you thought the most people
         were in, in round terms? I am not asking you to give
         it to me to the nearest one. - A. At one stage it was
         absolutely packed out, so it is hard to say, I don’t
         know. It is about the size of this room, so you are
         talking about 150 people, but I don’t know.

    Q.   It was packed, was it? - A.   It was packed out, yes.

    Q.   Were there people outside as well? - A. I can’t
         remember, I couldn’t tell you. It was a warm day.
    Q.   When you say it was packed, was there still movement
D        between people? - A. There was a steady flow of
         people coming in and going out.

         So people could move around? - A.    Yes.

    Q«   But it was pretty crowded? - A.     It was very crowded,
         yes.

         Okay, that was an aside, do not worry about it. You
         then made your way towards the ground, is that right?
         - A. That is correct.

    Q.   Did you go to the Spion Kop entry or not? - A. The
         year before, what usually happens is if you produce
         tickets saying that you are an opposition fan they
         will let you into the ground, because obviously you
         can't go into the other end because if they scored
         there would be some trouble if you show you are a
         supporter, or whatever.

         I did not understand that. I did not hear you very
         well, that may be the reason. The question I asked
         you was did you go towards the turnstiles which would
         have let you into the Spion Kop? - A. No.

    Q.   You did not? - A.   No.

    Q-   Just tell me why you did not go there? ~ A. Because,
         as the year before, what they usually do is if you are
         an opposing fan, because obviously there are tickets
         on sale on the day with touts, you do not obviously
         want to go into the end with the opposing fans.




H
                                                            4


                                 S. A. BERRY


Q.   But you are a Manchester United fan, are you not? - A.
     I was totally neutral, yes. Eric was a Liverpool fan,
     you see.

Q.   I was talking about you.    - A.   Me personally?

Q.    Yes.   Was your friend a Liverpool fan? - A.   Yes.

Q.   I see. So you werea neutral man, but your mate was              a
     Liverpool fan? - A.  That is correct, yes.

Q.   And he did not wantto be amongst the Forest fans?          -
     A. Plus, we had met Eric's friends at the pub.

Q.   So you decided you would go towards the Leppings Lane
     end, is that right? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q.   At that point did you actually think that you would
     get in at Leppings Lane? - A. If we didn't get in, we
     would just go back round to the Forest end, because we
     were not there to cause trouble at all.

Q.   I am not suggesting that, do not worry.    You are not
     under any attack. - A. No.

Q.   All we are trying to do is find out what happened and
     I am interested en route, so to speak, in asking you
     one or two supplementaIs,   SO have I understood it
     now? Your friend was a Liverpool fan? - A. That is
     correct.

Q.   You were Manchester United, you had Forest tickets and
     you preferred to be at the Leppings Lane end if you
     could get in? - A. If we could get in, yes.

Q.   But if you could not get in you would have gone — —
     A. We would have seen the match either way.

Q.   So you went from The Fox down the hill to a roundabout
      and along Leppings Lane, is that right? - A. Yes, I
      think so. I can't remember the roundabout.

Q.   Were there other fans going down with you at that
     time? - A. There were a lot of fans, yes.

Q.   Were you one of the first to leave, the last to leave,
     or what? - A. About mid-way.

Q.   So there were still quite a lot of people there? —         A.
      Once one started they all left really.
                                                          5



                                                  S. A. BERRY


Q. You were walking then with the fans towards Leppings
   Lane? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. Leppings Lane entrance I mean? - A. Yes.~

Q. On that walk did you notice anything about t&e fans
   because you were in the midst of Liverpool people,
   were you not? - A. Yes, we were.

Q. Did you notice anything? Were you concerned? - A.
   There was a large amount of fans. Before we
   approached there was like a circle of Police. As you
   walked through you had to walk through the Police.

Q. Where were those Police? - A. The year before what
   they had done was put a circle of Police round and if
   you hadn't got a ticket you couldn't get through, you
   see.. '

Q. Where was that circle of Police? Was it near the
   ground or away from the ground? - A . It was away from
   the ground.

Q. Put the map up which is C.284, Can you show him
   where Pox Hill is because once he has found Fox Hill
   he will be able to familiarise himself? Show him
   where Leppings Lane is as well. Can you orientate
   yourself from that? - A. Yes, I can.

Q. We are talking about 1988 at the moment.    We have
   gone a year back? - A. Yes.

Q. You have said there was a Police Officer somewhere
   who stopped you going through? - A. Yes.

Q. Where was that on the map? - A. The Community Centre
   just at the top by the roundabout.

Q. Just by the roundabout? - A. Yes, I think it was the
   Community Centre.

Q. Can you show us on the map? - A. Yes.

Q. Just describe   to me inyour own words what happened
   in 1988 at that position and what it looked like? -
   A. In 1988?

Q. In 1988? - A.If you did not have a ticket   you just
   could not get   through. That was basically it.
                                                           6




                                                   S. A. BERRY.


Q. What time were you walking down there or coming
   through in 1988? - A. It was a lot earlier then.   It
   was about one o'clock.  It was a lot earlier then.

Q. On this occasion were there any Police Officers in
   that location when you were coming through at about
   2.30 or thereabouts? - A. There was, yes.

Q. There were Police Officers? - A. There were, yes.

Q. But they were not stopping you going through? - A.
   You just walked straight through, yes.

Q. Were they across the road or at the sides of the road
   at that time? - A. Yes, they were across the roads.
   Yes, I am sure they were. You had to actually to
   walk through them, you see.

Q. Then they just allowed you through? - A. Yes, they
   didn't stop us at all.

Q. Did you see anybody carrying cans of alcohol coming
   down from the Fox? - A. I couldn't say.

Q. You cannot say? - A. No.
Q. You do not remember whether they were taking cans off
   people in that location? - A. I am sorry?

Q. Whether you saw any Police Officers taking cans of
   alcohol? - A. No, I couldn't say that.  I couldn't
   say that.

Q.   You have no recollection of that? - A. No.

Q.   There is no reason why you should because it was not
     a matter of importance to you at that time? - A. Yes.

Q.    You together with hundreds, if not thousands, of fans
     were coming down Leppings Lane at about that time? ~
     A ■. There were a few fans, yes, there was. Quite a
     few.
Q. When you say quite a few, do you mean ten, hundreds,
   thousands, approximately? - A. A large mass of crowd.
   It must have been in the thousands, it must have
   been.

Q. So it was large? - A. Yes, it was a large mass.
63




                                                            S. A. BERRY -


         Q. As you approached the turnstiles what did you see? -

     B      A. It was just a mass of people in front of the
            turnstiles. There was no movement at all.

         Q. Pardon? - A. No movement of people a t a l l in front of
            the turnstiles. '■

         Q. Could you see- the outer perimeter gates? Do you know
            what I mean by that? It is No. 254. Can you
            remember, and it is obvious there is nobody there in
            that picture, does that refresh your memory as to
            what the ground entrances were like? - A. Have you
            got an overhead view of that now and then I could see
            it better, you see?

         Q. Yes, 255. Before you answer, Mr. Griffiths, please
            show where Leppings Lane is coming down from the
            roundabout. That is Leppings Lane and then enter the
            ground area. Is that   the outer perimeter gates?
     D      Behind that there is one set of turnstiles and then
            the others.    They arein an arc and beyond that is
            the stadium.    Canyou orientate yourself on that? -
            A. Yes, I can.

         Q. You were coming down Leppings Lane?     A. That is
            correct, yes.

         Q. When did you first notice the crowd? - A. Where the
            first main street, from Leppings Lane end, from the
            stand end, the next one, that is correct.

         Q. The next one? - A. Yes.

         Q. There you could see the crowd? - A. You could sort of
            see a steady flow of people like all the way up there
            but then it sort of came to a halt and it was like a
            mass of people from there.

         Q. Were you able to see the perimeter gates? - A. No.

         Q. Presumably as you were aiming to get in you were
            approaching these? - A. We did, yes.

         Q. Did you get to these gates eventually? - A. We got to
            about three or four people away from the gates.

         Q. At that point you could see them?     A. Oh yes, you
            could see them.




     H
                                                            8




                                                    S. A,«r. BERRY -


Q.    When you got to that position, not when you got
     through, were the gates open or shut? - A. They were
     shut.

Q. How were they being secured? - A. By one Policeman,

Q . There are several sets of gates there. Can you
    recollect by chance whether it was the middle set,
    the left or the right, or can you not remember? — A,
    If I had a map, the one before that?

Q.   Yes, it is 254.   Can you see it? - A. Yes, I can.

Q. Those are the perimeter gates which control or guard,
   whatever word you care to use, the turnstiles A to G.
   Can you remember whether they were all shut, whether
   some were open or shut? Which one was secured by the
   Policeman? - A. There were some people the other side
   of the gates but before the gates were shut and there
   were some people the other side of the gates,
   whether they had climbed over or whatever, there was
   an actual Policeman on the gate but out of these I do
   not know which one it was.

Q. If you do not know please say? - A. I wouldn't like
   to say. It was one of those.

Q. It was one or other of those? - A. Yes.

Q. This was a foot Officer, was it? He was not on a
   horse? - A. No, he was just ready to open the gates.

Q. What time about would that have been? - A. It must
   have been about ten to three, quarter to three.

Q . The gates were shut at that time in your opinion? -
    A. Yes.

Q. They were secured, if that is the right word/ by a
   Police Officer? - A. Yes, whether they were locked or
   not I don't know.

Q. But just saw the one? - A. The one Policeman.

Q. All I am interested in is what you saw. Did you hear
   anything being said within the crowd in which you
   were gathered? - A. There were people complaining
   because it would be about quarter to three or ten to
   three and they weren't in the ground yet. Then
   somebody did shout out that there was only one copper
   on the gate and to rush him or push him. Then there
                                                          9




                                                  S. A. BERRY -


  was like a big surge from the crowd and obviously the
  Policeman couldn't hold all the crowd. About ten or
  twelve people, with the gates opening about two feet,
  managed to push through. With me being like, sort
  of, three or four away from the gate with Martin, we
  were like pushed through. We had no choice really.

Q. So the shout, did it come from behind you or in front
   of you? - A. The shout actually came from in front of
   me. In front of me.

Q. From in front? - A. Yes, it was in front of me.

Q. Did the people in front of you move forward and then
   the rest behind you followed or what? - A. It was
   just like a universal push. Everybody pushed.

Q. The gate opened at that point and you got through? -
   A. It didn't actually open wide. The Policeman was
   trying to hold the gate and you could see he was
   really, really trying to hold it but there was no way
   he could hold it against the pressure of people.
   Mind you, when we got through there wasn't a steady
   flow of people. There was only ten, twelve, fifteen
   people actually got through.




                                 / Q . Did he manage..—
Did he manage to close it again as far as you know? -
A. He must have done because there wasn't a flow after
this, so he must have done.

Once you got through those gates after that, did you
see any mounted Officers or any other Officers? - A.
Yes, there was a mounted Officer in there, there was*

Did you notice what, if anything, he was doing? - A. He
was telling us that if we didn't stop pushing that we
wouldn't get in. Just telling us to calm down.   It
wasn't a case of calming down, it was like everybody
pushing and the horse actually, where we were the horse
was actually being lifted up just about because of the
swell of people just round everybody, and ne was
telling everybody to stop, to cool down.  He wasn't
being aggressive about it because he was having a joke
with some of the people, and smiling, but just "Cool
down, otherwise you are not going to get in".

Was any attention paid to him as far as you could see?
- A. We paid attention to him so ....

What did   you do, in fact? Just let's follow your
progress   from there. - A, Because the turnstiles were
there we   started queueing because we thought that is
the next   stage, just queue up and then ....

Were there only a few people in this area outside the
turnstiles or was it full? - A. There was quite a few
people in there. I wouldn't say —    because of it
being a close, confined area, and everybody was pushing
towards the turnstile, or heading towards that way, so
I suppose the area round that, there wasn* t such a lot
of people, but they were all pushing towards the
turnstile, so it seemed like there must have been a lot
of people in there perhaps, but I can't guarantee there
was a lot of people in there.

You had the impression there were a lot of people in
that area outside the turnstiles and they were moving
forward? Can you show the turnstile area? - A. Yes,
we must have been, with us getting through that gate we
must have been near the back - yes, we were right near
the back and there was not many people behind us but
there was a swell of people in front.

Where was the horse? - A. The horse would be just about
where the blue railing is.

So he was about half-way? - A. Yes, about there.

And when you say you queued we have heard from many
other witnesses, in fact, that there weren't any
                                                         11

                                                S. A. BERRY




   queues, that there was just a mass of people? - A.
   There was a mass of people but it was a mass of people
   heading towards one way.

Q. So in that sense they were queueing? - A. They were
   queueing, yes.

Q. But you are not trying to say that they were individual
   .... - A. There wasn't a straight line of people all
   orderly, no.

Q. In other words you were aiming at a particular target,
   so to speak? - A. That is correct.

Q. Then tell me what happened to you after that? - A. It
   is hard to describe actually. Suddenly something had
   happened, and the flow of people, it was like a steady
   stream because everybody started moving and we ran
   round the side and we ran through a gate at the side
   that had been opened.

Q. A big gate? - A. It was like a sliding gate, yes, and
   we must have been one of the first through because
   there wasn't - when I say everyone was rushing through,
   when we went through there was a about four or five
   people just next to us rushing through, so it wasn't a
   massive flow of people. There was only about four or
   five just ran through along with all the other people,
   so like a steady flow just went through and that was
   it, so I wasn't actually pushed in.

Q. In fact, you managed to get - that gate you are
   describing is behind that van? - A. It is where the van
   is.

Q. You can't see it very well. ■* A. Yes, it is right where
   the van is.

Q. When you went toward it were you still fairly near the
   back of the crowd or had you already advanced? - A. We
   were near the back because obviously if you are further
   down, you have got the railings there, so we just went
   straight down.

Q. You had missed the railings? - A. Yes, we were that far
   back that we missed the railings, yes.

0. In fact, you and your friend managed to get in and you
   didn't have to show a ticket? Nobody asked you for it
   anyhow? - A. Nobody asked for it, nobody at all.

Q. You had tickets but they were for the opposite side of
   the ground? - A. Yes.
                                          ;;v^rr::: •
                                           '7
                                                        12
                                            S. A. BERRY




Having got through where did you go after that? - A.
When we got straight through the gate there was a like
a tunnel in the middle of the stand and we aimed
towards that because that is where there were people
going towards.  I wouldn't say a rush of people, just
one or two people just running in there. The flow of
people was that steady that we were able to walk into
there. We didn't rusk in, we actually walked into
there.

So no difficulty once you were in that concourse area
and going towards the tunnel? - A. No difficulty at
all, no.

Having got into the tunnel was the passage relatively
clear? - A. No.

What happened? - A. There was people, I would say there
was people in the tunnel trying to get in there.

But was the passage blocked? Were there so many people
that you could not get through? - A. No. There was
people in there but we just walked straight in. We
were half-way down within seconds.

So you didn't have any difficulty negotiating the
tunnel? - A. No difficulty at all.

I think you exited from the tunnel towards the left-
hand side, is that right? - A. That is correct, yes.

We have called that Pen 4. - A. That's Pen 4, yes.

Do you know approximately what time you exited from the
tunnel, from the far end of the tunnel? - A. Just as we
got into the tunnel, or into the actual ground, there
had just been a near goal miss, so it must have been
about two or three minutes into the match.

How do you know that? - A. Because there was a shout
from the crowd. I realised that after the match.   I
mean, after the match I was told that is what happened.

The reason why I ask is because people shout when the
teams are announced, people shout when the teams come
out, people shout when the game begins, and of course
they also shout for near misses and for goals, so how
could you distinguish that particular shout which you
heard as you entered? - A. You could do. You could
tell the shout, because it was the way everybody went.

It was one of these "ooh-aah" shouts? - A. Yes.
I hope I have got that right.  I am not a great
football expert but I have read that somewhere. When
you exited onto the terrace, just think, could you see
the players on the pitch? - A. Yes.

Were they playing at that point in time? - A. Yes.

They were playing? - A. They were, yes.

You are sure about that? - A. Positive, yes.

You went to the left when you came out of the tunnel? -
A. We made our way to the left, yes, to stand, but it
got a case where you had to make your way to the left.

Was it because you were being carried? I don't mean
physically carried but there was a crowd movement
towards the left? - A. You felt yourself like being
closed in, that was the reason why we were making our
way down there, so we could get near the front, you
see, because we felt if we got near the front, to the
railings, there wouldn't be so much ....

How crowded was it when you got onto the terracing? -
A. As crowded as the terracing will be when the match
is on. It was crowded.

It was crowded?   A. Yes.

Was it so crowded at that point, as far as you were
concerned - I am not asking about anybody else, just
you - that you said to yourself, "My goodness me, I am
not stopping, I am going straight back out'1? - A. When
we first got in there no, but then after a few, about
30 seconds, I would say yes. That is why we started to
make our way to the front.

So in other words, on your first entry it was crowded
but you weren't that apprehensive, but things changed
fairly quickly after that? - A. They did, yes.

How far down the terrace did you get before you came to
a stop, or perhaps you never came to a stop? - A. We
never came to a stop, we went all the way down.

Where did you end up in the end - right against the
fence, or the barrier, or what? - A. What was happening
was that we actually climbed over the fence to get out.

Can you put the acetate up? This is a plan of those
two terraces. Walk round to the projector and I want
you to put a mark on it as near as you can, a cross I
want, where you finished up just before you climbed
out, so to speak. Take your time and orientate
                                            S , A. BERRY




yourself. That is the tunnel. - A. Yes, and we were
pushed down towards - that is a walk-way, isn't it?

Yes, that is a void pen, so to speak.  It is called 5,
but never mind its name. So you went right to the
front, in other words? - A. Right at the front, that is
where we got over'the fence.

You came over the fence, over the front, in other
words? - A. Yes.




               (Marked Exhibit C307)
                                                             15


                                           S. A. BERRY



   (Marked Exhibit C.307)

Q. Now, at that point there were a load of people around you,
   were not there? - A. Yes, there wa s .

Q. And you are quite a tall chap, so you did tower a little bit
   over the others? - A. Yes.

Q. Did that mean you yourself had less difficulty perhaps than
   some in that enclosure? - A. Most of people around me were up
   to just underneath my shoulder size because obviously they had
   been pushed and leaned forward. So I had my head above
   everybody so I could actually see by turning my head round   .
   what was happening.

Q. Tell me what you saw insofar as you are able to remember?
   First of all, when you finished up in that position before you
   climbed over, was the match still in progress or had it
   stopped, if you remember?   If you don't remember don't tell
   me. - A. By the time I crossed over and on to the fence and
   over, the match had stopped, but there were people shoutiig
   and screaming and whatever.   I could not tell you.   I could
   not give you a precise time exactly where I was when the latch
   finished.

Q. One more question on this point.  What it sounds like is §s if
   you were being propelled.  Is that the right word? -* A. Yes,
   pushed forward.

Q. Was it a steady push forward or did it come in waves or surges
   or whatever word you use? - A. It was just like, you were
   there and suddenly it was like a surge of people.  I would not
   say it was a steady surge.  It was like a surge, a surge, full
   stop, that is all it was.

Q. It was not that you were pushed that far, stop and then
   another push? - A. No.

Q. It was a surge but it was continuous is what you are saying? -
   A. Well, there was a surge which made it very confined, but
   after that it was more difficult, but the initial surge was
   what took you by surprise.

Q. There is a gate on that plan.   Can you see it? - A. Gate 4,
   yes.

Q. Could you actually see that gate? - A. No.

Q. So you can't actually say what happened to it, whether it was
   open or shut, because you never saw it? - A. It was shut
   because when we got on the pitch there were no people coming
   through there at the time.

Q. But you are saying you were on the pitch after the match was
   finished, are you? You are sure about that? - A. When we got
   on to" the pitch there was not people coming on to the pitch.
                                                                16

                                                S . A . BERRY


       The only people coining on to the pitch were the people who -
       crimbed over . There was no people coining through the
       actual....

    Q. No, you misunderstood me. What I thought you said was that
B      after you had climbed over the fence and got on to the pitch
       side of the terrace the match had ceased? - A. Yes, the match
       had ceased.

    Q. Are you saying you then were able to see the gate? - A. There
       were people climbing over.  With us climbing over the actual
       fence, once you are on the pitch you can actually see all the
       way along the terrace, and as far as I can recollect the gate
       was not open and the match had finished.

    Q. But there is incontrovertible visual evidence that the gate
       was open before the match ended, and I just wanted to check.
       I am interested in the timings.  I am not trying to trap you
       in any sense.  I am simply trying to pin this. - A. As far as
       I am aware the gates were not open when I got on to the pitch,
       and the match had finished when I got on to the pitch.
       Obviously, I may be wrong.

    Q. Those gentlemen and ladies along there will ask you questions.

                       Cross-Examined by M R . HALE:

    Q. Mr. Berry, I, too, am not   trying to trap you in any way. I
       accept you have not got a   crystal ball and you could not jpe
       what was going on. Could    I deal with 1988 first,  I think
       then you came a good deal   earlier? - A. That is correct.

    Q. We have had the benefit of seeing comparative videos. I don't
       want to run through them all again now and hold everything up,
       but will you take it from me that in 1988 the flow of people
       had almost stopped by about quarter-to-3? - A. Yes, 2.30.

    Q. Whereas in 1989 it was totally different?       A. It was only
       just starting really, yes.

    Q. It was just starting, and there was an awful mass of people
       came after that time? - A. I think the reason was perhaps
       because it had been so organised the year before that people
       thought they could just walk straight in, so they left it
       later on that year.

    Q. There are a lot of reasons, and they are not all the same
       reasons.  There were traffic problems and various things, but
       for one reason or another, whether it was anybody's fault or
       not, the mass of people came between quarter :-to-3 and 3
       o'clock in 1989? - A. Yes.

    Q. You saw that mass of people? - A. In 1989?

    Q. In 1989? - A. Yes.

    Q. That presumably was totally different from the time when you


H
                                                                       17


                                                     S. A. BERRY


       were walking along Leppings Lane in 1988 and a Policeman may
       have stopped you and asked you for your ticket? - A. Yes.

    Q. Would a Policeman or five or six Policemen or ten Policemen
       have any chance of holding that crowd up and asking them for
B      tickets in 1989? - A. The majority of the crowd had already
       gone through the Police when we were there.  So they were
       actually down towards the Leppings Lane end stand, and there
       was a lot of people going through steadily.  If the Police
       decided to do that it would have caused quite a lot of
       congestion, but it is hard to say.  I would not like to say.
       It would have been difficult.

    Q. There would have been difficulties,  You say the crowd in
       front of you had gone through? - A. They had already gone
       through, yes.

    Q. But if there had been a line of Policemen there with linked
       arms across the road and stopping everybody, saying, "Have you
       got a ticket? Have you got a ticket", and so on, that would
       have slowed things down, would not it? - A. It would have
       done, yes.
D   Q. So they would not have got through and you would not have just
       walked through.  You would have been held up further down
       Leppings Lane instead of being held up at the turnstiles? -A.
       Yes, that is correct.

    Q. You explained you heard a shout, in 1989, and somebody said,
       "There’s only one cop on the gate", and they rushed it and
       went through? - A . Yes.

    Q. I put it no higher, did you hear a story going about that the
       vans had forced the gate to get in? - A. What do you mean by
       that?

    Q. Just that, as simple as that? If anyone had said the fans
       forced the gate to get in, would that have been more or less
       what occurred in your presence - a gate;  I am not talking
       about the main gate or the concertina gate or anything like. -
       A. The gate where we all were?

    Q. The gate where you were which was being held b y o n e P o l i c e m a n ?
       - A. I only heard one single man say, "There’s only one cop on
       the gate", and then there was a sudden surge behind us.          I
       would not like to say.

    Q. If somebody had said that the fans had forced that gate that
       would not be incompatible with what you saw happen? There was
       a surge and they went through? - A. Yes, that is correct.  I
       suppose s o , y e s .

    Q. It is a matter for other people to judge how significant the
       remark that you heard was made? - A. Yes.

    Q. And again, please accept that I know you have not got a
       crystal ball and that you acted in good faith and everything
4
                                                             18

                                               S.A. BERRY


        else, but you and a friend went into an area that you had not
        ticket for? - A. That is correct, yes.


    B




    D
                              /Q. We have heard evidence.




    G
                                                           19


                                 S. A. BERRY


Q.' We have heard evidence of other people doing that,
     five here, two there, and so on, and they add up. If
     the trouble had been caused merely by excess numbers,
     and I say immediately I am not suggesting that, but if
     the only problem had been excessive numbers in that
     pen, then unwittingly, would you accept, you were
     contributing towards it? - A. When I was actually
     inside the ground there were people who actually did
     not have any tickets at all.

Q.   No, but the actual fact - and I attach no blame at
     all, that is for other people to judge - is that you
     were in a confined area where you had no ticket to be?
     - A. That is correct, yes.

Q.   Please accept I am not blaming you, but that is one
      contributory factor to why there were more people, or
      if there were more people in there than there should
      have been, put it that way.

          THE CORONER: I would not press the witness.           I
     think he has answered you fairly on that.

          MR. HALE: I will not press it.
Q.   When you got in - and this is why I am not pressing it
     - at first you actually could move? - A. Yes, that is
     correct.

Q.   The big pressure that came came after you had got in?
      - A. That is correct.

                 Cross-Examined by HR. PAYNE

           MR. PAYNE: Would you be good enough, Sergeant
      Griffiths, to put up 284, the map, please.
Q.   Fox Hill Road:   do you see the slogan across the top
      of this map, "Reproduced by permission of Geographers
     A to Z Map Co. Ltd"? - A. Yes.

Q.   Do you see the letter "A"    in the middle of the   word
     "Geographers"? - A. Yes.

Q.   Immediately underneath that is "Fox", and that is the
      Fox Hill Road where your pub was? - A. That is
      correct, yes.

Q.   So you came down that road, joined Halifax Road, then
      along Penistone Road to the roundabout? - A. That is
      correct, yes.

Q.   Your evidence is that you left at about 2.30? - A.
      About that, yes.
                                                              20


                                     S. A. BERRY


    Q.'   And arrived at the ground at about -—    A.   Outside the
          ground at about quarter-to 3, 10-to.

    Q.    Quarter-to/10-to 3? - A.    Yes.
B
    Q.    As you made your way along that route which we can see
          on the map there were large crowds accompanying you
          making their way in the same direction? - A. There
          was a flow of people, yes, that is right.

    Q.    Can you amplify the timing of this, please? The
          previous year you had arrived at the ground about an
          hour-and-a-half earlier you said? - A. Yes, that is
          correct, yes, about that.

    Q.    There is a significant difference - an hour-and-a-half
          later in 1989? - A. Yes. We met a lot of people at
          Fox Hill. There were a lot of people there we knew.
          I didn't know anybody, but Martin knew, the person I
          was with, and we sat there with them for some time, so
          we assumed that when everybody left we would just go
          straight into the ground, there would be no problem at
          all. Because, as I say, the year before it had just
          been a constant flow in and there had been no problems
          at all.

    Q.    I am just trying to get to the bottom of this, why it
          was, and we have heard lots of evidence about masses
          and masses of people congregating on the ground in the
          last 20 minutes or so before kick-off, and you are one
          of those who did that? - A. Yes.

    Q.    I am just wondering why it was that this happened? -
          A. I wouldn't like to say because, as I say, we were
          in the pub at the time and then once one started
          leaving they all left.  I would say that there was
          nobody left in the pub at about 20-to 3, quarter-to 3.
          We just followed the crowd, that is all we did, from
          Fox Hill.

    Q.    Do you think the weather had anything to do with it? -
          A. The weather? It was a nice, hot sunny day, so I
          wouldn't say that, no. I wouldn't say the weather had
          anything to do with it. In what way do you mean,
          though, by the weather?

    Q.    I am trying to find out why it is that the situation
          was different in the two years from your evidence as a
          man who was there both times? - A. I think the people
          must have assumed, with it being so well organised,
          they were just going to go in a steady flow. A group
          of people would start back and think 'We'll get in no
          problem', but along with that group there would be
          another group, another group, another group, everyone




H
                         S. A. BERRY


assuming that they would get in no problem at all, and
not thinking that everyone would move on the ground at
the same time.

You have mentioned in your evidence the police
officers, or some police officers, who were stationed
at the roundabout entrance to Leppings Lane? - A, It
was around that area, yes.

You have said that some of them-were stationed across
the road? - A. Yes.   I would not like to say how many
there was, I couldn't say, I can't remember how many
there was, but I know there was at least a couple
there.

I am going to ask you to look at the Police Order for
this particular part of the approach to the ground, so
could you please be given what the Jury have as number
C285, and in that turn to page 40. At the top left-
hand corner you can see Serial 32 commanded by Police
Sergeant Potts, do you see that? - A. Yes, I do.

With 8 policemen in the serial, and this is entitled
"Public Order Patrol, Penistone Road North, Phase 1 -
Before the Match".  For your information, the
instructions to this serial were that they should be
responsible for part of Penistone Road North from the
traffic island at the junction with Leppings Lane to
the Traveller's Rest public   house,which is just a
little way up Penistone Road North going north. It
says:

     "This road will be extensively used by Liverpool
     supporters en route from Wadsley Bridge Station",
     which we can see on the map, "... and coach
     parking areas in Clay Wheels Lane".

If we can just find that, you see on the maps the
letter "G" in the black spot in the middle of the map?
- A. Yes.

Part of that is covering Clay Wheels Lane, which you
can see going down past it.Do you see that?

     THE CORONER:  Point it    out on the map.   Ifyou
turn round, you can see it.

     MR. PAYNE: There it is.    Sergeant Griffiths is
pointing it out. - A. Yes.

So this serial has got to keep an eye on this being
used by Liverpool supporters en route from Wadsley
Bridge Station and coach parking areas in Clay Wheels
Lane and Penistone Road North/Halifax Road.  So
                                                         22



                                 S. A. BERRY


     coaches are being parked up both these roads, Clay
     Wheels Lane and Halifax Road? - A. Yes.

Q.   Then the job of this serial is to maintain order and
     ensure that supporters do not posses^-items prohibited
     by the ground rules, banners, missiles, weapons or
     alcohol. Go back one page to page 39 where there are
     now the two serials, Serial 30 at the top of the page,
     and Serial 31 at the bottom, and these are the two
     serials who are posted actually at the Leppings Lane
     roundabout.  The first one, No.30, is commanded by
     Police Sergeant Ashton and Serial 31 by Police
     Sergeant Pearson? - A. Yes.

          THE CORONER: Can I stop you one minute.      Can you
     tell me what the question is going to be?

          MR. PAYNE:   Yes, I am sorry.  I want to just
     follow up what the witness was saying about the police
     officers who were stationed at the roundabout, and I
     wanted to explore what the practical effect would have
     been of holding up the crowd at that roundabout when
     there was such a large mass of people advancing on the
     ground.

          THE CORONER:The reason I ask is there   is no
     point in putting to him the Order because he cannot
     dispute it because he did not see it, so he does not
     know it. I do not mind you putting to him that there
     were X number of officers.

          MR. PAYNE:     I understand the point.

          THE CORONER:     So if you would perhaps proceed on
     those grounds.

Q.        MR. PAYNE: Bearing in mind that you have seen
     that there were officers stationed at the roundabout,
     and also up that stretch of the road immediately along
     the stretch that you walked, do you see that? Do you
     understand the point I am putting? - A. I know where
     you mean, yes.

Q.   I am drawing your attention to the fact that a lot of
     policemen were stationed there, do you understand
     that? - A. I understand what you are saying, yes.

          MR. KING: To be fair to the witness - and I
     intended not to interrupt my learned friend at all
     because he is entitled to put his questions - but all
     he is doing is putting an Order.  It does not prove at
     all that there were officers there, merely that it
     says so on the piece of paper.
                            S. A. BERRY


      THE CORONER:  I think, Mr. Payne, perhaps what
you are putting to the witness is that the Order
provided, that there should be a lot of policemen.
Whether they were there or not is the question you are
going to ask, is it not?
     MR. PAYNE: Yes. The difficulty, of course, is
that the evidence is coining out in a fragmentary way
and later on there will be evidence, I expect, from
officers who will be able to prove that they were, in
fact, stationed there, but if I do not draw the
picture at the moment the Jury have not got the full
picture.
     THE CORONER:  It is difficult, I accept.  It is
always a problem when you are telling a story because
you cannot tell the whole story in one fell swoop.

      MR. PAYNE:  I do not want to be tedious, but may
I noxf just come to the point which I want to put to
this witness?

     THE CORONER:    Yes.
     MR. PAYNE: Bearing in mind that in 1989 there
was this large influx shortly before the kick-off,
different from the previous year as you have said, if
these police officers stationed in the area where I
have just been showing you - right - had attempted to
hold up the crowd and to check each member of the
crowd at that point for tickets, or for weapons, or
alcohol, do you understand what I am saying? - A. I
know what you mean.

What would the practical effect of that have been at
this location? - A. I suppose there would have been a
build-up of crowd where the Police had been, with
people trying to get through.  It is hard to say.   I
would not like to say, because I would not know.
Obviously there would have been a build-up of crowding
where the Police are all the way through that road.

And the more people there were, even more a b u i l d - u p
of crowd obviously? - A. That is correct, yes.

I want you to come down now, turn away from the
documents you have been looking at and in your
evidence come down now to the turnstiles, to the outer
perimeter gates, where one of the gates was being held
closed by a policeman.  — A. That is correct, yes.

 And the mass of people were, therefore, as you have
 said, outside the gates with a smaller number of
                                                               z4



                                  S.   A.   BERRY


         people inside by the turnstiles? - A. There was some
         people who had already got through, yes.

    Q.   There was a deliberate attempt to push the gate open,
B        as you have said? - A. Yes.

    Q.   And that came from people who were behind you? - A.
         The shout   was in front of me, but the push wasfrom
         behind me, yes.

    Q.   You did not push, I suppose? - A. Well, I mean, I was
         caught up   in the push, I mean they pushed behind me
         and I was   in front of that so I was pushed.

    Q.   So other people pushed, but they were behind you? - A.
         That is correct, yes.

    Q.   They pushed you forward? - A.      That is correct.

    Q.   And propelled you through the gates? - A.      Along with
         other people, yes.
D   Q.   Once you got inside the gates and you had joined the
         throng by the turnstiles, the people who pushed you
         were still -—   A. Behind the gate.

    Q.   Behind the gate? - A. I assumed so because I wouldn't
         s a y that many people got through the gate, not an
         enormous amount. No, I wouldn't say there was an
         enormous amount of people got through.

    Q.   So then the concertina gate was opened and you were
         one of the first through it? - A. I must have been,
         yes, because there wasn't a rush of people going
         through.

    Q.   So the people who had pushed you to try to force the
         perimeter gate were still behind you, were they? - A.
         On the other side of the gate, outside.

    Q.   Behind you in the crowd? - A.      Say that again.

    Q.   The people who had actually forced the perimeter gate
         by pushing, as you have described, were behind you at
         that time? - A. Yes.

         Once you got inside they were still behind? - A. I
         couldn't say how many people. When we got through I
         didn't look round to see how many people were behind
         me to get through because there wasn't abuild-up of
         people behind me, so not that many people got through
         it.




H
                                                S. A. BERRY .


It sounds from your evidence as if the pushers were
behind you when you managed to go through the
concertina gates. They were still part of the crowd
behind you? - A. There was a lot of people. There
were thousands of people there outside behind the
gate where the Policeman was. I mean if they had all
got through there would have been mayhem but I
wouldn1t say that that many people got through.

The Policemen     - A. Not to push the Policeman
through anyway.
The Policeman was trying to control the mayhem by
keeping them outside the perimeter gate, was he? - A.
I assume that is what his task was, yes.

What? - A. That is what his task was, yes.

In any situation like this the safety of the crowd
depends, does it not, on reasonable co-operation
between the Police and the people attending the
ground? - A. Yes.
Do you agree with that? - A. I agree with that, yes.

Certainly so far as the people who pushed you through
the gate were concerned, they were not co­
operating? - A. You are talking about ten to three
and the kick-off is at three o'clock. Those people
wanted to get through obviously and with the sudden
surge of the crowd the Policeman could not hold the
gate.
Your evidence is that there w e r e thousands of people
outside the ground? - A. There were a lot of people
outside that gate, yes.
At ten to three? - A. Around then, yes.    Quarter to
or ten to three, yes.
            Cross-Examined bv M R . MANNING:

If I can develop the point made by Mr. Payne at that
moment, what you say is that when it comes to quarter
to three or even ten to three though the Police,
according to what you have said, are trying to
prevent mayhem there is the stage when the crowd take
over and decide what was going to happen and not the
Police Officers? - A. The Police were there to keep
order obviously. There was a lot of people outside
                                              S. A. BERRY


waiting to get in and their main aim was to see the
match regardless.

They decided that as it was quarter to three they
were not going to stay outside that gate? - A. There
were so many people out there that you understood you
were not going to get in to see the start of the
match at least-

Let us develop the scenario that arrives outside that
gate and that decision, as you say, which was made by
thousands of people in the crowd. Had you not met
these people in the Fox public house what time had
you and your friend thought that you would go down to
the ground? - A. I suppose it would have been half
past one or two o'clock.  It is hard to say.  I mean
when you get into the ground there is not a lot to do
in there apart from just sit down and wait for the
match to start.

You did not think it was probably going to be better
in terms of getting into the Leppings Lane end to
wait until there were quite a lot of people around
and that might give you a better chance of getting
in? - A. Say that again.

Did you think it would be better in terms of you
getting into the Leppings Lane end to wait until
there was a larger crowd there? - A. No.

We have established you had tickets for the other end
but your friend wanted to get into the Leppings Lane
end with the Liverpool supporters? - A. With his
friends, yes.

So there was no conscious decision to wait until the
crowd had built up as to how you would then get in? -
A. No, no way.

Had you any idea about how you were going to get
in? - A. As has been done before on several
occasions, not by ourselves, but I know of people who
just approached a steward and say you have got
tickets, or a Policeman.  I know damn well that a
Policeman or steward would let you in because the
fear of trouble at the other end if an opposing team
scored.

What you are saying is that if you had not been able
to get tickets - and this is a general point - for
your team's end? - A. Yes.
                                                          27




                                                   S. A. BERRY.



Q. Bearing in mind the Police were for safety reasons
   segregating the crowd, and you had tickets for the
   other end, you could go up to a steward and present
   the ticket and say, "I am actually a this end
   supporter and I have a ticket for the other end.
   Will you let me in because if I jump up and down and
   cheer when my team score somebody is going to set
   upon me at the other end?"? - A. No, but you have got
   like touts outside the ground selling tickets for
   either end. My personal aim was to see the match
   regardless. Anybody buying tickets that is what they
   want, if they are neutral parties, and so either end
   they would go in. My friend decided he wanted to go
   into the Liverpool end for the match.

Q. You did not make any conscious effort at all, did
   you, Mr. Berry, to look for a ticket tout outside the
   ground when you got down there? - A. No, because I
   didn't need a ticket.

Q.   As itturned out you got in without a ticket? - A.   So
     did a lot of people who were with me, yes.

Q.   A lot of people with you got into the     match? - A.
     There was somebody when we actually went through the
     gate didn't have a ticket. There was somebody
     actually waiting outside whose friend had their
     ticket.

Q. So they had no ticket at all? - A. No. I didn't
   actually know those people but that is what they told
   us.

Q. Was your impression that there were quite a number of
   people that you were able to identify who did not
   have any tickets at all? - A. Nobody took any stubs
   of tickets.

Q. There is a difference between not having a stub taken
   off your ticket and not having a ticket? - A. There
   were some people there without tickets, yes.

Q. Earlier on at the Inquest we heard from a lady who
   was close to the point where you had come out from
   Fox Hill on to Halifax Road. She has got a sandwich
   shop close to the junction with Halifax Road and
   Penistone Road. This is how she described it at
   2.45:
                                                              28




                                                       S. A. BERRY .


      "About 2.45 another group running past. There were
      lots in this running group. There were hundreds.
B     They were rushing though they were not all in one
      group."

      A. There was nobody rushing or running when we were
      there, nobody at all.

    Q. She described the people she saw in this way:

       "They were drunk, very boisterous, although we are
       used to this, and some being a little bit rude."

      A . I didn't see anybody to my knowledge who was
      drunk, being boisterous or anything like that.   It
      was a well disciplined crowd so far as I was
      concerned. They were making their way steadily down
      to the Leppings Lane end. There were a lot of
      people.   It was just the pure size of the crowd that
      made it uneasy but there wasn't drunken people
D     rolling about, running or causing mayhem at all.

    Q. They filled the whole road, the pavement and the road
       itself, did they not? - A. From that junction, yes,
       but towards that junction there were people like
       sitting around. There were a lot of people just
       sitting there and doing nothing really, just sitting
       on the fences down the actual lane.

    Q. Perhaps they were people who did not have any tickets
       and, therefore, did not go down? - A. I can't say
       that.

    Q. Another witness described 2.45 at No. 17 Leppings
       Lane in this way:

       "By 2.45 people were still flocking in whereas the
       roadway is usually quiet by that time."

       A. I couldn't say that because by 2.45 I would be up
       at the turnstiles.

    Q. You would have been up at the turnstiles? - A. Yes, I
       must have been, yes.

    Q. You were not the very last person to be in the crowd
       with the crowd continuing to swell at the rear of
       you? - A. No.

    Q. You were the very tail end Charlie of the crowd.
       There was nobody behind you? - A. Oh no, sorry.




H
                                                                29




                                                      S. A. BERRY -


      There were people behind us - As I say , we were in
      the middle of a steady flow of people.
B
    Q. There was a security guard who was helping to man one
       of those gates. He was wearing a light blue uniform.
       Do you recall seeing him? - A. No.

    Q. He described being the other side of the gate, in
       other words, the inside of the gate with the gate
       closed and the crowd outside. He described himself
       as being scared. Can you understand that comment in
       the light of what you have said about the crowd? - A .
       Scared of what?
    Q. Scared about the crowd on the other side of the gate,
       the way in which either they were behaving,
       intimidating? - A. I mean I was part of that crowd
       and there was no way that — I felt that the crowd, it
       was just the sheer number of people. That is all it
       was. There was no violence shown. Obviously there
D      was concern because, as I say, it was about ten to
       three and people weren't actually into the ground yet
       but that is all. There was nobody starting to cause
       trouble or anything like that.

    Q. Did you see a Police Land Rover outside the gates? -
       A. I couldn't say I saw it. No, X couldn't say.

    Q. Did you hear any announcements outside the gates?
       A. No, none at all.
    Q. Did you see a Sergeant with a hand-held megaphone or
       microphone outside the gates? - A. No.

    Q. But there was a mounted Officer trying to calm things
       down? - A. He wasn’t trying. He was there on his
       horse. He wasn't being aggressive or anything but he
       was like still joking with the crowd and so on and
       the crowd were joking back with him. So he wasn't
       under any pressure at all. He was just like, you
       know, "Everybody get in an orderly line. You will
       get through there eventually".

    Q. The note I made, Mr. Berry, when you were answering
       the Coroner is that there was a mounted Officer
       saying, "If we didn't stop pushing we wouldn't get
       in'1? - A. He said, "Get into an orderly line".

    Q. "Calm down"? - A. Yes, but he wasn't actually being
       aggressive about it because he was joking with us.
Q. I am not suggesting he was being aggressive but he
   was trying in what you describe as a jocular or
   jovial way to get the best out of people, not to
   antagonise or be aggressive but to jovially try and
   make them see sense, calm down and not push because
   that was going to make it worse for getting in? - A.
   It is the same any Saturday afternoon at a match.

Q. Yes, but these mounted Officers are normally very
   skilful? - A. That is what their job is to do, yes.

Q. Notwithstanding the efforts of that Officer, the
   crowd made up its mind that they were going to push
   through the gate? - A. I wouldn't like to say, no.
   My aim was just to wait until I had got in or to see
   somebody if I could get in with the tickets I had.
   My aim was not to push that Policeman on the gate.

Q. You were in the middle of it. Somebody had made the
   comment in front of you and others pushed behind you?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Whether it was the former or the latter the fact of
   the matter was that against the wishes of the
   Officers, namely the one on the gate and the one on
   the horse, even in your own mind it might have caused
   mayhem if people had broken through in large n u m b e r s
   through that gate, that crowd had made up its mind
   what it was going to do? - A. No.  Individuals made
   up their mind what they were going to do. The crowd
   had no choice. The people in front of us, the people
   who shouted, surged, and I mean I couldn't turn round
   and say, "Stop pushing”. One person against the
   whole crowd, I had no choice. Those people at the
   back, as is obviously the case, who wanted to get in
   they knew they were at the back and knew they weren't
   going to get caught by the Police, just surged
   forward* With me being in the front I was like
   pushed against the gate and the gate opened a few
   feet and we got pushed in.

Q. Of course, every individual has their own mind and
   their own brain? - A. Yes, but when there is that
   amount of people pushing I had no choice.

Q. But equally .....

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Manning, I think you and the
witness are at cross purposes because I think what you are
putting to the witness is that the crowd did this and that
and what the witness is saying is that certain individuals
n

                                                               31




                                                         S. A. BERRY


        within that crowd did certain things. He is distinguishing
        between a group and thousands. He is not saying every
        single individual because he excludes himself.  That is the
    B   point. Perhaps i you rephrased the question you might get
        on the same wave length, that is my impression.

             MR. MANNING:   I was not going back there, sir.  I had
        developed that point, thank you very much, and I was on to
        the point which hopefully is the last point.

        Q. In the same way that it seems that individuals made a
           decision and other people were caught up, so it
           seemed so far as you and your friend are concerned,
           that having intended to go down to the ground at
           about 1.30 or two o'clock time you got caught up with
           people in the public house and because they did not
           seem to see the necessity to go down to the ground
           early for whatever reason you did not go down to the
           ground at the time that you had intended to either? —
           A. I couldn't say we got caught up with the people in
           the public house. We were there with people who we
    D      knew, or who Martin knew, and I mean with us living
           in Nottinghamshire and them coming from Liverpool,
           not seeing them for some time, they would be talking.
           I was sort of like sitting with them talking about
           things that happened and then everyone left at the
           same time and made our way down to the ground.

        Q. Was it a surprise to you just how many people had
           apparently left it fairly late to get down there? -
           A. Not necessarily.  I have left it until five
           minutes before the match starts because sometimes the
           later you leave the better it is because you can just
           walk straight in. A lot of the crowd will be there
           at 1.30 to two o'clock.

                        Cross-Examined bv MR. KING:

        Q. Mr. Berry, might I just explore with you a little
           more about crowd behaviour from your experience and
           your experience on the day. Have you been in crowds
           before? - A. I have, yes.

        Q. You used the words, "The crowd had no choice" looking
           at it as a whole, did you not? Looking at a large
           group of people, "The crowd had no choice"? - A. That
           is correct, yes.

        Q. You yourself gave evidence and you did not
           deliberately push into the ground, that is right, is
           it not? - A. Yes.




    H
But you found yourself going through the perimeter
gates? - A. In what way do you mean? Where the
Policeman was?

Yes, where the Policeman was? — A. Because I had no
choice.  It was like the pure pressure of the crowd
pushing through.
So within any given crowd you obviously could have
individuals who were making determined efforts to
push? - A. Yes.
Within that same crowd you could have an equal
number, if not more, who did not want to push? — A.
Who did not want to push, yes.

But who were just caught up in it? - A. As I was,
yes.
Looking at the situation outside the Leppings_Lane
turnstiles at the time you were there, which is
shortly before kick-off, was it not? - A. That is
correct, yes.
Could you give an estimate of how many people it
seemed to you were outside the whole area from the
turnstiles back into Leppings Lane? I do not want
you to put a precise figure on it. Was it hundreds
or thousands in your eyes? - A. It would have been
thousands.  It wouldn't have been hundreds.

It would have been thousands? - A. Yes.

Within those thousands of people you are going to
have some people who are frustrated because they are
going to miss the kick-off? - A. That is correct,
yes.
You are going to have some people who are panicking
because of the pressure of the people around them? -
A. I wouldn't know.  I wouldn't like to say.

So be it. You gave an example of a Police horse
being lifted up off the ground almost? - A. It was
like the Police horse was moved by the crowd, yes.

I do not suppose it was your impression that the
crowd deliberately tried to get hold of the Police
horse? - A. No, I don't think so, no.
                                                  S. A. BERRY


Q. Was it was the pressure of the people around the
   horse which seemed to be lifting it? - A. That is the
   only thing it could be really. The Police horse
   wouldn't jump up by itself.

Q. You could have people who deliberately and
   maliciously tried to lift the Police horse or you ^
   could have the mass, the swell, of people around it
   and the pressure giving that result? — A. The people
   who were actually inside, the other side of that
   gate, they were the sort of people who weren't
   vindictive or anything like that. They were waiting
   to see the match. They were not there to cause
   trouble. They weren't there to misbehave or anything
   so far as I could see anyway.

Q. The scene is that you have   these thousands of people
   all trying to get into the   ground very shortly before
   kick-off? - A. Not where X   was though. The year
   before there was thousands   but after the next stage
   there was not, when we got   through the gate with the
   Police.
Q. I understand that. When you got through the gate you
   then joined the queue? - A. Yes.
Q. The gates behind you were shut? - A. I assume so,
   yes.
Q. That was your evidence? -* A. Because I didn't see
   them open and I didn’t bother looking round behind me
   but, as I say, I wouldn't say it was the surge of the
   crowd behind me.

Q. You were not conscious of a whole surge of people
   coming through? - A. No.

Q. However, you were then conscious of a flow of people
   ahead of you being allowed into the ground through
   the concertina gate? - A. Through the concertina
   gate.
Q. Somebody clearly had   opened the concertina gate to
   allow the people who   were in your part of the
   turnstile area, that   is ahead of the perimeter gates
   where you were, into   the ground? - A. Could you say
   that again please?
Q. The gates behind you were opened and you got in? ~ A.
   Yes.
                                                 S. A. BERRY


As far as you were aware not many more people joined
you? - A. Yes. There was only like a handful of
people got through.

Ahead of you were people at the turnstiles? - A. Who
for some reason had got through-  I don't know how
they got through but there were some people ahead Of
us, yes.

Those people were the people who were able to get
through the concertina gate when it was opened? - A.
Yes. We followed the steady flow of people going
round.

The concertina gate was opened, it would appear, to
relieve the pressure of the people at the turnstiles.
That would be logical, would it not from what you
could? - A- I wouldn't like to say-  I suppose-   I
wouldn't know.




                       / Q . Maybe I am wrong.
                                            S . A . BERRY




Maybe I am wrong.  I don't want to put words into your
mouth. Could you see - perhaps you didn't and if the
answer is, there is no answer, say so - could you see
any reason yourself from that scene, when you were
looking ahead, for the opening up of that concertina
gate? - A. No.

You couldn't see any reason for that? - A. No, because
there wasn't the number of people in front of the
turnstiles.  I have been at turnstiles before with just
as many people and there has been a steady flow into
the ground.

1 see.  I am just now trying to pinpoint the time,
therefore, when you went through that concertina gate,
and the time we are talking about and the scene you are
talking about. We know - and I think the learned
Coroner will put me right if I am misleading you in any
way - that the first opening of the gate was 14.48.

    THE CORONER:   The first significant opening, yes.

     MR. KING:   Not many people went through but a few
people went through? - A. We went through that gate, we
went straight into the tunnel and straight onto the
terrace and the match was being played, so it must have
been about l-minute-past-3, 2-minutes-past-3.

We know there was a time - I will see if I can help you
a bit more - we know there was a time after 14.48 when
the gate was opened again, and that was just after
10-to. - A. So you are saying the gate was shut then,
was it?

Yes, and then at about 8-minutes-to-3 we know that it
was opened again for about five minutes.  It doesn't
seem as if you went through then, by the sound of it,
and we know that many, many people went through in that
five minutes. - A. I couldn't tell you, because as I
say, we must have gone through about 2-minutes-past-3,
2 minutes or l-minute-past-3, because by the time we
went straight out of the tunnel the match was in
progression.

So it looks as if you on your evidence, and the scene
you are painting was almost at 3 o'clock itself? - A.
It must have been for me to get through, yes.

The impression you had when you went through was that
there were many thousands of people still behind you?
That is what you said to Mr. Payne. - A. I didn't look
round. There must have been for us to get through all
those people to start with, and they weren't in front
of me when we went into the ground.
                                               S , A . BERRY




When you went onto the terraces through the tunnel you
saw the state of the terrace as you got through the
tunnel, didn't you? - A. Yes.

If I had said to you, "I am going to introduce another
1,000 people onto that terrace", what would you have
said? Could it have taken them? - A. No.

You say that you were able to move down to your left? -
A. Yes.
But you didn't stop.  I think you said you moved down
without stopping? - A. We were trying to aim away to
the near front.

As you were moving down could you tell us how packed it
was? - A. How long is a piece of string?  I mean, I
can't say how packed it was. There was people in
there, shoulder to shoulder.  It wasn't uncomfortably
packed until the surge came from behind us.

        MR. RUSSELL:   I didn't hear that last answer.

     THE CORONER:   It was not uncomfortably^packed
until the surge, I think you said, is that right? - A.
Yes, that is correct.

     MR. KING:   I will just explore that with you
because you are a man who has been to many football
matches and you might be able to find something is
comfortable which someone else might find
uncomfortable. You say people were shoulder to
shoulder? - A. Yes.

And how much room was there between the rows of people,
that is to say, shoulder to shoulder and what about the
man in front? - A. The same again, chest to chest.

Chest to chest? - A. Back to back, whatever.

So people were back to back, chest to chest and
shoulder to shoulder? - A. Yes.

        THE CORONER:     Ithink we had better say chest   to
back:

That is what you meant, isn't it? - A. Yes.

     MR. KING:    So this is what you described, and I
am not criticising you because you are a man who has
been to many football matches, but this is what you
regard as not uncomfortable, as position of shoulder to
shoulder with the    mannext to you, chest to back to the
man in front, andback to chest to the man behind? - A.
                                              S . A . BERRY




Yes, not so close that you can't --- I mean, that is
why you stand because you are all stood together, but I
could have stood it for the whole match, yes. There
would have been no problem at all.

The reason I ask that is clearly if it was like that
when you entered, if 1,000 people were introduced into
that situation, well, it would be, to put it bluntly,
disastrous, wouldn't it? Where were they going to go?
- A. Precisely, yes. There was nowhere for them to go.
There was no more room in there for 1,000 people.

Indeed, you yourself couldn't move far over to the far
terraces to the left, could you, because there was a
radial fence which was all the way down the terracing?

     THE CORONER:   You had better check whether he
knew that, because I h a v e n ' t asked him.

      THE WITNESS:I did know that, yes.

      THE CORONER:    You did know it? - A. Yes.

      MR. KING:   I am sorry, sir, I should have done it
in   stages.  I wonder if we could have the acetate back
up   where he marked where he was, sir.

      THE CORONER:   Yes.
     MR. KING:   Let me go in stages.  Had you yourself
been at the semi-final the year before on these
terraces? - A. Sorry?

You went to the semi-final in 1988, didn't you? - A.
Yes.

Where did you stand or sit on that occasion? - A. In
the Spion Kop.

So you hadn't been to the Leppings Lane end before? -
A. No.

Before you went down the tunnel did you know that the
terrace was divided into pens or cages, as one person
has described them? - A. No.

So you didn't know when you came out of the tunnel that
you wouldn't be able to move over to your left, as far
over as you wanted to? You wouldn't know that when you
came through the tunnel? - A. I didn't know the
formation of the ground at all.

When you get to the point you have marked on the
acetate, you are looking out onto the pitch, clearly to
                                            S . A . BERRY




your left is a radial fence? - A. There is a fence,
yes.

Which I think Sergeant Griffiths can show us.   It runs
all the way along, doesn't it? - A. Yes.

That stops you going any further? - A. It is like a
divider, yes.

So there was no escape for you to go sideways when this
great surge of people came from behind? ~ A. That is
correct.
Can I just go to ask you one or two matters at the very
beginning of your evidence. When you were walking down
to the ground, before you got to the roundabout, when
you say there were Policemen who just let you through,
you say you were walking down with the rest of the
fans? - A. Yes.

The picture I have is of a lot of people, but just
walking to the ground in a normal way, would that be
fair? - A. Yes, because on Leppings Lane, the actual
lane itself, you can't see down to the bottom. You can
see the crowd at the bottom when you walk down, but
people were just steadily walking because we assumed
they were people queueing up to get in.

Yes, and   you didn't say to yourself whenyou were
within that crowd thoughts along the lines of, "My
gosh, everyone around me is very badly affected by
drink"? That wasn't the impression you got, was it? -
A. No.

Obviously we are talking about impressions and talking
about feelings, but the feeling you had was the feeling
of what a normal, happy crowd, going to a semi-final? -
A. Yes.

In 1988 how many Police Officers had formed this circle
to check your tickets?

     MR. PAYNE:    What time? If my friend is going to
ask that  question he should put the time that he is
asking the witness about.

     THE CORONER;   I am sure he will do.   Carry on,
Mr. King.

     MR. KING:   In 1988 when you told us that there
were Police Officers who were checking for tickets -
you remember that? - A. Yes.
                                            S . A . BERRY




You told us where they were. Can you remember how many
there were? - A. No, I couldn’t. You don't say, "Look
at those Policemen".

No. In 1989, at the time - for the benefit of my
learned friend I will ask you again - at the time you
were going to the ground in 1989, that was about 2.30,
is that right? - A. It would have been a bit after
2.30.

A bit after 2.30? - A. I couldn't say. There is that
many times going about, I can't remember which one is
which.

That is all right, and the previous year you had been
about an hour earlier, as I remember? - A. That is
correct, yes.

Let me just talk about 1989 for the moment. The Police
Officers you saw in 1989, what exactly were they doing
as you went past them? Anything, or just standing and
watching? - A. I assume they were. To my knowledge
they weren't doing anything. They didn't stop us.    I
thought they were iust looking for people causing
trouble.   I wouldn t like to say, but I know when I
walked through them they didn’t stop us or anything
like that.

I was interested in your word, "I walked through them".
- A. Yes.

As if they were in some way blocking your path and you
had to make your way through them? - A. No, they were
just standing in the middle of the road. You would
perhaps get a couple and you just walked straight
through them. I wouldn't say I walked through them as
in barged past them.

No, but I have forgotten your evidence, are you saying
there were just two Officers? - A. No, that is just an
example. Two Officers standing there and you just
walked straight through them.

I understand that, but in 1989 how many Officers were
there? - A. I couldn't say.  I honestly couldn't say.
I know, obviously because I walked past one of them,
but I couldn't say.

Are you talking about more than two? - A. I couldn’t
say.

The only reason I want to investigate it slightly is
you talk about walking through, you see, and if there
are only two Officers presumably you wouldn't have to
                                            S . A . BERRY




go particularly through them at all? - A. There were
two but I wouldn't say there were more than two. I
couldn't say how many there were dead on.

Are you actually saying you walked through the middle
of them? -

     THE CORONER:   Isn't he trying to say he walked
between them?

     THE WITNESS:   Between them then, yes, if you want
to ••••

     MR. KING:   And everybody else was coming through
at the same time? - A. Yes.

You may not have noticed this, so please say yes or no,
did you notice whether any of those Officers had
radios? - A. No, I couldn't tell you.

     THE CORONER:    You didn't notice or it didn't
happen? - A. I don't know whether they had them or not.
You can usually hear them if you are walking past, but
I couldn't tell you.

     MR. KING:   And here you are, this large group of
people entering Leppings Lane? * A. Yes.

You are going along Leppings Lane, the picture I have
is you are not able to see what is about to greet you
when you get to the turnstile area until you get to
that road on the left close to the turnstiles? - A. You
can see a crowd but you don't realise - I mean, you are
just seeing the crowd that is moving into the ground.

Yes, you don't become conscious of what is happening? -
A. Until you actually get there, that the crowd is
actually stopping, full stop.

Indeed, if we look at Leppings Lane, there is in fact a
turn at the end of the lane which causes you to turn
into the entrance, isn't there? It is not a straight
road to the entrance, you have got to turn at the end?
- A. Yes, you can't actually see all the way down
Leppings Lane.

As you were walking down Leppings Lane, before you come
to the turn, did you pass any Police Officers in
Leppings Lane? - A. I don't know.  I couldn't tell you.

It looks as if you didn't notice any. - A. I wasn't
looking out for any ....
                                             S . A - BERRY




It didn't go into your head that they were there? - A .
No.

The crowd which was with you along Leppings Lane was
just a steady flow? - A. That is all it was, yes.

And this steady flow was getting closer and closer and
closer to this great mass of people who were about to
greet you at the end? - A. We were getting closer and
closer.  I don't know about the rest of the crowd,
whether they were stopping or whatever, but we were,
certainly the two of us were walking towards the
ground.

With everybody around you? - A. With the flow, yes.

It wasn't that you were all charging down the road in a
mad rush? - A. No, no way, it was not.

I want to get the scene clear.  It is just a large
group of supporters flowing down Leppings Lane towards
the end? - A. That is correct, yes.

Then when you got to the end there as the mass of
people ahead of you? - A. Yes.

Thank you very much.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Berry, do you agree that even if fans arrived later
in 1989 than in 1988, you would still expect checks to
be made on them for tickets, missiles, alcohol and the
like, before they reached the ground? - A. Could you
say that last bit again?

Would you still expect someone to check the fans who
were arriving for things like tickets, to make sure
they had the right tickets for the match; for alcohol,
they are not allowed to take alcohol into the ground.
Would you expect somebody to be there stopping them at
some point? - A. It depends what sort of match it is.
If it is a big match and there is Police there, but the
smaller the match - it depends what sort of teams they
are, what sort of reputation the teams have got, but
yes, I agree with what you said. Obviously it depends
on what sort of match it is.

I am saying would you normally expect to have a ticket
or pay to go into the match? Would you normally, in
simple terms? - A. Yes.

Would you agree that fans would have been slowed down
higher up the road, if there would have been checks
                                            S . A . BERRY




tfiade, and that would have reduced the numbers of fans
making their way to the entrance? If fans would have
been filtered out, the ones who hadn’t got tickets, or
ones who were obviously drunk, then that would have had
the effect of reducing the numbers who were going down
towards the entrance? - A. I wouldn't like to say.    I
would assume so, yes, because the Police would stop
them there and filter them through, but I wouldn't like
to say.

It seemed from what you were saying that the greatest
problem that day were the numbers, not the behaviour of
the numbers? - A. That is correct, yes.

Would you say that the organisation in 1989 was
completely different to what you saw in 1988? Whether
there was a vast, or quite a difference?

     THE CORONER:   Be careful there, Mrs. McBrien,
because we are talking about different times. He has a
very difficult problem to answer that because you are
asking him to compare organisation, whatever that might
have been, at half-past-1, or 1 to half-past*! in '88,
with organisation between 2.30 and quarter-to-3. For
all you know, and indeed for all I know, in 1988 it was
exactly the same at quarter-to-3 as it was this year,
so the witness is in a difficulty.  You can ask him
whether he noticed a difference in the organisation but
you can't actually ask him whether there was a
difference.  Do you see what I mean? I am not trying
to be difficult but he can't give you an intelligent
answer, in my opinion, to that question.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Did you think it looked impossible
for the crowds outside to get in by 3 p.m., taking into
account the numbers that were outside? Did you think
they could all get in by that time? - A. No.

Do you think anyone would have been pushing if an
announcement had been made that the game had been
delayed? - A. I couldn't say.

Thank you, Mr. Berry.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, before I ask this witness any
questions, can I please enquire as to whether the Jury
went to the Fox?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, we entered no pubs, but we
drove past so they know where it is and they probably
knew it anyway, but we definitely slowed down as we
drove past it.
1
                                                                  43


                                                         S . A . BERRY




               MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I wasn't suggesting that the
          Jury were on a pub crawl!
    B                 Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

        Q. Mr. Berry, you have reminded us that it was a lovely
           sunny, spring day this Saturday, wasn't it? - A. It
           was, yes.
        Q. And your trip to the Fox was not the first time that
           you had been there, was it? - A. I had never been to
           the Fox before, no.

        Q. You hadn't? - A. No.

        Q. But you parked near the Fox because your friend knew
           where to go? - A. Yes, that's correct.

        Q. The Fox, perhaps you can remember this, has a large
           tarmac car park in front of it, hasn't it? - A. That is
    D      correct, yes.
        Q. And it has a large banked grassed area behind and to
           the side of it? - A. I couldn't tell you that.^ I
           walked straight through the door and that was it. I
           didn't go outside at all, round the back or round the
           sides.
        Q. As I understand your evidence you can't remember how
           many people were outside? - A. No.

        Q. But you can remember it being packed inside? - A. It
           was packed and busy inside, it was, yes.




                          /Q. The timing of your visit




    H
                                                                 44



                                               S.A. BERRY



Q. The'timing of your visit, you told us you arrived at Sheffield
   at 12 to 12.30 and parked your car at or near the Fox. Does
   that mean that was about your time of arrival at the Fox
   itself? - A. Yes.

Q. You in fact left, you feel, at about 2.30? - A. That is
   correct, yes.

Q. And you had thought before you arrived at the Fox that you
   would have left at about 1.30? - A. No, I would not say that.
   I would not say we though.  We did not lay a time down when we
   were going to leave or anything, no.

Q. But you stayed at   the   Fox   longer, you told us, than you would
   have done had you   not   met   some friends? - A. That is correct,
   yes.  I would not   say   the   friends were the reason why we
   stopped.  I would   not   say   that.

Q. It would be fair to say, would not it, that there was a good
   party at the Fox? - A. What do you mean by "party"?

Q. I am not suggesting anyone had issued invitations, but thfere
   was a gathering of people at the Fox and there was a party
   atmosphere? - A. There was a party atmosphere, yes.

Q.   Would it be fair to say that the prospect of a Semi-Final:and
     possibly a trip to Wembley had led to high and perhaps
     boisterous spirits for people at that pub? - A. There
     were people singing and laughing and joking, but I
     would not say boisterous.

Q. Would it be fair to say that there was a certain impetus to
   the party mood of the pub, from the pub to the ground and it
   was, to be hoped, on to Wembley? - A. Yes.

Q. Now, you have not measured how far it is from the Fox to the
   ground, have you? - A . N o .

Q.   Would it be fair to say it is perhaps a little in excess of
     one mile? - A. I could not say.  I can’t remember.  I can’t
     remember the distance.

Q. But in any event, for you it was a IS to 20 minute walk? - A.
   It was about that, yes.  I can't even remember going past the
   roundabout that is on the m a p . I can’t remember the
   roundabouts.

Q. I am not tying you down precisely.  A 15 to 20 minute walk? -
   A. It was about that, yes, IS minutes, 20 minutes.

Q. And as you went down Leppings Lane you could see some way
   ahead that there was a throng of people outside the perimeter
   gates, could not you? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. In fact, if you look at the map, which is C.284, if you look
   up Leppings Lane towards the roundabout we can see three roads
                                                               45

                                               S .A ■ BERRY


         off to the right, Vere Road, Fielding Road and Bickerton Road,
         and'it is right that from at or even just before Bickerton
         Road you could have seen the gates ahead of you? - A. You
         could have seen the gates ahead of you if there were no people
         there, like a normal afternoon, but with all those people
         there....

    Q. You could certainly see where the gates would be but for the
       people.  You could see the mass of people from that far back?
       - A. You could do, yes.

    Q. Could you turn back a few exhibits to C.255, the aerial
       photograph you asked to look at. Do you have that? - A. I do ,
       yes.

    Q. You can see the Leppings Lane entrance in that photograph, and
       we can see two of the three roads off to the left coming back
       towards yourself at the bottom of the photograph;   first of
       all, Vere Road off to the left.   I tell you it is Vere Road by
       reference to the map.   It is the first one one can see coming
       away from the ground.   Then Fielding Road, the next one back.
       - A . I can see that, yes.
D   Q. And then one can see a little of Bickerton Road cutting off
       the corner of the photograph? - A . That is correct.

    Q. And if one extends Bickerton Road and imagines where it would
       meet the Leppings Lane, that is the sort of distance of vision
       that you had down to the scene outside the the perimeterjgate,
       was not it? - A. That is right, yes.

    Q. My learned friend, Mr. King, referred to there being a "Turn
       left” off Leppings Lane. Now, while in Highway Code terms
       that might be correct, in terms of a line of vision it is
       straight on, effectively, is not it? It is the road that goes
       round to the right.   If you have not got any steering on your
       car and you are going down Leppings Lane you would go straight
       into the area outside the gate, would not you? - A. That is
       correct, yes.

    Q. As you walked down Leppings Lane you approached the back of
       the crowd, the mass of people you described outside the gates,
       which I believe you described as going back to the first road.
       Is that right? - A. Looking at it from this map here I would
       not say it was as far as the first road, no.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   You would not? - A. No, not looking at the
         area here.  It is difficult looking on the actual map.

              THE CORONER    He did say that, but he is revising his
         answer.

              THE WITNESS:   I did actually say that, yes, but when you
         are looking at the actual street map the distance does not
         seem so far, but when you see the aerial view I would not say
         it was as far as that.



H
VM




                                                     S.A. BERRY


         3.        MR. RUSSELL:   But there was a throng of people that I -
              think you have measured in thousands rather than hundreds? -
              A. There was a lot of people there, yes, that is correct.

          . All of them keen to get in to see the start of the match? - A.
     B      Yes.

         Q. And as far as you knew, some with and some without tickets? -
            A. Yes, yes, that is true.

         Q.   When you first joined that throng of people you joined it at
              the back? - A. No, as I said, I just walked straight through
              because we just like carried on walking.   There was not a
              tight throng of people. We walked straight towards the ®ate
              to see if we could find someone to let us in.

         Q.   Let us clarify this.  There was a throng of people outside the
              gates all keen to see the start of the match? - A. That is
              correct, yes.

         Q. You were able to walk through that throng of people? - A. As I
            was on the terrace, same as on the terrace when we were on
            there.  There was a pack of people, but you could still fteedle
     D      your way through.

         Q.   I would like to deal with outside theperimeter gates at the
              moment. - A. Yes, but the similarity is the same.   There was a
              lot of people there.

         Q.   You were able to easeyour way to the   front of thecrowd? - A.
              There was no problem at all, yes.

         Q. Is that a verb you would use? - A. Yes.

         Q. You were able to ease your way through the crowd outside the
            perimeter gates to a position about three or four people away
            from the gates? - A. That is right, yes.

         Q. Can I now move on to when you got through the concertina gate
            and went down the tunnel and arrived on the terracing.  First
            of all, you described the terracing, or the effect of your
            evidence is when you arrived on the terracing it was as
            normal.  Did you make a reference to Manchester United at that
            stage? Is that from ypur experience of standing on terracing
            at Old Trafford? - A. I did not make a reference to Manchester
            United.

                   THE CORONER:   Does anybody else remember a reference to
              Manchester? I think you must have misheard.    It is very
              difficult, and it is not a criticism of you.I don't remember
              a reference to Manchester United except mine right at the
              beginning.

         Q.        MR. RUSSELL:   I apologise, Mr. Berry, but from what do
              you derive your experience of what is normal on a crowded
              terrace, going to which grounds? - A. From grounds and pop
              concerts and anything like that.


     H
                                                              47

                                               S. A. BERRY



    Q. I know you tried to give me this evidence a few moments ago,
       but the state of that terracing was sufficient for you to be
       able to ease your way through, and I use that word again? - A.
       Yes.
B
    Q. And you knew where you wanted to go, which was down to the
       front? - A. Yes.

    Q. And you were able to do that? - A. With causing any problems,
       yes.

    Q. And by easing your way I understand your evidence to be saying
       that you were going between people to get to the front. You
       were not pushing all before you like a steam roller? - A. That
       is right, yes.

                         Further bv THE CORONER:

    Q. I want to ask one other question which has occurred to me.
       You know you mentioned, going back to 1988, and this is really
       the end, you were, I think, on the Spion Kop.  Is that right -
       that year? - A. That is the opposite end.  That is correct,
       yes.

    Q. Which turnstile did you go through? - A. I can't remember.

    Q. Did you go through the Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A. No.

    Q. There are some other turnstiles? - A. Yes.

    Q. Definitely not Leppings Lane,   Is that right? - A. I am
       absolutely positive.

    Q. This is the bit that puzzles me. How is it you were able to
       describe the cordon across Leppings Lane? - A. The one at the
       top of Leppings Lane.  If you see the map....

    Q. You were describing a cordon in Leppings Lane.  Put up the
       map, 284. - A. It is before me.  Is it Penistone Road?

    Q. Yes. - A. I was on about the top there near to the top of the
       roundabout going down towards Leppings Lane stand. We walked
       down Penistone Road, that way.

    Q. Last year you walked down Penistone Road and you looked
       towards Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.

    Q. So you did not actually go through a cordon in Leppings Lane
       and were stopped and searched? - A. No.

    Q, Or whatever they were doing? - A. No.

    Q. Is it right, and this is an important point so think hard
       before you answer, are you drawing a deduction from what you
       remember of 1988, or are you saying,  "I saw the tickets being
       checked", because on the map it looks as if it is inches

H
                                      S.A. BERRY


away, but in real life that is a big roundabout? - A. It is,"
yes.

I want you to tell me what you remember you actually saw in
1988 at that point where you described - I have forgotten the
word you used; we will use the word ’’cordon of Officers” -
who you said were checking tickets, etc? - A. That is correct,
yes.

Did you see them with your own eyes? - A. I did see them with
my own eyes, y e s .
     THE CORONER:   Anything else arising out of that?   Thank
you, Mr. Berry.

     Ladies and gentlemen, we are rising for quarter-of— an-
hour and then we are having another witness who I think will
be brief, and then a third one this afternoon.  If I let the
Jury go out and have a quick word with you, gentlemen.   Make
it 20 minutes, because I want to say one minor thing.

                    (The Jury left Court)

     THE CORONER:   May I have a quick word.  It is not
controversial.  It is about the witnesses. You remember I
said to you at some point if there was anybody else whom you
wanted me to consider please do so, and I also said, please
let me know as soon as possible.  I repeat that, and I add a
further point, and that is I am going to make a cut off point
on 19th December.  In other words, when we rise at this
session. After that it would have to be a most exceptional
thing for me to consider, because I have got to draw the line
somewhere.

      The second thing I want to say is that one of the
witnesses, you will see the list which we gave you we are
already putting people in, and this is partly because I am
inserting people who have been requested to call. It does not
follow I will call everybody whom I am asked to consider, but
on the other hand where I feel I can possibly oblige, if that
is the right word, then I am doing it. That is the reason for
that.   I would be most grateful if the sooner you draw names
to my attention the easier it is for me, and in time to assess
them and to sort them into order.   Now we can break.

                     (Short Adjournment)
                         J. A. MeGAULEY


           JAMES ALAN McGAULEY Affirmed

                  By THE CORONER

Good morning. You are Alan James McGauley, is that
right? - A. James Alan McGauley.

I beg your pardon. You live at      Wadsley Lane,
Sheffield, is that right? - A. Yes.

It happens that you are a Planning Officer, is that
right? - A. Yes.

By chance you are in this building and we did not
discover that until this morning actually, but thank
you very much for coming at very short notice.  I very
much appreciate it. Wadsley Lane we have already
heard about.  Perhaps we could have 284 the plan up.
What I want is for you to show me on the plan how high
or how far down Wadsley Lane you live. - A. Do you
want me to go across to the plan?

Yes, it is probably easier if you do that and   just
point to it. - A. About here.

So you are near the  junction with MiddlewoodRoad, is
that right? - A. Very close.

Okay. Come back. You are not a football supporter,
certainly not a Liverpool or Nottingham Forest
supporter? - A.  No, I am not a supporter of either
team.

You are not a supporter? - A.   No.

You have lived at this place about 2 \ years now, 3
years? - A. Yes.

So you were definitely living there in 1989? - A.
Yes, I was.

Were you living there in 1938, as a matter of
interest? - A. Yes.

On 15th April 1989 you were at home, I think, is that
right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

I think you have got a child, have you not, a little
boy, was it? - A. Yes, a little boy.

And you were at   home with him? - A.   That is right.

Were you in the front room, the back room, the
kitchen, or where were you? The time I am thinking
                         J.    A.   McGAULEY


about is between, say, 12 and 3, that is the period? -
A. From about quarter-past 1 onwards I was at the
front of the house.

Quarter-past 1? - A. Yes, I actually came back from
Sheffield City centre at about quarter-past 1.

How did you come back?   Were you on a bus? - A.         I
came back by taxi.

Did the taxi bring you down Middlewood Road? - A. No,
it went across Walkley and round the back onto the
Rivelin Valley and around.

I see. So you missed that area? - A.           I missed the
congestion, yes.

Is it because there was congestion, or you assumed
there would be? - A. The taxi driver assumed
congestion.

You never saw it? - A.   No.

Because you missed it? - A,     Yes.

So you actually came to your house from the opposite
end of Wadsley Lane driving down -— ? - A. Down into
the Rivelin Valley and around.

You went into your house and you were in thefront.
Did you observe the road at all? - A. Yes.

We will take it in stages.  Did you say quarter-past
1? - A. Quarter-past to half-past 1.

Between quarter-past and half-past. Let us take that
time: what was it like? - A. The road on football
matches is normally quite busy.    It is congested with
traffic, people are parked on either side of the road.
Indeed, when I came down the taxi had to stop in the
middle and allox-7 me to get out, get the pram out and
get my boy out to go across to the house. There are
normally people walking down at that sort of time
anyway, and certainly on that day there were people
walking down.

Walking down towards Leppings Lane? - A.         Towards
Leppings Lane, yes.

Are you saying then that at quarter-past 1 to half­
past 1 people were walking towards the ground? - A.
Yes, certainly.
                                                                   51


                                     J.    A.    McGAULEY



    Q.   'Were they in large numbers, small numbers? I am not
          trying to pin you at if it was 53, or anything like
          that.  I just want to have a rough idea. - A. There^
          was a steady flow from about half—past onwards, whica
B         then obviously built up over the next half-hour,
          three-quarters of an hour.

    Q.   So you are saying that between half-past 1 and 2
         o'clock there was a steady flow which actually
         increased? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Down towards Leppings Lane? - A.           Yes, down towards
         Leppings Lane.

    Q.   Did it then tail off, or what? - A. Actually, the
         reason that I remember the incident is that my small
         boy very often looks out of the window wnen tnere are
         large crowds going past. He was at that sort of age
         at that time, and he would stand up on the
         windowledge, or be held up by myself, and wave at
         people because he was just under 2 at that time, and
         they would wave back. We probably stood there, off
D        and on, for half-an-hour, 45 minutes, waving at
         people, and it is a way to get him entertained before
         he has his afternoon sleep.

    Q.    It makes him happy? - A.        Yes.

    Q.    So that is why you actually remember it because he was
          looking at the people waving, and you were looking
          after him? - A. Yes, that is right.

    Q.    Does that mean then that at about quarter-past 2 you
          stopped looking out? - A. No, it was actually
          slightly later than that.  I think I was doing a few
          things in the house and then I put him to bed around
          10-to to quarter-to 3, something like that, for his
          afternoon sleep.
          What I am trying to find out is you seemed to be doing
          a few things around the house. You are not expected
          to stand at your window for 2^ hours to look out just
          so that you can answer questions that I ask, but I
          want to know whether you were looking out after
          quarter—past 2? — A. I would say until about half-
          past.
          Okay. So we are now between half-past 1 and half-past
          2 we are talking about.  Did you notice any change in
          the flow rate over that period then, apart from it
          increasing after 2 o'clock, you said? - A. It was
          quite a steady level from 2 onwards. You must
          appreciate that at normal football matches at
          Hillsborough there is a steady flow of people down




H
                         J.    A.    McGAULEY


'there. It is very rarely overflowing-onto .-the roads.
 People normally walk down the pavements on either
 side, my side of the road and the other side, and once
 those pavements are full it seems a steady flow, and
 that is certainly what it was on that day.

Did you notice whether people were going the other way
as well, because I think there is a pubjust  up the
road from you, is there not? - A.  Yes.

I do not know if we have got its name. - A. There
are a number of pubs further up the road - the Horse
and Jockey, and I can't remember the names of the
others, but there are a few at the top.

Did you notice whether people were going upthe hill?
-A.   No. Earlier there were a few people walking up,
but I do not know, maybe in search of shops.  There is
a collection of shops on the corner of Wadsley Lane
that sell sweets, and it is quite common on a football
match for people to go up to buy pies and that sort of
thing if the shops down at the bottom are congested.

Was the crowd that your lad was waving to and that you
were watching a mixed crowd, in the sense that it was
youngsters and older people as well, or was it
predominantly one as opposed to the other? - A. It
seemed an average crowd, some youngsters, some older
men. The reason I remember it particularly is that
people then waved back at him, and he had a little
performance with them, but it was certainly a good-
natured crowd.

A good-natured crowd? - A.     Yes, certainly.

At that time, the time we are now thinking about,
half-past 1 to half-past 2, did you notice anybody
carrying cans of alcohol? - A. No.

You did not notice any? - A.        No.

You did not notice any behaviour which you found
reprehensible? - A. No.

Nobody tried to wee in your garden, if I can put it
plainly? - A. No. In fact, that was one of the
things that did strike me, given that it was a large
game, because as we are on the main road we sometimes
have litter left in the garden, or people do do as you
say. That never happened on that occasion?

It did not? - A. No, and that was slightly surprising
given the relative size of the crowd because it is a
                                                       53



                              J.   A.   McGAULEY


     'problem in the area that I live every other Saturday
      and mid-week games.

Q.   So it does happen but, in fact, on this particular
     occasion, as far as you were concerned, it did not
     occur? - A. It did not occur.   It has occurred in the
     past where people have left cans and occasionally car
     roofs have been bent, and that sort of thing, but not
     on that occasion.

Q.   Can you help me with regard to the time between 2.30
     and 3? I think you had put your lad to bed at that
     time? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you observe anything of the crowd at that stage? -
      A. I went downstairs and then had a look out of the
      window.   Then I went into the dining room to do some
      work at a desk in there, so I just looked at the
      window and saw there were quite a lot of people Still
      going down at about maybe quarter-to, and then I
      didn't return to the front room where the television
      is until maybe about quarter-past 3 when I had the
      radio on.

Q.   Then, of course, the event had already taken place, so
      to speak? - A. Yes.

Q.   So you really, in that other half-hour, only caught a
      glimpse of them at quarter-to 3 for a short period of
      time? - A. Yes.

Q.   Would that be fair? - A. That would be fair, yes. We
     have not got any curtains on. We did not have
      curtains on at the time because of redecoration, so we
      had quite a good view out. Every time I went into the
      front room you could see people going down the hill.

Q.   Did you notice any difference between the people
      between 2.30 and 3 o'clock, which I realise was just a
     momentary view, from the people you had seen earlier?
      - A. No, no difference. One thing you do notice,
      certainly if you look after 10-to 3 on a normal day,
      people are running down very often because they are
      late, particularly if they have had problems parking.
      There may have been a few people running down a little
      bit quicker, because one of the problems is that the
     whole of Wadsley Lane would have been full of cars and
      all the adjacent area going back maybe for half-a-mile
      or a mile would have been parked up, so they very
      often have to rush down to get to the ground if they
      can't find anywhere to park, particularly if they
      don't know the area very well. That is not uncommon.
                          J.   A.   McGAULEY


'You have mentioned that people were walking on the
 pavements.  Perhaps I have misunderstood you, or did
 not hear properly. Were you saying that on this
 occasion people were just on the pavements, or that
 they were also in the roadway? ~ A. Sometimes,
 certainly when a match has finished people walk on
 both sides.

No, I am talking about on this day. - A. People were
walking on the pavements on either side. That is what
I am saying, there wasn't a mass of people, because
when there are a lot of people the roads are also
used.  So the flow was quite a steady one. When any
match is finished and people start to walk up Wadsley
Lane, it is very often they then walk on the roads as
well as the pavements because there wasn't physically
enough room. That was the point I was making.

 But they were not walking on the road between 1.30 to
 2.30? - A. No, on the pavements.

On the pavements only as far as you are concerned? -
A. Yes.

We heard a few days ago from some police officer who
was on point duty at that junction more or less, or
perhaps a little bit further down, and what he said
was what he had noticed was that the crowd were
walking away from Leppings Lane, up Wadsley Lane, and
then at about 2.30 he said it was as if a switch had
been turned and they all turned and walked down, the
crowd seemed to be coming down. Did you have that
impression at all? - A. No, certainly not.   I did not
see people walking up Wadsley Lane in large numbers.
It would have been noticeable because they would have
been going against the flow of other pedestrians.

So, as far as you x*ere concerned, it was a steady flox?
from about 1.30 or quarter-past 1 until 2.30 and then
when you caught a glimpse at quarter-to 3 it was about
the same? - A. It was a steady flow down the hill.
Because of the size of the road and the relative size
of the pavements, you would notice a large flow up at
any one time, because there would be congestion on
either side of the pavements.

            Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Your observation of the crowd between half-past 2 and
3 o'clock consisted of a glimpse at quarter-to 3? - A.
Yes, a series of glimpses as I was passing in and out
of the front room.

A series of glimpses? - A.     Yes.
                            J.   A.   McGAULEY


             Cross-Examined by MR.-KING

Mr. McGauley, for an hour you had a very good view of
the state of affairs outside your window and the
people passing by? - A. Yes.

You had a grandstand view? - A. Yes. That is one of
the advantages and disadvantages of living on Wadsley
Lane.

We haveheard a number of      witnesses giving all sorts
of different accounts and     so it is helpful to have an
account   from somebody who   is looking out on the scene
in this   way. You are not    a Liverpool supporter, are
you? - A. No, I am not.       I do not generally go to
football matches.

You have no particular reason to want to support
Liverpool fans, or any other group of people? - A.
No.

Is it right that you yourself wrote a letter to the
Sheffield Star newspaper not long after the disaster?
- A. Yes, I did.

Can I just show you a photocopy of what I understand
was the letter which was published.  Do not read it
out. Just tell me if that is the letter. (Handed) A.
Yes, that is my letter.

     THE CORONER: What is it you want to put to the
witness, Mr. King?

     MR. KING: Sir, I want to investigate two
matters. Might I just borrow the letter to make sure
that I am expressing it correctly?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, sure.

     MR. KING:  I am sorry, there are three matters.
One is the impression of this witness as to the
condition of the supporters passing his window, to
which, sir, your questions have been directed in part.

     THE CORONER:    Yes.

     MR. KING: His general knowledge.of the area and
parking facilities because you have investigated the
reasons for people being late at the ground, not with
this witness but as an issue before this Inquest.
Thirdly, his experience at the ground itself on
another occasion in the same year before this disaster
involving the Manchester United game, when he himself
had an experience of the time fans arrived at the
Leppings Lane end and an experience of difficulties or
otherwise of getting fans in in time for kick-off.
Sir, that third matter is, in my submission, very
relevant because what we are investigating in this
Inquest is in part expectations, what has happened in
the past and what has happened in the past has given
rise to understanding, beliefs, expectations, upon
which planning is based, and we have heard this on a
number of occasions already in this Inquest.

      THE CORONER:  It is a very difficult problem, Mr.
King, as I am sure you will appreciate, because if we
start allowing in what happened at the Manchester
United match, we will be touring the country before we
know where we are with regard to what happens at other
grounds, how many matches have been played where
people have got in late, early, fast or slow.   I am
certainly very reluctant to go into any detail like
that.   I think one would have to be very, very
careful, because this Inquest is already long, complex
and difficult enough, and also I think we are probably
moving into a field where I have difficulty sometimes
justifying what we are doing to myself.   I think I
would have great difficulty in justifying that.   I am
not wishing to restrict you, I am sure you will
appreciate that.

     HR. KING:  In the light of your preliminary
indication, and not wishing in any way to prejudice
any further discussion of this issue, could I
respectfully suggest that we invite the Jury to retire
for a short moment so that nothing I say anyone along
here could complain that I have in any way sought to
influence the Jury.

     THE CORONER:   Could you pop out for a few
minutes.

     (In the absence of the Jury and the witness)

     THE CORONER: We must finish with this witness
before lurich, by the way, because he has got a meeting
and we have squeezed him in so, come what may, we must
finish with him or we will have to bring him back on
another day. That is not to rush you;    that is the
reality of life.

     MR. KING: Sir, if I were simply applying to ask
questions about other games at other grounds as a
general investigation of football behaviour, then I
would say everything you said would be totally
legitimate.  I am seeking to investigate an issue
which has already been investigated in this Inquest by
reference to other matches, namely the layout of the
'Leppings Lane end, the knowledge or otherwise of the
 authorities of the- behaviour of football fans as far
 as their arrival goes, their expectations, thirdly the
 capacity of the Leppings Lane end turnstiles to allow
 people who come witrhin the last half-hour to quarter-
 of-an-hour into the ground with ease.

      Sir, if I might read out the paragraph, and then
 everybody will know what I am talking about in the
 letter.

      THE CORONER:   Yes, that is easier.




      j




                          /MR. KING:   It is very
     MR. KING:   It is very short, sir.     Shall I read the
relevant paragraph or the whole letter?
    /


     THE CORONER:      Yes, please.

    MR. KING:       The letter reads as follows:

   "As someone who lives on Wadsley Lane and witnessed
   the crowds en route to the Hillsborough semi-final, I
   feel it is important to correct several inaccuracies
   in your coverage of the tragedy.

  Firstly, the Liverpool supporters were certainly not
  drunk or badly behaved; they were almost totally good
  humoured and disciplined.

  The area was just as congested as any normal Saturday
  afternoon when Sheffield Wednesday are at home, and
  on several occasions in the recent past both visiting
  and home supporters * behaviour has given much more
  cause for concern than on this particular Saturday.

   Secondly, the football club's inability to provide
   adequate car parking and refreshment facilities for
   its customers results in congestion which forces car
   owners to park up to two miles away and then to walk
   to the ground. Both factors inhibit an early arrival
   at the ground.

   During the recent match against Manchester United
   supporters from Manchester were still waiting to get
   into the ground 15 minutes after the game had
   Started. This with a crowd only in the 34,000
   range."

Sir, the rest of the letter is just comment which my
learned friends can see if they wish.

     THE CORONER:      Yes.

     MR. KING:   Those instructing me - and I say this
openly - knowing that this was a witness who was going to
give evidence and knowing of the letter has had taken a
statement from this witness and I do not hide that at all.
I have, therefore, a proof of what it is he would say on
these issues. What he would say on those issues if he came
up to proof and what I would be asking him about would be
as follows; that he had attended the Sheffield
Wednesday/Manchester United game on the 11th February 1989,
that he had arrived about quarter to three‘intending to go
into the Manchester United end which was the Leppings Lane
end. A lot of people were milling about who were not, it
seemed to him, going to get in for 3 p.m. There were
mounted Police and foot Police. There were a lot of them
probably h e says because of Manchester U n i t e d 's reputation.
A large number of fans spilled out into the roadway and the
bridge. Others were still arriving coming along Leppings
Lane from both directions. Coaches had dropped off in
Leppings Lane.*
   "I decided there was no chance of getting in for
   three o'clock and so walked round the stadium next
   the river and got in at the Kop end.”

He explains how he got in, sir:

   "Around five past three to ten past three I recall
   seeing some Manchester United fans being escorted
   around the pitch in front of the Kop end. At first I
   thought there had been trouble, maybe they had been
   ejected perhaps because they had been at the wrong
   end of the Kop but then they were let into the West
   End where the other Manchester United fans were.
   There were about 20 or 30 at least. They were let
   into the corner pen of the West Stand, Pens 6 and 7
   and I could see that the Leppings Lane end terrace
   was crowded and I recall seeing some fans being
   pulled up into the seating area of the West Stand-  I
   also recall seeing a handful of Manchester United
   supporters being escorted around the pitch also to
   Pens 6 and 7."
That is all I need tell you, sir. It is important, sir,
because as you know fans are being asked about what
happened in 1988 with a large gate and what happened about
going to the Leppings Lane end and what happened on those
terraces. You know because you have already indicated that
there were other instances which we shall be looking at not
only in 1988 but going back to 1981, sir, when there were
certain reports or otherwise.
     In the bundle of material which was before the Taylor
Inquiry there was, in fact, an analysis of the numbers
attending at the Manchester United/Sheffield Wednesday game
in 1989, the percentage that had arrived by a certain hour,
the percentage which had arrived in the last half hour and
the difficulties there experienced.  It is relevant because
it shows prior to this disaster the capacity of the
Leppings Lane terraces and the capacity of the Leppings
Lane turnstiles to deal with people who arrive at the sort
of times which I have indicated, very similar to the sort
of times we are dealing with here. Sir, my submission to
you is that this is a very relevant factor when one is
dealing with expectations of the Police in their planning,
indeed, in the general survey of the capacity of the ground
to deal with these people.
      MR. PAYNE:  Sir, I wonder if you would be kind enough
to h^ar me and allow me to comment on what M r . King has
said?
     THE CORONER:   Certainly.
     MR. PAYNE:   The position of the Chief Constable is
ambivalent in relation to the application being made by Mr,
King in this way; that the nature of this Inquest is to
determine the answer to the question how? Mr. King has
made it quite clear that he wants to elicit from this
witness evidence about knowledge and practice and which
must apply to the practice of the Police and also to the
practice of the Club in relation to the management of
spectators arriving at the ground.
     His second head was that he wants to explore the
capacity of the Leppings Lane turnstiles and the extent to
which that was known to the Club and I suppose also you
would say to the Police. He wants to explore the
facilities for car parking and refreshment and whether they
were adequate and he wants, by way of comparison, to
explore what happened at another football match against
Manchester United when a crowd, he says, was waiting
outside the ground after the kick-off.
     If those things are relevant then they are relevant to
the question how by carrying with them by carrying with
them the implication of criticism of the facilities and
management provided by the club and the Police. So this
line of questioning is directly aimed to answering the
question how by giving the answer "Fault on the part of
those responsible for the management ie the Club and the
Police". That is as it appears to us, that that is the
object of the line of questioning.
     As I say, the response of the Chief Constable to this
is ambivalent because, sir, we sent to you some time ago a
copy of the report prepared by the Deputy Chief Constable
of the Cornwall Constabulary, Mr. Phillips, in which he has
carried out a very substantial exercise of the comparison
of the facilities and management provided at this ground on
big matches compared with similar arrangements made at
other matches on roughly comparable occasions. As you will
have seen from the report, using a lot of illustrations
from other matches and from his own very extensive
experience he comes to the conclusion that the management
and arrangements which are made on this ground are broadly
in line with current practice in 1989 to be found at other
grounds throughout the country.
      From our point of view we would be very happy for the
 Phillips Report and all the work that has gone into it to
 be placed before the Jury so that they can see that the
planning for this particular match and the arrangements
made by the Club and the Police for the reception of the
crowd, the turnstiles provided, car parking and all that,
in many ways here is very much better than facilities which
are provided at other grounds.  It certainly is in line
with those other facilities.

     The reason I rise is to say that if Mr. King is to
embark on this exercise with this one witness here then we
would in due course hope that you would think it also
relevant that perhaps through the evidence of Mr. Phillips
we would be able to show, in a much broader context, that
these facilities are comparable with those provided
elsewhere and the planning likewise is of a similar order
to what is expected at similar events throughout the
country.   That is our comment about the application being
made by M r . King.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, having heard what Mr. Payne
said, there is also another Police Report as to the
management and facilities at this ground which we have. We
have not as yet submitted it to you, sir, because since it
arose out of civil proceedings it would not necessarily be
very helpful to you or this particular Jury. We would be
happy to put that in.

     Any application upon Mr. Payne's line would have to be
viewed in the light of the Stalker Report as well. As to
Mr. King's application really, in my submission, it would
be somewhat invidious to have one witness giving his
impressions and recollections of one event without putting
everything in context. We know from this particular
hearing how difficult it is to build up a very accurate
impression of what goes on in one single day. What one
witness says he has seen or believes he has seen does not
necessarily reflect what actually occurred.

     I have not got all the facts of the Manchester United
game to hand.  I do not know at the moment whether it was
all ticket or whether the turnstiles were paying.  I do not
know the reasons why the people were late. The examples
that Mr. King read out of people being seen to be hauled up
into the stands, having actually seen photographs of
Sheffield Wednesday before that sort of behaviour goes on
regardless of how many people are on the terraces.   If you
want to get a good view in the stand they get up there. If
you remember at the Inquiry some of the Police Officers who
were positioned there said that part of their job was to
stop people climbing up because they get a better view from
the stands.

     All those points can only be viewed if you have a
large body of evidence to put what this witness has been
saying in the context of everybody else. So that makes
4
                                                               62




        this task absolutely impossible. We are deflecting, in my
        respectful submission, from what happened on this day and
        how this tragedy occurred by going down a route which will
        open up applications, certainly by myself, to bring in
        someone from the Club to give an answer to what happened,
        if anything did happen on that day.
    B
            It seems an unnecessary waste of time pursuing
        something that is not going to help this Jury to come to
        its verdict when it has already faced a huge amount of
        evidence, and continues to face a huge amount of evidence,
        which they have got to sift through and come to an
        appropriate verdict at the end.

             MR. KING:   Sir, if that argument is taken to its
        logical conclusion we should not be looking at what
        happened in 1988 at a similar game. We should not be
        looking at what happened in 1981 in a Semi Final involving
        other clubs but nonetheless had had events occurring at the
        ground which gave clear warning signals for the future. We
        should only be looking at one Operational Order which is
        the one in 1989 when in fact as you know, sir, there are at
        least two other Operational Orders, one in 1988 and also
        one in 1989 as between Sheffield Wednesday and Liverpool
    D   dealing with the organisation of fans on the terracing
        which are highly relevant to the planning Of matches.

            Sir, we either just concentrate on the events of 15th
        April 1989 and do not allow any questions to what has
        happened in the past, what was normal, what was abnormal,
        what was expected, what was unexpected or it would only be
        right and proper that this Jury have relevant facts, as I
        have indicated I would seek to elicit from this witness of
        what he saw, no more as far as this witness is concerned of
        what he saw, on the day involving the Manchester United
        game.

             Without those facts of investigation, sir, the Jury
        would be getting a totally unbalanced picture if there was
        only partial comparison. What I have been slightly
        concerned with, sir, is that we have allowed on questioning
        broad generalisations as to what had happened in the past,
        what was expected and what was unexpected.  I do not object
        to that, sir, in as far as one is looking at the process of
        what could have been anticipated but if we are looking at
        the process of what could have been anticipated then the
        experience of what happened in 1989 at a game of the sort I
        have indicated must be relevant, given it is actually
        directed to the Leppings Lane end.

             MR. HALE:   Sir, I respectfully support the arguments
        of Mr. Payne and Mr. Catchpole.  If one goes on extending
        the area we could bring in the actual Cup Final of 1989 and
        what happened there. We could bring in earlier incidents




    H
of a similar kind and there would be just no end to it.  In
particular in relation to the Manchester United game I
would feel it very necessary to canvas and perhaps to bring
a large number of witnesses to explain why the fans came
late on that day and why the crush occurred and so on. We
would then have another Inquiry on our hands, of course, as
big as this.
     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Can I just respond very briefly
to my learned friend Mr. King? The relevance of tne
1981 incident to how this occurred is only to provide a
background as to when those pens were put in, and give
the Jury the whole context in a broad way. The reason,
as he well knows, we have got two operational orders in
place, one for 1988 and one for 1989, it is exactly the
same match, it is exactly the same arrangements. The
question is how far do they differ? We are^not going
down, as far as I can see, the route of saying, well in
1988 we are going to call witnesses and build up a
whole picture of that* There are comparisons being
made with exactly the same operation. That is not tne
same as saying on an individual league match, or some
match, whatever it was, that the Police range is going
to be the same, the pubs range is going to the same the
transport is going to be the same, and the same
problems are going to be faced.
     I absolutely agree, with respect, with Mr. Hale,
if we do that we are going to be looking at every game,
looking at reasons why fans turn up late, what the
arrangement should be, should it be postponed? That
just takes us well beyond the bounds of what this Jury
needs to have to come to a proper verdict.

     MR. KING:   Sir, very briefly because I realise
the time, I repeat, if I was dealing in a
generalisation of football matches I would agree with
everything that has been said but I am not, I am
dealing with the experience of this witness of a
specific game at the specific end where these tragedies
occurred, and dealing with specific issues as to the
numbers arriving shortly before kick-off, and the
ability of the ground to deal with it, and his eye
witness view of what was happening on the terraces at
that time. What facts can be drawn from that, what
conclusions can be drawn from that, is obviously a
matter for the Jury, but not to allow questions
directed to those issues is, in ray submission, to draw
a veil over very relevant evidence as to what had
happened in the past at the very end where this tragedy
occurred, and the very same turnstile, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I think the sensible
thing is that I am going to let this witness go and we
will start with him again at some other point, because
I don't like the witnesses, or indeed me or you for
that matter, being under any pressure. That is not an
answer to your application but a statement of what I
intend to do.

     That also gives me a little time to think about
what you have said, but I must say that I am
exceedingly reluctant, as my initial reaction, to agree
to your request, because we have got an Inquiry which
is already almost boundless and whilst I can see what
you are saying, I can understand the point that you are
trying to make, and I agree that insofar as we are
looking at, say, 1988, and comparing it with 1989, we
are looking at other events, there is a connection
which Mr. Catchpole has outlined, and which is, in
fact, the ratio on which I have proceeded when
considering 1988, and it is also true that Mr.
Catchpole has certainly summarised my thinking with
regard to, say, the 1981 situation.    I would like to
think about it further and I will come up with some
firm decision.

     Secondly, I might as well say this as well, it had
been my intention to call ACC Philips right at the end,
because it is my normal practice to call what I call
experts. He was not on the list because I was still
debating it, so to speak, because the fact that he is
an expert who has been, if you like, commissioned, if I
can use that word, by one of the parties, doesn't
necessarily mean that he can't give impartial evidence.
Of course, it must be tested as to whether it is
impartial. We have got some of our own, as you know,
who hopefully will give their evidence impartially.    In
fact, I am sure all experts would do that anyway.   It
is their professional responsibility.

     Perhaps I can just say this to you Mr. King, and
perhaps you would like to think about it, because we
may need to have another session on it before we
conclude.  I can see a difference between having an
expert come along and say that the practice at this
game was similar, dissimilar, to the general practice
in football organisation for these and these reasons,
and in those cases I wouldn't be surprised if it was
done by reference to events both at the ground and
away. That, I think, is different to actually asking a
witness to bring in a completely different match, and
if we do that I think it is right we would have to look
at that match in greater detail. We cannot allow one
witness to pick out one match and not give everybody
the opportunity.

     The reason why I called him, so that you might
know, is two-fold.  First of all I didn't know about
that black-out and I certainly didn't know about the
statement, and I don't complain about that - please
don't think that at all.  I called him because (a) I ws
invited to do so by a family member.  I looked at his
statement.  I could see that he was saying something a
bit different to some of the other local residents that
we had called, and I thought it was fair, that we have
had local residents that have told us something about
what they thought about   the behaviour of the fans, that
if we have a local resident who says, "I think
different", it is only fair that the Jury should see
that there is another point of view.

     I certainly didn't intend to use him to   move the
Inquiry into what I consider to be a totally   different
ball game, but I reserve my position and you   might like
to think about what I have said as well, and   if you at
some point want to have more submissions on    thisaspect
then I am very happy to listen to them.

     What we are going to do now then, unless somebody
wants to come back on what I have just said, we will
get the Jury back so they know what is going on, and we
will get the witness back and I will tell him I am
postponing .... Mr. Maxwell, yes?

     MR. MAXWELL:   Sir, I have a comment of^general
significance, I think, to make here, and it is this:^
where a party asks you to call a witness I think it is
incumbent upon the party to make known to you what
significance is to be attached to that witness's
evidence. What we have done for the last 15 minutes or
so is to engage in a debate that arises from a document
of which, sir, you have said you were not aware. Had
you been aware of it in advance then your views might
have been formed already as to whether that was
relevant, or you might have been better able to deal
with the argument that has been put before you. What I
am suggesting therefore is not that you order but that
you invite anybody who has nominated a witness, or
requested that a particular witness be called, snould
indicate to you in general terms at least what they see
as the significance of that evidence, or, and better
still, make available to you for your consideration any
relevant document that the witness may rely upon, and
we might then at least cut down this interesting
debate.

     THE CORONER:   I   think it is only fair to say, I
agree with your point   and I think it is right and I
won't repeat what Mr.   Maxwell has said, but it is also
fair to say, because I don't want you to be under any
misapprehension, that the name was not put forward
either by Mr. King or by his instructing solicitors, he
was put forward directly, privately by a relative of a
person who had died. As far as I was concerned I knew
nothing of these other matters, so in that sense I
think it may be that they could not really do anything
about it.
                                                   67




     MR. MAXWELL:   If there was the slightest hint of
a complaint in what I said about what has happened,
then I withdraw the complaint, but for the future I
respectfully urge that it would be a sensible procedure
to follow.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I think you would agree with
that, Mr. King, wouldn't you?

     MR. KING:   Sir, I don't disagree but just so as
to protect those sitting behind me - I am not
interested in protecting myself at all - no one had any
knowledge that this witness was going to be called.
Certainly I didn't know he was going to be called until
this morning.  It was only this morning when that was
discovered that in fact, and I would submit very
properly, those instructing me sought out the witness,
knowing and having been given information that that was
a witness who had written a letter, and the information
came to hand.  It was done so quickly that I certainly
wasn't in a position to deal with it in any other way,
but I agree with my learned friend, insofar as we were
to put forward any witness I would certainly ensure
that all matters are laid before you as to why that
witness is relevant, and indeed putting forward the
statement is the most obvious way of doing so.

     THE CORONER:   Perhaps I could come back to you on
that. I wasn't initially too concerned about the
statement but I am a little bit more concerned about it
now, because here was a witness who - it is quite true,
I didn't know this morning was coming. We decided on
calling him because we lost, if we can put it that way,
witness number one, and we hunted around for somebody
who was local who I thought would be brief, and who we
could slot in. In the event I was, as I have already
said, totally wrong in my judgment with regard to time
but the point I am really making is this, that if you
have a statement from a witness whom I happen to call,
which has been taken before, then there is no objection
to that at all, but I am not so sure that it is right
that you should approach a witness who is being called
by me. All the witnesses are being called by me, I
don't blame any of you for the witnesses I call.   I
invite you to nominate names because I want to try and
make sure that we call as many people as I reasonably
can who you feel have evidence which is relevant, but I
am not too happy about the witnesses being approached
and statements being takien on the day when they are
supposed to give evidence.

     You had the letter to the newspaper, fair enough,
that is a different matter all together, but I am not
very keen on the intervention.
     MR. KING:   Sir, if anything improper has happened
in that respect then it won't happen again, and it
probably arises out of the inexperience of inquests,
because as you know, sir, in normal litigation there is
no property in a witness, and indeed, in normal
criminal prosecutions and in civil litigation there is
nothing improper in an instructing solicitor obtaining
a statement from a witness which can then be passed to
those representing an interest.

     If, however, this is not the correct procedure in
an inquest, then rest assured, sir, it won t happen
again.

     THE CORONER:    I may be wrong myself, because it
doesn't usually happen, this sort of thing.   It is just
my general impression that I think it is undesirable
that the witness at short notice should be approached
and a statement taken, and I don't think I want to say
any more about that.   If there was a situation where
you felt, in view of what I have said, that you were
being hampered, approach me and we will do whatever is
reasonable.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I see the lateness of the hour,
but it may be important for guidance, and sir I don't
ask for a ruling now, but perhaps therefore you might
give consideration to whether or not it is proper, and
if not why not, and I say that with the best will in
the world, sir, for witnesses who it is known will be
called to be approached by anybody, not in order to
influence what they say, but in order to take a
statement in the normal way of litigation.  As I say,
sir, in the normal way not only is it not improper,
there is no property in a witness, and I can only
repeat that.

     THE CORONER:   The difficulty is that this is not
normal litigation, it is an inquest, as opposed to an
adversarial system, and we have got to remember that.

     MR. KING:   That is why I am in your hands, sir,
and if you tell me that what has been happening should
not happen, it won't happen.




              /THE CORONER:           can we get
Lt
                                                                 69




                THE CORONER:  Can we get the Jury back so they can go
           off'to lunch. Can you ask the witness to come back in?


                           (In the presence of the Jury)
     B
                THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, there is no such
           thing as a five minute submission.  That is a golden rule, and
           I don't think we would be breaching it. That is not anybody's
           fault.  It is impossible to do it. The point raised is quite
           a difficult one.

                       JAMES ALAN McGAULEY Recalled:

                                  Bv THE CORONER:

         Q. What I am going to do, Mr. McGauley, I know you have a meeting
            and you have got to have lunch and various other things, and
            we are not going to proceed with your evidence at this stage,
            but we will stop. We will invite you back at some convenient
            point in the future, by which time we will have the
            transcripts and we will remind you of what you have said so
     D      you don't have to worry you won't remember word for word what
            evidence you have given, and then we will decide how we
            proceed with the line of questioning.

                 THE CORONER:   We will rise and have our lunch now and be
            back at 5-past-2. We have another witness, and we must deal
            with him today. Otherwise we will get down to one witness a
            day and be here not for three months but for three years, and
            I don't think any of us can take that.

                              (Luncheon Adjournment)




     G




     H
                                S.   K.   BOARDMAN


            STEPHEN KENNETH BOARDMAN Sworn

                      By THE CORONER

You are Stephen Kenneth Boardman, is that right? - A.
Yes.

You live at                                 in Liverpool, is
that r ight? - a . Y e s .

Your dad is with you today, is he not? - A.          Yes.

How old are you now? - A.      16.

In 1939 how old were you then? - A. I was 15.

It just happens, although it is 13 months, your
birthday falls that way? - A. Yes.

You are a Liverpool supporter, are you not? - A. Yes.

Before we carry on, I know you are 16 now, and no
longer 15, you do not have to be frightened.  Although
I will ask you questions, and I have no doubt other
people will do so as well, nobody is going to try and
hurt you, if you know what I mean.  So just relax as
much as you can and I will ask you questions and you
tell me the story to the best of you ability - okay? -
A. Right.

What I am interested in is to get at the truth as far
as you can remember. That is the only thing that
matters as far as I am concerned, all right? - A.
Okay.

You went with your brother and another friend, I
think, to this match? - A. Yes.

You went on a coach, I believe, is that right? - A.
Yes.

You left Liverpool.  I think you were intending to go
at about 11? - A. We were meant to leave at 11, but
we were one of the last coaches and we never left
until half-past.

Why was that? - A. There was a bit of pushing and
that, and so we waited until the last coach.

You mean you could not get on the other coaches
because fans were pushing ahead in front of you or
what, or other people, I do not know about fans? Who
was pushing? - A. They were just fans.
                                    S. K. BOARDMAN


Q. ,How many coaches were leaving from that area? - A.
    There were about 20 or 30.

Q.   I see, quite a lot? - A,     Yes.

Q.   There was quite a crowd? - A. Yes.

Q.   So you finished up on the     last coach? - A.     The
     second-to-last coach.

Q.   You left at 11.30? - A.     Yes.

Q.   I think it is right that you came across the Pennines,
     did you not? - A. You did not come along the
     motorway, you came over the Snake Pass, is that right?
     - A. Yes.

Q.   There were quite a lot of roadworks and hold-ups and
     one thing and another, is that right? - A.  Yes.

Q.   In fact, you did not get into Sheffield until 20-to 3,
     is that right? - A. We got off the coach at 20-to 3.

Q. I think I am right in saying that the coach driver
    knew that it was late so he stopped at a roundabout,
    is that right, to let you off? - A. Yes.

Q. Then he drove off to park somewhere? - A.          Yes.

Q. How did you knox/ where to find the coach again? - A.
    Because we went past a hill on the way down to the
    ground and he said, "This is where I ’ll be parked on
    the way back”.

Q.   So he actually drove past his parking site and said,
      "I'll take you a little bit nearer" and then dropped
      you off and disappeared up the hill again, so to
      speak? ~ A. Yes.

Q.   You, with your brother and his friend, and no doubt
      everybody else on that coach, went towards the ground,
      is that right? - A. Yes.

Q.   You had not been before, I do not suppose? - A.          No.

Q.   Was yours the only group that was making towards the
      ground, or were there other people going as well? - A.
      No, there were a lot of people walking to the ground.

Q.   So you had no real difficulty in knowing which way to
     go? - A. No, we just followed the crowd.

Q.   On the way, first of all did you notice whether the
      crowd was well-behaved? - A. Yes, quite well-behaved.
                                 S. K. BOARDMAN


Q. ,Were they singing, and so on, or not, can you
    remember? - A. No.

Q.   They were happy, I presume, because they were hoping
     for a win, as I am sure you were as-"well, that is
     right, is it not? - A. Yes.

Q.   But you were not worried, you were not frightened by
     that crowd at that point? - A. No.

Q.   Did you see anybody drinking out of cans? - A.     A few
     people, yes.

Q.   Just a few? - A.   Yes.

Q.   Were those people walking with you, or were they
      seated or standing around? - A. Most people were
      making their way to the ground because it was quite
      late. There were only a few people just sitting on
      walls.

Q.   I see. Were those the people, on    the whole, who were
      still drinking out of cans? - A.   Not all.

Q.   I am not saying all of them, but of the people who
     were drinking out of cans, was it the ones who were
     seated around the walls rather than  the people who
     were walking? - A. Yes, some were.

Q.   Okay. Just to get it absolutely right, you saw no
     fighting and you did not see anything that concerned
     you in any of these people? - A.  No.

Q.   Whether they had cans or not is neither here nor
     there? - A. No.

Q. You got to Leppings Lane, I think you said about
    quarter-to 3, would that be right? - A. Yes, it was
    about quarter-to 3.

Q.   When you got there were there lots of people there
     already ahead of you? - A. Yes.

Q.   Were there lots of people coming up behind you? - A.
     Yes, quite a lot.

Q.   Did you see some gates with bars on them? - A.     Yes.

Q.   How close did you have to get to them before you could
     see them? - A. We could see, but there was a lot of
     people around them.

Q.   Can you remember as you approached the gates were they
     shut or open? - A. Open.
                             S. K. BOARDMAN


/Did you see any police officers, either on foot or on
 horse, in front of the gates, in other words your side
 of the gates as you were walking towards them? - A.
 There were police officers on foot.

Did you notice what, if anything, they were doing? -
A. They were just trying to guide people through the
gates.

Did you see any people on horses? - A. There were
people to the side, by the exit gate.  I think there
were about four police officers on horses.

I see. Did they appear to you to be doing anything? -
A. No, they were just standing, stopping people going
down the side of the ground.

I see, further away from the turnstiles? - A.   Yes.

When you approached these perimeter gates, the blue
outer gates, did you have any difficulty getting
through those yourself? - A. No, we got through them
quite easy, but as soon as we got through there were
crowds, so we stepped aside, so we never got stuck in
the crowds, and we were just standing hoping that the
queue would go down.

Can   we put up the usual view of the perimeter gates,
254   I think it is. Can you just look at that picture
for   a minute. Can you see those perimeter gates on
the   picture? - A. Yes.

Were those the ones that you approached, as far as you
remember? - A. Yes.

Behind them you can see some turnstiles.   Can you see
those? - A. Yes. .

Then there is a sort of little railing and then there
is a van, can you see that? - A. Yes.

Just beyond the van - you cannot actually see it on
the picture - there is what you I think have called
the exit gate.  Is that a concertina-type gate? - A.
Yes.

You are saying that the police officers were somewhere
around there on the horses stopping people going
further down, is that right? - A. Yes, by the
furthest back van.

When you entered the perimeter gates, you do not
remember which one you went through, I do not suppose?
- A. No.
                             S. K. BOARDMAN


, You would see that there were a lot of people
  immediately outside the turnstile area, is that right?
  - A. Yes.
 You did not think it was wise to go into that crowd,
 so you stepped to one side, is that right? - A. Yes,
 we stepped to the right of the blue barrier.

 To the right? - A.   Yes.

 There is a river there, is there not? - A.    Yes.

 Do you remember that there is a river? - A.    Yes.

 You stepped to one side. Why did you do that, just
 because there were a lot of people, or was there any
 other reason? - A. No. It just seemed people were
 getting pulled out because they seemed to be getting
 injured, so x?e just thought it wasn't in our best
 interests.

 So you thought people were being hurt in that crowd? -
 A. Yes.

 Just to repeat that, you were saying that you did not
 join that crowd because you had the impression that
 people were getting hurt at that time? - A. Yes.

 You have told me that you then went to the right, and
 did you go down towards where that exit gate was? We
 have called it Gate C actually, but it does not really
 matter. - A. Yes, we were standing by the Police.

 Quite close to that? - A.   Yes.

 Whilst you were standing there, did you see the gate
 open and shut once or twice perhaps, or not at all? -
 A. Yes, the people who were getting injured, the gate
 was getting opened so they could go into the ground.

 When it opened, was it just a little teeny bit, or was
 it wide, or what? - A. Just wide enough to let a
 policeman and the injured party through.

 At that point when you were seeing this did other
 people go through, or was it just the injured party
 and the police officers who went through? *- A. No,
 once other people went through who weren't injured.

 I will come to that in a moment, but you did see it
 open once or twice where other people did not get
 through, is that what you are saying? - A. No, I do
 not understand you.
                             S.   K.    BOARDMAN


'I will start again. You said that while you were
 standing there, you could see that when people were
 hurt that gate was being opened and that the injured
 people were allowed to go in, is that right? - A.
 Yes.         —

 What I am asking you is how many times did you see
 that happen? - A. It was quite a few.

 Out of those quite a few times, how many occasions did
 it happen that you saw that in addition to the injured
 person other people managed to get in? - A. Once.

 Just once, okay.  I will leave that for a moment and
 we will come back to that perhaps later.  Before I ask
 you the next question there is one other I had
 forgotten to ask you and I will do it now while I
 think of it. When you were still outside the
 perimeter gates, as you were approaching them, do you
 recollect seeing a Land Rover there at all? - A. No.

Do you recollect hearing any messages over
loudspeakers of any sort? - A. We heard one when we
were inside the perimeter gates.

 Inside the perimeter gates? - A.       Yes.

What was that? What did you hear? - A. I think it
was for people to stop pushing at the front.




                                  /Q.     You heard that
AT ?




                                                         S. K. BOARDMAN


           Q. You heard that through a loudspeaker of some sort? -
              A. Yes.
       B   Q. Did you notice where it came from, where the message
              emanated from? Emanated is a big word. Did you see
              the person who was making the announcement? - A. No,
              but we could see the speaker and we could hear it but
              that was all.
           Q. Where was the speaker? - A. It was at the side of the
              turnstiles.
           Q. You are saying it was somewhere over there where the
              Officer is pointing? - A. Yes, by Gate C.

           Q. You could hear the message over there saying, "Stop
              pushing" or something of that sort? - A. Yes.

           Q. You heard that, did you, while you were standing
              along the river bank. Had you got to that? - A.
              While we were standing back.
       D
           Q. By the time you had taken refuge so to speak?      A.
              Yes.
           Q. You were not the only people on that bank, were
              you? - A. No.
           Q. There were others there as well? - A. About ten
              people.
           Q. At some point I think you heard quite a group of
              supporters talking amongst themselves, is that right?
              ~ A. Yes,
           Q. First of all, tell me what you heard them say? “ A.
              One of them said that next time they let someone in
              who was injured they were going to push through and
              get through because they never had tickets.

           Q. Did they ever say they did not have tickets or did
              you guess? - A. We just thought that they never had
              tickets because they were all standing there and they
              weren’t queuing up.

            Q. You had tickets, did you not? - A. Yes.

            Q. The fact that they were standing there does not
               necessarily mean they did not have tickets, does
               it? - A. No.




       H
                                                                / /




                                                    S. K. BOARDMAN


    Q. Because you had gone there as it was safer?- A. Yes.

    Q. Let us just make sure that we get it right.  Do not
B      worry because everybody makes assumptions and this
       sort of thing. Firstly, did you actually hear with
       your own ears somebody say, "Next time they open the
       gate we will go in"? - A. Yes.

    Q. You definitely heard that? - A. Yes.

    Q. How big was the group that was talking about that? -
       A. There was about ten people. Ten people in their
       twenties/thirties.  They were all quite young men.

    Q. Quite young men? - A. Yes.

    Q. Not more than ten? - A. No.

    Q. You did not hear them say, "We haven't got
       tickets"? - A. No.
D   Q.   You did not see whether they had tickets? - A. No.

    Q.   You had no idea whether they had tickets or not? -   A.
         No.

    Q. That is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

    Q. Because we must be careful. They may all have had
       tickets for all we know? - A. Yes.

    Q. I think a short while after you heard that comment
       the gate opened again, is that right? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Was it in order to let somebody? - A. I think it was
         in order to let somebody in.

    Q.   What happened on that occasion? -A. They   pushed.

    Q.   I am sorry? - a .They ran at the gate and the
         Policeman couldn't stop them and about 50 to 100 got
         through the gate before more Police horses come round
         the side of the ground and got the gate shut again.

    Q. You saw that opening on that occasion. Do you
       remember approximately how wide the gate opened on
       that occasion? - A. I think there are two gates and
       one of the gates opened fully and the other one
       stayed shut.




H
                                                                       / L>




                                                       S. K. BOARDMAN


    Q. Including the people who rushed forward, were there
       these people whom you had heard talk? - A. Yes, they
       were the ones who pushed in the first place.
B
    Q. Then the Police managed to shut the gate again? - A.
       Yes, with help from more Police horses who had come.

    Q. It was not open for very long on that occasion? - A.
       No, not very long.

    Q.   You did   not in fact join in this rush? - A.No.

    Q.   You stayed outside? - A.   Yes.

    Q.   Why did you not join in? Was there a reason why you
         did not join in? - A. We were a bit scared. Wewere
         only fifteen, like, me and my friend.

    Q.   Okay, that is a good enough answer.    Soyou    were
         outside? - A. Yes.
D   Q.   The gate was shut? - A. Yes.

    Q.    What was happening in the turnstile area?     - A. They
         were still pushing and shoving.

    Q. Was there quite a bit of that going on there? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. What did you feel at that time? - A. As though
       something could happen but not to the extent it did
       happen.

    Q. You were a bit apprehensive at that stage?               Yes.

    Q. What steps, if any, did you take to improve your own
       personal situation? - A. They shut the gates, the
       blue perimeter gates and they opened again. A lot
       more people started coming in and so we jumped over
       the fence by the side of the river and we were
       standing in like a deep muddy river bank.

    Q.   What you did was that you retreated even further       away
         from the crowd? - A. Yes.

    Q. By getting over the wall which separates the river
       from the ground? - A. Yes.

    Q.    You did that in order to get away from all    thepeople
         who were coming down? - A. Yes.




H
                                                              79




                                                S . K . BOARDMAN


    Q. You said that they shut the perimeter gates and then
       they opened them again. Who shut the gates? - A. The
       Police.
B
    Q. Did you notice who opened them, by chance? You may
       not have done and if you did not, do not guess? - A.
       No, I couldn't say.

    Q. A lot more people came into this area where you had
       been? - A. Yes.

    Q. And presumably into the turnstile area, is that
       right? - A. Yes.

    Q. At that time did you notice the mounted Officer?
       When you say the perimeter gates were shut, you have
       just told me? - A. Yes.

    Q. How many Police Officers were controlling that gate
       so far as you could see? - A. We could see a Police
       Officer trying to keep the gate shut and mounted
D      Police behind him.

    Q. Was the mounted Police Officer on the inside of the
       blue gates or on the outside? Can you remember? - A.
       No.

    Q. What was he doing? - A. He was trying to keep the
       people away from the gates.

    Q- How was he doing that? What made you think he was
       doing that? - A. Shouting, just shouting at people,

    Q- Was any notice taken so far as you could see? - A.
       People were shouting back at him.

    Q. Could you hear what was being said?      No.

    Q- You were too far away? - A. Yes.

    Q- You have already told me that you do not know what
       happened but the gates opened and more people came
       in? ~ A. Yes.

       Did they come in slowly or how did they come in? - A.
       First of all, there was a rush and people just walked
       and started walking in.

       Like most things there was a bit of a rush and then
       it all calms down again? - A. Yes.
                                         S . K - BOARDMAN


That is exactly what happened, is it not? - A. Yes.

Then you had climbed over the wall. You were
standing in the mud of the river bank I think you
said? - A. Yes.
But you could still over the top, could you? - A. It
wasn't a wall.  It was a like a fence that you could
see through.
What did you then see? - A. I bent down and I looked
up and there was no one round. So I looked again and
Gate C was opened and so I told my friend. We jumped
back over and just walked through.

In effect it was fairly quick that all this crowd
dispersed? - A. Yes.
Was there a difference this time because I think the
first time you said when people went in the Police
were trying to close the gate off and this time were
the Police actually helping through? - A. I offered
the Police Officer my ticket and he said, "Just go
in".
Was he on foot or on horse, that Officer? - A. On
foot.
Was there any horsemen around there as well? - A.
Yes.
What were they doing at that point? - A. They were
still building a barrage between the side of the
ground and the gates there.

You have never been to this ground before, of course,
and so you got in and then you looked around I
suppose? - A. Yes.
Did you know where to go? Had you any idea? - A. No,
we just followed everybody else.

In that sense it was easy because there were plenty
of other people apparently doing that and you
thought, "If they are going this way I will go as
well”? - A. Yes.
In fact you went down the tunnel, is that right? - A.
Yes.
                                                            81




                                              S. K. BQARDMAN


Q. As did many others- When you got into the tunnel
   when you first entered it, how full was it? - A. The
   tunnel wasn't very full as soon as we got into the
   ground but there were a lot of people coming in after
   us, still coming in.

Q. Did you walk round? What was happening when you
   walked round? - A. We walked round because my shoe
   was undone and I had enough time to bend down and
   fasten my shoe and then we just got up and just
   followed the crowd.

Q. In fact, you had enough room to do your shoe lace up
   within the tunnel at that point? - A. People were
   knocking and barging me but I tried to stay on my
   feet to tie my shoe lace.

Q. Was everybody walking at that point or were some
   running or what were they doing? - A. They were
   walking.

Q. You went down the tunnel but you did not quite get to
   the exit of it, is that right, before something else
   happened? - A. Yes.

Q. Tell me what happened then? - A. We met people who
   were still in the tunnel, couldn't get through the
   tunnel. How far back? - A. About five to ten people.

Q . Give it to me in metres or yards if you prefer or
    even inches? - A. About five metres.

Q. You think about five metres back from the exit of the
   tunnel you had to stop because it was blocked? - A.
   Yes, there were people still in the tunnel.

Q. You could not get through, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Could you see the pitch from where you were? - A. I
   saw the pitch for a moment and then I only saw it
   once. The match hadn't started.

Q. That is what I am trying   to find out. Did you see
   whether the players were   on the field? - A. Yes,
   because I saw one player   kicking into the goalkeeper
   and then I never saw the   pitch after that.

Q. You never saw it again? - A. No.

Q. At least that you can recollect anyway? - A. No.
nJ 1




                                                       S. K. BOARDMAN


           Q. So there you are standing in the tunnel? - A. Yes.

           Q. A crowd of people in front of you? - A. Yes.
       B
           Q. Also stationary? - A. There was more people coming in
              from behind.

           Q. Does it mean you were sort of getting into the middle
              of a group of people? - A. Yes, we were going further
              forward.

           Q. What happened then? - A. Me and my friend, I pushed
              him to one side so that we would both go into the
              same section. Then I lost my friend and never saw
              him after that until I got on to the pitch.

           Q. When you say you pushed to one side, do you mean you
              pushed your friend to one side? - A. Yes, so that we
              would stay together.

           Q. Which side did you push him, towards the left or the
       D      right? - A. To the left of the goal.

           Q. I use the word "worming" but somebody used the word
              "easing". Were you trying to push your way through
              the crowd or were you being carried forward? - A. We
              were trying to get away from where the pushing was
              but we never knew how bad it was to that extent.   So
              we tried to keep away from the barriers so that we
              never got stuck against a barrier.

           Q. You are still in the tunnel. Are you saying that
              this crowd that you were in worked its way forward
              and you got to the exit of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

           Q. Was that a voluntary movement by you or were you
              being forced along or were you able to walk under
              your own steam? - A. We were getting pushed along.

           Q. You were trying to get towards the left? ~ A. Yes.

           Q. When you first left the tunnel and you saw the
              terrace, what did it look like to you? - A. It never
              looked that bad.

           Q. At that point it did not look too bad? - A. No.

           Q. You did not see what was going on at the pitch at
              that time? - A. No.




       H
1<
                                                                    83




                                                        S. K. BOARDMAN


         Q. So you cannot say whether at that point play was in
            being or not? - A. No.

     B   Q. Then you and your friend were still together at that
            stage, were you? - A. Yes.

         Q. How come that you and your friend were separated? -
            A. We just couldn't stay together any longer.

         Q. Why    was that? - A. Because of the pushing.

         Q. Are you saying there was pushing from behind, from
            the front, from the side or where? - a . From behind.

         Q. Were you then being carried forward by this push into
            the terrace? - A. Yes.
         Q. Had you been to a big match before? - A. Yes, I have
            been to other Semi Finals but not to watch Liverpool
            in one.

     D   q   . You have not been to watch? - A. Liverpool.




     E




     F




                                         /Q. As you were being.




     H
                                                                 84



                                                   S . K. BOARDMAN




    Q.            As you were being pushed further and further
          into the terrace, I think you were being pushed
B        'slightly to the left, is that right? - A. Yes.

    0. What you wanted to avoid was the barrier? - A. Yes.

    Q. Because you knew that might hurt you, I suppose? - A.
       Yes.

    0. At that point, when you first started going down the
       terrace, how was the terrace compared with other semi­
       finals? Have you been on the terraces at other semi­
       finals? - A. Yes.

    Q. How did it compare to you, as far as you are able to
       say? If you can’t say I would rather you say so. - A.
       The other semi-final we got there early and we was at
       the front, and there was quite a lot of room.

    0. So this was much more crowded than anything you had
D      ever been to before? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did the crowd, was it a steady move forward all the
       time, or was there a movement back as well, a sway at
       all? - A. No, we were going back a bit because people
       were saying, "Push back".

    Q. Who was saying that? - A. Other fans were shouting,
       "Push back" because people were getting hurt, but you
       couldn't do nothing about it because you were still
       getting pushed forward.

    Q. So you could hear people saying "Push back", is that
       right? - A. Yes.

    Q. Were these people ahead of you, at the side of you,
       behind you, where were they? - A. People all over the
       place were shouting.

    Q. Were shouting "Push back"? - A. Yes.

    Q. Were there other fans who were cheering at this time
       that you can remember? - A. No.

    Q. You can't remember, or there were not? - A. I can't
       remember.

    Q. At some point you reached a position where you thought
       you would rest, is that right? - A. Yes.

    Q. Before we go on any further I am going to get you to
       look at a little plan of the terrace and I am going to
       ask you to put a cross on that, where that final
       position was. Just one other question, I know you hav«


H
                                                             85



                                                 S . K . BOARDMAN




     already said you never saw anything of the match, but
     can you say whether you noticed whether the players
     were still kicking around at that time, _whe.ther they
     were lining up to kick off, or what, or whether you
     just don't know? - A. They had kicked off by then.

Q. They had kicked off? - A. Yes.
Q. But you don't know how far into the match they had got?
   - A. No.

          MR. JONES:   This will be C303, sir.

          THE WITNESS:   I went down and I got to about
     here, and that is where we rested.  I went through the
     barriers. I never went under the barrier, I went round
     the barriers and I got to about here, and then that is
     where we rested.  (Marked Exhibit C308)

Q.        THE CORONER:   That is when the match was already
     in play, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. But you don't know how far on it was. Put a cross just
   there, then. When you were in that position, where you
   have just put your cross, just briefly describe to me
   what the conditions were like for you at that time? -
   A. I was getting squashed and there was people coming
   over my head as well.

Q. Where were they coming from? - A. They were coming out
   of the crowd.

Q. From further back you mean? - A. Yes.

Q. You mean they were walking over you? - A. They were
   getting pushed over people's heads.

Q.   Did people lift their hands up and were passing them
     forward, or were they running overthe people? - A.   No,
     they were getting passed forward.

Q. Was any comment made about that by people around you? -
   A. People were saying, "It's just as bad for us, why
   don't you just bide your time the same as us".

Q. Did you at that point hear anybody say, "Move back" or
   anything like that? - A. Yes, you could hear people at
   the front saying, "Children are getting hurt here, will
   you move back".

Q. You could hear that? - A. Yes.

Q. But I take it you couldn't move back? - A. No.
                                                                  86
V

                                                       S . K. BOARDMAN




        Q. And presumably the people around you couldn't move back
           either, is that right? - A. Yes.
    B
        Q. But you don't know what was going on further back? - A.
           No.

        Q. Because you were facing forward at that point? - A.
           Yes.

        0. Then were you gradually pushed further forward towards
           the fence? - A. No, there was people jumping over the
           side of Gate 4 into the alleyway between Gate 4 and
           Gate 5, and I just waited my time and made my way
           gradually across and I got over from Gate 4 into the
           alleyway where the Policeman helped everyone over, and
           onto the pitch out of the gate open at the front.

        Q. When you say Gate 5, you mean Pen 5? - A. Yes.

        Q. So what you are saying is that you stood still as near
           as you could? - A. Yes.

        Q. Then as you were able you worked your way further to
           the left? - A. Yes.

        Q. Then you were helped over by a Policeman in that
           alleyway? - A. Yes.

        Q. We call it Pen 5, and you went out onto the pitch from
           there, is that right? - A. Yes.

        Q.    And other people had been doing that as well, ahead of
             you? - A. Yes;--

        Q. I think you hurt yourself a little bit as you climbed
           over, didn't you? - A. Yes.

        Q.   But it has all healed up, hasn't   it? - A. Yes.

        Q.    That is good. Not surprisingly, the people in the
             terraces were very -- there was a lot of excitement
             and anxiety in the terrace while all this was going on?
             - A. Yes.

        Q. Did you by chance, you may not have done and if you
           didn't please don't guess, did you notice what happened
           to the gate in Pen 4? - A. No.

        Q. And then very fortunately you found your friend, didn't
           you? - A. Yes.

        Q. But there were one or two people missing off your
           coach, sadly, weren't there? - A. Yes.



    H
                                           S . K . BOARDMAN




You didn't know any of the other people, did you? You
were just with your friends, it was just a coach you
had boarded? - A. Yes.

You didn't know who was missing, did you? - A. No.

You just knew that there were some empty spaces? - A.
Yes.

Thank you.   You have done very well, I think anyway.

             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

When you went to get on the coaches before you set off
from Liverpool, there was a delay? - A. Yes.

Because there was a bit of pushing? - A. Yes, and the
Police were taking alcohol of anyone who was trying to
take it on the coaches.

Who was doing the pushing? - A. Just people trying to
get on the coaches, just the fans.

Why did this cause a delay? - A. The Police were taking
their time checking everyone's bags and they were
thinking what was the hold up for.

Who was thinking that? - A. The fans - well I think
they were thinking what was the hold up for.

What makes you think that? - A. Because people were
getting on the coaches so slowly, because everybody's
bags were getting searched and all the alcohol was
getting took off them.

What was the reaction of the people when they were
being held up like that? - A. Just, "Hurry up, we want
to get there '.

When you got outside the ground you heard someone
shouting through a loudspeaker, 'Stop pushing"? - A.
Yes.

Was anyone pushing? - A. Only the people by the
turnstiles trying to get in, because although it was
all ticket the queue wasn't going down.  It seemed to
stay the same so everybody was going through quite
slowly and people were thinking what was the hold up
again.

And what were they doing? - A. They were trying to get
nearer the front to get through the turnstiles.
                                           S . K . BOARDMAN




How were they doing that? - A. Well there was no
queues, it was just a massed crowd.

Then you saw Gate C opened and you went and took refuge
by the river? - A. Yes.

Why did you do that? - A. In our best interests, so we
wouldn t get hurt in the pushing or the shoving.

Who was pushing and shoving? - A. Just the people
outside the ground.

When you got into   the pen you were trying to get away
from the pushing?   - A. Yes.

Who was pushing? - A. The fans inside.

           Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING

I don’t think very many questions from me either. When
you were walking down the road from the roundabout, you
said, "A lot of people were walking to the ground, I
followed the crowd, they were quite well ■behaved"? - A.
Yes.

Tell us about the ones that perhaps weren't wholly well
behaved? - A. There were people - they were like
sitting on walls, but they weren't doing nothing
serious, they were just drinking, but some weren't
drinking alcohol, some were just drinking soft drinks,
and there was people shouting to friends, just like
there is at a normal football match when you are
walking to a normal football ground.

You may be able to help about something that we heard
about this morning, because we heard from a gentleman
who was the other side, the outside of the perimeter
gates that you got had through already, so you had the
advantage of being able to look back and see the time
when the gates were pushed open? - A. Yes.

It is impossible to say any precise figure, but can you
help us at least as to some "guesstimate" of a figure
of people who came through that gate after it had been
pushed open? - A. No. There was quite.a lot of people.

Would you say there were more than, say, 15 or 20
people went through? You were in a group of, I think,
10 or more that were at the side of you that you had
heard talking about the next time the gate opened they
were going in? - A. Yes.

Were there more people than that that came through that
perimeter gate? - A. Yes, I would say about 50.
A
                                                     S.   K . BOARDMAN




    Q. You decided the best thing to do was to hop over the
B      fence and get out of the way of these people who were
       coming through the gate? - A. Yes.                 '
                                                                     -


    Q. Were you also concerned that these ten that you had '
       heard talking about planning to force the gates if they
       had another opportunity, that you knew what they were
       doing was wrong? - A. Yes, so we tried - I said to ray
       friend, "Let's step back and get out of the way", so we
       just came out of the way.

    Q. Absolutely,   thank you very much, I have nothing else
       for you.

                     Cross-Examined by MR; KING

    Q. Stephen the gentleman you have just spoken to said
       about the blue perimeter gates being pushed open, but I
       think what you told us was this, and see if I have got
       it right, that when you arrived at the ground the blue
       perimeter gates were open, weren't they? - A. Yes.

    Q. And you went in and were guided in by Police Officers?
       - A. Well, there was two Policemen, one either side of
       the gates, and we got through without any trouble.

    Q.   Yes, they were allowing you in? - A. Yes.

    Q.   When you had got    through having been allowed in, you
         realised that it   seemed that people were getting
         injured who were   waiting in the crowd at the
         turnstiles? - A.   Yes.

    Q» This was the crowd which you were going to have to
       join, having been allowed in through the perimeter
       gates? - A. Yes, if we wanted to get through the
       turnstiles.

    Q. Yes, then I think you said when you stood back from
       that, that you saw the blue perimeter gates snut. You
       said, "They shut it"? - A. Yes.

    Q. And then they opened again and people came in? - A.
       Yes.




                              /Q. You weren't able



H
                                                           90


                                           S.K- BOARDMAN



Q. But'you were not able to say who opened the gates.  That is
   what you told us, is not it? - A. No, we could not say.

Q. So when this gentleman said to you that you had said - he was
   really inferring that - that you had seen the gate push open,
   you had not. All you had seen was the gate open again.   That
   is right, is not it? - A. Yes.
Q. The loudspeaker which you heard the message, did you see where
   it was? - A. It was by Gate C.

Q. Was it on the wall? - A. I think so, yes.

Q. When you had got through those perimeter gates and you decided
   you were not going to join the crowd because it appeared you
   could see people were getting injured, you told us that you
   saw four Police Officers on horses and they were by the exit
   gate? - A . Y e s .
Q.    Could you have a look at C.254? Have a look at that picture.
     Do you see where the van is? - A. Yes.

Q. I don't know if it helps at all, but can you see anywhere at
   all where you saw the Police Officers on horseback? - A. it
   was further back behind the other van.

Q. So it was on the van side of that little fence? - A. Yes.

Q. And further away from the photographer, beyond the van? — A.
   Yes.
Q . I thought that is what you meant, and I wanted to get the
    picture right.   So the Officers you saw on horseback, they
    were not themselves in the crowd of people who were waiting at
    the turnstiles? - A. No.

Q. And indeed, their   job seemed to be tostop people going down
   the side beyond the vans? - A. Yes.

Q. Let me just go on a bit to after you had gone through that big
   gate and you found yourself in the tunnel.  You may not
   remember, but you might. Do you remember whether the tunnel
   was flat or whether it went down at the end? Do you remember?
   - A. No.
Q. When you came to a stop, you might remember this much, did you
   seem to be on the flat as opposed to a slope? - A. Yes.

Q. So it helps you so you know what I am talking about, we know
   and everybody who has been to the ground knows, that at the
   end of the tunnel  before you get on to the terrace, just
   before, it slopes   downwards, you see. So we can perhaps
   identify where you came to a stop by that impression.    When
   you had stopped in the tunnel your evidence was that more
   people were coming from behind you? - A. Yes.
                                                                    91


                                                 S .K . BOARDMAN


    3. And it was these more people coining from behind you which
       propelled you on to the terrace, as I get the impression? - A.
       Yes .
    Q. And when you were on the terrace, and you say it was not too
B      bad, but you were being nonetheless carried forward because of
       people coming in from behind? - A. Yes.  It was worse than
       usual for full matches, but it was not the worst I had ever
       been in.
    Q. No, but did you feel you were in complete control of what you
       were doing? - A. I could move to one side. As the crowd
       swayed forward I could get across away from the barriers.  So
       I had quite a lot of control over myself, yes.

    Q. But when you were being asked by people at the front to move
       back a bit - do you remember? - A. Yes.

    Q. And you said, "We couldn't do anything about that";          you had
       wanted to move back but you could not? - A. Yes.

    Q. What was stopping you moving back? - A. Because there was
       quite a lot of people behind us and they were pushing forward
D      more.
    Q. So at the time you were getting squashed you would have liked
       to have got back? - A . Yes.

    Q.    But you could not because of the pressure   frombehind?     - A.
         Yes.
    Q. At the time you were getting squashed, that was at the time
       you have shown us on the plan? - A. Yes.

    Q. If I could just see the    acetate again, if I may. You have
       marked where you were.     We can see from there that in front
       of you there would just    be people.  There would not be any
       barrier in front of you?   - A. No.

    Q.   In front of those people would be   theperimeter   fence? - A.
         Yes.
    Q. Was it the people in front of you who seemed to be in some
       sort of distress? - A. Yes.

    Q. Was it the people in front of you who seemed to be saying,
       "Get them back", or words to that effect? - A . Yes.

    Q. Could you yourself tell from where you were that the people in
       front were in some sort of trouble? - A. Yes, a few of them
       looked quite bad.

    Q. And then, of course, everybody started coming over the top and
       so forth? - A. Yes.
              THE CORONER:   Well, thank you very much, indeed. You
         have been a real credit to yourself and to your dad and mum as


H
                                                 DISCUSSION


       well, of course.  Thank you very much for being here this
       afternoon.  That is all, thank you.

              Despite everything we are more or less right this
       afternoon, because we were aiming to finish a little bit
B      early, and we are. So, ladies and gentlemen of the
       Jury, it is Friday, and we are finishing until Monday.
       I d o n ’t have to repeat it all again, do I, but I do want
       to say have a jolly good weekend.     Look after
       yourselves.     Half-past-10 on Monday. If you want to
       leave us now.     I don't know about the domestic
       arrangements, but I take it that is all under control,
       Sergeant Griffiths.
             The Jury will go out and we will stay for a minute or
    two.   Not long, ladies and gentlemen.

                         (In the absence of the Jury)

             THE CORONER:     Yes, M r . King?

            MR. KING:   If I may briefly discuss something we were
       discussing just before lunch, and you remember my describing
D      events, how it came to be that I had a statement from the
       witness, Mr. McGauley.  In fact, I was doing those instructing
       me a gross injustice, because though in fact I don't retract
       what I said about the propriety of what they did had they in
       fact taken a statement off the witness knowing the person was
       to be a witness, in fact I am now instructed that was not the
       case at all, and such was the speed of events that it was
       purely coincidental that what happened was the name had been
       given to those instructing me as a prospective witness, the
       witness being a person who worked here, arrangements had been
       made for that prospective witness to be seen, a statement to
       be taken with a view to consideration, and then lo and behold,
       you called him, and as you know, sir, he was not on the
       original list.

             THE CORONER:     I know that. That is what amazed me

            MR. KING:   So in fact I was doing an injustice to those
       instructing me in the manner in which it came about. Having
       said that, had it come about in the original, way I would
       still submit as I had earlier, but I was anxious and those
       instructing me were anxious that there should be no Question
       of any sort of impropriety put upon their conduct in that
       way.
            THE CORONER:   That is very kind.  Thank you for
       clarifying that. You can see why I was a tiny bit concerned,
       because if he is a witness whom we don't actually summons
       until 10.30 and he turns up at 12, and in 1-and-a-half hours
       you have managed to track him down and take a statement, it
       just did not sound right to me.   If they had done it it
       would have been extraordinarily efficient, I must admit.

             MR. KING:      One of my colleagues, who will be nameless,


H
                                         DISCUSSION


not only indicated that he or she did not consider it was
improper but commended the efficiency of those instructing me
and wished for the same service.
     THE CORONER:   I will think about this point.  I find it
quite a bit of a problem because I seem to vaguely recollect
from my studies the point you made that there is no property
in witnesses.  I take it the rest of you would agree with that
as a principle of law? I have an uneasy feeling about it, and
I may be wrong there.  It is a weekend, and I have the chance
to think as well, have not I?
       I think, ladies and gentlemen, although we are starting
at 10.30 with the Jury I don't know whether we should not
start at 10 with ourselves so we can deal with the point which
M r . King has raised. You    d o n 't look happy, do you? You want
to start at 10.30 is what you are saying? I don't want to
press you on this. I will think over the matter over the
weekend that you raised.      My feeling is still, Mr. King, that
I am unlikely to agree tothe introduction of, if you like,
the Manchester match.    It does raise a very interesting
additional point, which is whether or not we should draw, to
use your words, the veil over other matches or events, say in
1981 or so. That is what I need to think about.           I can
distinguish easily in my mind between, on the one hand, 1989
and 1988 and everything else. First of all, it is the same
team.    It is the same event.     It is a sheer fluke, but it is
the same locus and the same ends. Although I would not want
to make 1988 a key focus, it does sometimes help to show up
the differences, if I can use that word.         I had, as you know,
originally intended to elude to 1981, mainly because it
explains some of the features of the ground.         It is difficult
to understand the features without knowing what happened in
1981.    You can see the purpose of that is not to establish a
course of conduct but to make intelligible why certain things
were in existence.    But I will reconsider that, because in
many respects it is out     of hand, and you        may blame me for
that, or not, depending     on your point of        view.

      Last time we talked on this subject I explained to why I
was anxious to allow people to have a relatively free rein
with their questioning, so that at the end of the day,
whatever the verdict of the Jury, and I have no idea what that
is going to be, because it is going to be their verdict, but I
will sum up and do what I have to do in accordance with law as
far as I am able.   In the end it will be their verdict.
Whatever the verdict, I hope that the majority of people will
say, "We like it or we don't like it, but at least we had a
pretty full hearing".    There will be some who will not say
that.   It is impossible    to please every single person.  I know
that, and I am not looking for that. On         the other hand,it
may be and also in order to bring some semblance of finality
to it, we will have to tighten up a little bit on the scope
and range of questioning.     I will toy with that over the
weekend as well.
      Can I just read you a little bit out of one of the cases.
                                       DISCUSSION


I am not very good at cases, but I will just draw it to your
attention.  It is R. v. H.M. Coroner for East Kent, ex parte
Peter Alan Spooner. and various other people , and R ■ v . H ,
Coroner for East Kent, ex parte Maurice De Rohan and
Margaret De Rohan. Queen's Bench Division, October 6. 1987.
I have not got the transcript, but I am taking it out of
Casebook on Coroners, published by Paul Knapman and somebody
else.  I just want to draw really the last few words of one
of the judgments to your attention.  It is the judgment of
Bingham L.J., and he says right at the end when he is
talking about intervention by the Court of Appeal by way of
Judicial Review in the course of a proceeding, and he is
giving illustrations where he might do that.   That is not
what I want to draw to your attention.  He then goes on to
say:
     "The fact that this is an inquest perhaps makes the
     argument even stronger because the coroner is by law an
     inquisitor;  the witnesses called are those whom he,
     under the statute, thinks it expedient to examine, and he
     is very much the master of his own procedure.

     These considerations are fortified here because the
     coroner...."

Please d o n ’t take this as meaning what I am now reading
applies to me. This is what he is saying about the Coroner
for East Kent:
     ” .... the coroner has immersed himself in a huge mass of
     material which the court has not seen. We have scarcely
     glimpsed the top of the iceberg of evidence with which he
     is familiar.   Very great weight therefore should be given
     to his judgment, although on questions of law he is of
     course exercising a judgment, not a discretion.




                                 /It is his duty.
     It is his duty to guide the jury to a correct
     verdict but his responsibility is to conduct a
     fact-finding exercise, not to apportion blame and
     not to decide civil liability.  In a case such as
     this the chain of causation may be of almost
     infinite length.  The coroner had to break it
     somewhere to keep his inquiry within tolerable
     bounds. He broke it at what I judge to be a
     reasonable and sustainable point, particularly
     bearing in mind the exhaustive public inquiry
     which had already been conducted by Sheen J."

     Then he talks about what he is going to do with
the appeal. That last paragraph is, in fact, true in
this case as well. We have got to break it somewhere.
Of course, it is a matter of judgment or opinion as to
whether the break is right, and we may agree or we may
differ, but in the end I have to try and do it as best
as I am able and as fairly as I am able.

     Lord Justice Bingham there says that he is not
dealing with apportionment of blame, or civil
liability, it is a fact-finding exercise.

      Now I am, as you know, very conscious that a
potential verdict, which I have not yet explained to
the Jury, is that of unlawful killing and we know
that.   It is potential in the sense that it depends on
the evidence whether it is one which will be left to
the Jury, but I certainly cannot exclude it at this
stage.   But you must remember if I were to leave that
issue to the Jury, and if I were to give them the
Lawrence direction, which was the one that was quoted
to me in a slightly modified form by Mr. Isaacs, then
the questions which are left to the Jury are not civil
evidence questions, or negligence;   they are questions
of recklessness, which is in fact different, as I am
sure all of you would accept.

     Therefore - this is, if you like, one of the
reasons why I am so, if you like at the moment,
disinclined to accept the submission - the fact that
one could produce, no doubt, a lot of evidence of
similar or dissimilar occurrences which might well go
to the question of whether or not there is any civil
liability is not really relevant to me. The way I
look at an issue is does this help or not help either
to prove or disprove recklessness within the terms of
the various Judgments of which Lawrence happens to be
one but there are plenty more, as I am sure you are
aware. No doubt when the time comes you may want to
address me on the law, but that is a matter for you
and not for me.
     So it is that factor which exercises ray mind in
deciding where to draw the line and how far to go doxm
the road.

     I agree that in order to understand or in order
to be able to comprehend whether an attitude is
reckless or not, it may be necessary to listen to some
evidence, and indeed a lot of the evidence which we
have heard already is really more on civil liability
and negligence than that, but you need it in order to
understand, and in order for me to be able to put to
the Jury in a comprehensible way the law in relation
to these facts.  If we did not hear it, it would be
very difficult to instruct the Jury because they would
be going off with huge lacunae of information, and
they would say, "Yes, but how can we decide whether
this was reckless if we have not heard ..." this, that
or the third thing.

     As I say, my thinking on this is directed along
those lines. Now obviously I am not expecting anybody
to address me on this now, because I have just raised
it and besides we want to go home, it is Friday, but I
am willing to listen to legal points on this if you
want to make any. But, if not, I will make my own
decisions.  I do not mean now, I mean at some
convenient time.  I will make my own judgment and then
it will be a matter for you whether you accept it or
not. I cannot do anything other than that.

     MR. KING: Can I just very, very briefly say that
I would like to consider what you have said, sir, and
perhaps make further submissions in the light of that
to support what I have already said as to the need to
look at certain matters.  But just as one very short
example as to how it would fit in with your analysis,
one aspect of recklessness is the foresight one has of
a risk and what one actually does to obviate a risk
and if, in fact, a similar occurrence has happened on
a previous occasion when the risk has been obviated in
a certain way when it was not so done on this
occasion, when the knowledge was there that it could
be obviated in a certain way, then that would be
relevant, in my submission, to foresight of risk and
the obviousness of risk.

     THE CORONER: Mr. King, I want to avoid getting
into a legal argument, because you are Counsel and I
am not and I bow in that sense to your experience, but
I am not quite sure whether that actually fits in with
this. That sounds a little bit like what I understood
was the Bateman test, which of course you will be
familiar with.  It seems to me from some of the more
recent House of Lords decisions that that is not quite
'the way the House of Lords has looked at the issue of
 recklessness.

     There is an element there, I agree, but I am
quite happy to listen to further argument.  That is
what I am trying to do. I am trying to make sure and
partly not deciding gives me a chance to think about
it, and it also gives you the opportunity to think
about it if you wish.

     MS. KING:   I will not say anything more now.     I
am just, in a    sense, rising to reserve my position.

     THE CORONER:  I   understand that. That is
perfectly all right.

     MR. MAXWELL:  Sir, could I take just a little of
your time in asking you for some assistance on the
question of the use of the video, and it is in this
context, that I do not know your detailed strategy in
dealing with the evidence, but it is quite plain that
you have given it very considerable thought.

     The position has been reached now where the Jury
have seen the video compilation on one occasion, I
understand.   They have also had put before them a
considerable body of oral evidence, and those
witnesses, you may eventually feel, are witnesses who
have tried to    assist the Jury and some of their
recollections   may be absolutely accurate, and the Jury
may so find, and they may be distorted, either through
lapse of time or perhaps through the distressing
experience that they have gone through.     Their
evidence is essentially subjective evidence.

     The video provides an objective account, albeit
with some limitations.  I think you described it as an
overview, and its assistance to the Jury is no more
than that.

     But, sir, it is my submission that we are
reaching a point where the Jury would be again
assisted by a reminder.   I appreciate that watching
the video is a sombre and distressing experience, and
it is also time-consuming.   But what I have in mind is
to invite you to consider whether the Jury should not
be asked again fairly soon, and perhaps even later
from time to time, to view this video because it can
be a valuable experience.   It can put the evidence
into context.  It can focus the evidence.   It can
correct it. To that extent, it may well be of
assistance to the Jury to take up, I think, 2 hours or
so fairly soon, and I invite you to consider that,
     I have also this much in mind, if I may just
finish.
     THE CORONER:   Yes, certainly.   I did not mean to
interrupt you.
     MR. MAXWELL:  If this further viewing occurs, _
then the parties who might otherwise be examining the
witnesses may themselves feel that a point is so £*-ear
on the video that it is unnecessary, or unprofitable,
to explore or challenge it. There was an example
earlier today, sir, when I think you referred to an
event as being one of which there was incontrovertible
evidence, and I took that as being a reference to the
gate being shown to be open on the video at a
particular time.  It may well be that the parties
would have that similar efficient attitude to the
evidence if they knew that the Jury would have the
video in their minds again, as no doubt they had it m
their minds at the outset of this Inquest.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Maxwell, you are quite right.
It has certainly been my intention to show the video
again to the Jury and, indeed, as you very rightly
say, it may even be necessary to show it to them a
third time, provided that one understands there are
limitations to it because, first of all, it is a
compilation, though I think a very good one, and
therefore does not cover 3 hours or 4 hours of events,
but it picks out particular events, but then it
concentrates on the main features.
     Secondly, I think that with regard to timings,
and so on, I would be inclined to accept the video
evidence much more readily than recollections of^
people who did not look at their watch.  So if the BBC
camera shows, for instance, that the matcn finished at
6 minutes past 3, that is the time it finished,
whatever a witness might say. Of course, the Jury
will have to make their final decision, but certain y
that would be my attitude.
      So, yes, I do go along with you.  I tnink the
 video does need to be seen.  I was not intending to
 look at it next-week, but I will think about it.
 Maybe you are right, maybe we should see it sooner
 rather than later.  I also accept the point that you
 make, that if your colleagues see it, and^ if they see
 things which cannot really be gainsaid, then there is
 not very much point in labouring those matters.
     As I said, and I have forgotten when it was now but I
think a couple of days ago, I would anticipate that as we
go along and as we start to get more and more supporter
evidence we do not want to have to - forgive the term -
grind our way through each minutiae of the crush or
otherwise, the openings of the perimeter gates and so on
because you will have heard them and we will only be
interested in the witness who actually says something
distinctly different. My intention certainly is to shorten
my examination-in-chief once I am satisfied we have heard a
reasonable amount of evidence and where it appears to me
that the witness is not really saying anything
substantially different from what we have already heard.   I
will be interested to hear whether the rest of you agree
with Mr. Maxwell's view with regard to the viewing/use of
the video.

     Mr. Maxwell, you were not here on the first day but
your colleague was, and we had Inspector Layton.   He
presented reams of figures and times all based on the video
evidence.    The purpose of that was, so far as I was
concerned,   to put into words the unchallenged - and indeed
it was not challenged — evidence with regard to timings and
things like that. Obviously it was not the subjective
feelings of people or things of that nature but if you have
a short of   (a) in this position and you have it from twoor
three people, like for example Stephanie Jones,    taking a
totally uncontroversial point, standing outside the gate,
the camera is pointing at her quite clearly and there are
several shots of her, it is all timed. She told us when
she perceived she came out of the gate and we can time that
to the second.   I cannot see how anyone can argue with
that.
     MR. PAYNE:   I have two points, sir. Firstly, I agree
with Mr. Maxwell that it would be helpful for the Jury to
have another sight of the video at some convenient time.
Secondly, with regard to the timing of the Court sitting on
Monday, when you mentioned that it was noticeable the whole
bench of advocates maintained a reticent silence. The
position is that several of us have to travel some
distance.  10.30 is obviously more attractive and I am sure
that collectively we would say we were in your hands about
whatever you wish to do.

     THE CORONER:   You are very kind. We will make it
10.30.  It is difficult when one comes from a distance, I
agree and we will have to deal with these other matters at
some other time.

     MR. MANNING:   I do not imagine you will send a
subpoena for me, sir, but I will not be here on Monday
morning.
      THE CORONER:   I will not subpoena you, Mr. Manning,
but i,t is very kind of you to let me know. The witness who
did not turn up, I am trying to make arrangements for him
to be summonsed and we will give him a fixed date. At the
moment the date we are aiming for is the 12th. That is not
because it is a particularly significant date but is
sufficiently far ahead for all the paperwork to be done.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your help.   I hope you
too will have a good weekend.
  (The Inquests were adjourned until the following Monday
                       at 10.30 a.m.)
