                                                                                                                         M I R . 15



  OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                             D a te and t im e raised       Is )            /   ? f~ )                  Num ber
                                                                                                                                                        ss
           n . <2><r
  T itle                                                                                     V v e ^ -p ^ v /V           U x

^jfn clu d e source and any document number if relevant)                                     £ 53^           \ \
V ■*
  ’ R e c e ive r’s instru ctio ns — u rgent a c tio n — Y e s /N o
                                                                                                                                                           Receiver




                                                                                                                                                           Indexer
   D o c u m e n t reg is te red /in d e x ed as indicated

   No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                                                       Statement Reader
   S ta te m e n t reader's instructions




                                                                                                                                                           Indexer
   Ind e x e d as indicated

   No(s) o f actions raised

   E x a m in e d - f u r th e r ac tio n t o be ta k e n                                                            j
                                                                                                                         f    ' S |   t '“




  F u r th e r a c tio n No(s)                                                                                                                             Indexer


  W h e n satisfied all actions raised O f fic e M anager t o endorse o th e r D o c u m e n t M aster N u m b e r F o rm
  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

              VICTORIA JANE HICKS




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                       At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

                24th April 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       A P P E A R A N C E S:




MR. D. FRASER                 Hillsborough Solicitors’ Group
                              Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH                  Medical and Dental Union of
                              Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                              Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN              Trent Regional Health Authority and
                              South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                              Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY                 Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE                 Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN               Police Federation of England and
                               Wales

MR. P. ISAACS                  Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and           Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF                 Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                                 INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                    B
                                                                        Pa&e



                        OPENING BY THE CORONER                             1.

                    C   DR. DENMARK Called

                           By THE CORONER                                  2.

                        DETECTIVE SERGEANT BRIAN JOHN McCOMBIE Called

                           By THE CORONER                                  8.
                           Cross-Examined byMR. FRASER                    11.
                    D
                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                           By THE CORONER                                 12.




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
Tuesday,    24th April,    1990


                 THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                          VICTORIA JANE HICKS


        MR. FRASER:   Sir, we now turn to deal with the
   case of Victoria Hicks and, of course, I appear in
   exactly the same guise as I did in the previous case we
   did.

        THE CORONER:   Mr. and Mrs. Hicks, I am not going
   to repeat how we are going to proceed because that will
   obviously be very similar.

        This then is a resumed inquest which was opened on
   the 18th of April, 1989.   On that occasion Neil
   Anthony Parkin, acting Coroner's Officer said:

           "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
           been identified to PC 3038 Cruttenden of the South
           Yorkshire Police as that of Victoria Jane Hicks,
           by Trevor Hicks, her father.

           She was 15 years of age, having been born on the
           20th July, 1973 at Bedford.

           She was a single girl and she lived at ___
                                   Pinner, Middlesex.

           She was a schoolgirl by occupation.

           She died at Hillsborough football ground following
           an incident there on Saturday, 15th of April,
           1989.    PC Cruttenden caused the body to be
           removed to the Medico Legal Centre and there she
           identified it to Detective Constable Simon Weigold
           who subsequently identified the same body to Dr.
           Denmark.

           It is the family wish that the body should be
           buried.11

   I then signed the burial order and adjourned it, but a
   few minutes thereafter we added a further sentence,
   still dated the 18th, saying:

           "Further information has come to light in that the
           deceased was found to be dead at the Northern
           General Hospital on 15.4.89, and not at
           Hillsborough at stated above."
Then I adjourned it again.

     Now there are several things which are not quite
right in that opening and I will deal with those now.
The first one is you very kindly again on the 27th of
April signed this form which I sent to you.   I think
we had got it right except you added the registration
details, but Bedford was actually correct.

     In addition to that, in fact Simon Weigold did not
identify the body to Dr. Denmark and we will deal with
that in the summaries.

     The alcohol in this case, as in the case of Sarah,
was negative, so Victoria's alcohol level was negative.

     Now we are going to turn to a different
pathologist, Dr. Denmark.   The reason why the
pathologists differ is, of course, because the bodies
were being deal with as quickly as possible, but there
is no significance in it.

                 DR. DENMARK Called

                   By THE CORONER:

Now, Dr. Denmark, you have already taken the oath on a
previous occasion? - A. Yes.

You actually came - I use the word "late" not in the
sense that you were not there on time but that
arrangements were made for you to come in the afternoon
and evening? - A. Yes.

At the time when you arrived Simon Weigold was not
actually there to do the identification.   Can.you just
confirm to me how you satisfied yourself that the body
we are now going to talk about was in fact that of
Victoria Jane Hicks? - A. I was given a sheet of
details.   I then confirmed that the details on the
sheet matched with the name of the deceased which was
written on the leg.   There was also a tag present, as
I remember it and we took a photograph as well.

In fact you recorded in your PM report that her name
was Victoria Jane Hicks, number 89? - A. That is right.

There is one correction in your PM report, the date now
should be the 15th of April? - A. Yes, it is a typing
error.

Now Dr. Denmark, if you would be good enough to give me
your cause of death and take me through the relevant
parts of your post mortem report please? - A. The cause
                        of death was traumatic asphyxia.   The key findings on
                        the outside of the body were the presence of petechial
                        hemorrhages over the face, where they were confluent
                        and over the eyelids in the conjunctiva.

                        Yes, anything else that this was to do with traumatic
                        asphyxia, pathologically speaking, apart from the
                        history? - A. In this particular case, no, sir, because
                    B   the purplish discolouration above the shoulders was not
                        as prominent as in some of the other cases.

                        What about internal findings? - A. I suppose the other
                        significant external finding is there was no other
                        large bruises or abrasions noted on the body.

                        On internal examination I noted that there was some
                        vomit material in the windpipe and that there was some
                        approximately 500 ml - half a litre - of blood in the
                        left side of the chest.   This is between the lung and
                        the chest wall.   I thought that this was due to some
                        tearing of vessels at the back of the check wall.
                        There was no damage to the ribs at that point, no
                        fractures.   It was also noted there was congestion and
                    D   bruising at the backs of both lungs and so some of this
                        bleeding may well have come from there.

                        I think also to expand on how that blood may have got
                        there, I was not impressed by the volume of blood in
                        that given that somebody who has had this sort of
                        crushing is very congested with blood, then a lot of
                        that blood could have run there after death, given that
                    E   there is a tear there for it to run out of.   I found,
                        just possibly coming to a question which may come, I
                        did find needle puncture marks in both elbows when I
                        examined the outside of the body.   I found no needle
                        puncture mark over the chest.   No evidence of a needle
                        track at that point.   Do you want me to expand on why
                        that might be?

                        Yes.   My understanding is that there may have been an
                        intracardiac injection of adrenalin attempted during
                        the resuscitative effort.    If that were so, could that
                        have played any part in the hemothorax which you found?
                        - A. In my opinion, no.    I think I would have seen
                        some sort of entry track.    It would not be the sort of
                        injury to cause that sort of tear in the back of the
                        pleura, anyway.    That sort of tear was an avulsion-
                        type tear which one might see in soft tissue injury due
                        to crushing.    The fact that I did not notice a needle
                        puncture track may well be explained by the fact that a
                        hypodermic needle has got a cutting edge on it.    It is
                        not just a cylinder that pokes in.    It has got a
                        cutting blade and therefore slips in and slips out and
                        may leave a very fine track.
                H                            - 3 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
There was no other significant natural disease in the
body that contributed to the death.   I did, however,
note that the brain was slightly swollen and weighed
slightly more than one would expect normally and I put
this down to the fact there had been some time for
anoxemic - lack of oxygen - to cause the brain to
swell.

You found no natural cause for this young lady's death?
- A. No, no natural disease.

Your findings together with the history leave you with
the conclusion that it had to be traumatic asphyxia? -
A. Yes.

You have already mentioned the needle puncture marks in
the arms.   You, of course, cannot say who made those,
but they would be entirely consistent with
resuscitative efforts in a hospital? - A. Yes.   I
assume that is what they were due to.

You certainly did not ascribe any improper significance
to them? - A. No, no.

You mentioned there was a little bit of blood oozing
from the right side - or blood stained fluidI think
you said - from the right side of the mouth.     Is that
usual or unusual with people who die? - A. I don't
think that is of any great significance.   Again, the
amount of congestion that can occur in this sort of
death, or in many kinds of death where there is an
asphyxial component, then there can be congestion of
the very soft tissues at the back of the nose and blood
can run out of those.

So it is not a significant finding? - A. No, no.

Would you attribute it to post mortem rather than ante
mortem events?   Obviously it was ante mortem in the
sense that that is what precipitated it, but could it
occur after a person has died? - A. Oh, yes.

I think we have already dealt with the hemothorax.
One of the other suggestions you made was that it might
be some tearing of the spinal branches of the aorta? -
A. Yes.

Can you just explain that a little bit, because it is
difficult to understand that? - A. The aorta is the
main pipe coming out of the heart and it runs down
close to the backbone and there are branches coming out
along the line of each rib around and the area that the
pleura was torn was a vertical line from where these
branches to each rib are coming out.   I thought that
                             what had happened was the tear in going across that
                             area had torn through some of these vessels.

                        5.   They are fairly fine vessels, are they not? - A. Yes,
                             fairly delicate.   I think one of the key points here
                             is that because the deceased was relatively young she
                             has got a very flexible rib cage and in somebody of
                             middle age you might have expected to see fractures,
                    B        but with somebody with this sort of pliable rib cage,
                             it does not surprise me that we get soft tissue damage
                             and no rib fracture.

                        Q. You mention an injury of the pancreas? - A. Yes, some
                             bruising.

                        Q. That is a relatively deep organ, isn't it?     Have you
                             any suggestion how that could have occurred? - A. Well,
                             it would suggest there might be some compression of the
                             stomach against the spine.   There was no actual
                             tearing of the organ or avulsion of it, given again in
                             this circumstance with this amount of congestion going
                             on, tissues are going to bruise easily, but if this
                             lesion occurred during the terminal phase, shall we
                    D        say, after the crush had started, then it could have
                             occurred with quite minimal trauma, excepting that the
                             pancreas, as you say, is well buried and therefore it
                             would have to be something that would press
                             significantly into the abdomen.

                        Q. You would need a considerable amount of pressure but if
                           there is congestion the bruising would show up rather
                    E      quicker than if you had merely delivered a blow to the
                           abdomen?   You would not expect to bruise the pancreas
                           by a blow to the abdomen in normal circumstances, would
                           you?   Or would you, I don't know? - A. In normal
                           circumstances it would take quite a severe blow to the
                           front of the abdomen to get bruising of the pancreas.

                        Q. As I understood you, what you are saying is that in the
                           situation which pertains when you have a traumatic
                           asphyxial death, the pancreas is more likely to bruise
                           than not if pressure is applied? - A. Yes.   The other
                           thing I am thinking of is that possibly this could have
                           been caused by somebody doing low cardiac massage near
                           the end of the sternum, in which case it is possible to
                           cause some bruising, given again that the organs would
                           bruise easily in this circumstances.   That is why I am
                           not trying to attach too much significance to it.

                        Q. In itself that was not a life threatening bruise on the
                           pancreas, as far as you can tell? - A. If it had been
                           it would have developed into pancreatitis or something
                           more significant.   There was not time for anything to

                H                                 - 5 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
develop, but I doubt it.   I doubt if in itself it did
mean much.

I want to turn to the question of defibrillation for
one moment.    If you could just describe for me, if you
are able - I know you are not a clinician but you might
remember - am I right in thinking that to defibrillate
somebody you usually put moistened pads on the body? -
A. Yes.    One puts electro jelly or uses special
conducting material to prevent burning.

If defibrillation is done correctly, does it leave burn
marks or any other signs on the body, as far as you
know? - A. I am not saying that one would say it had
been done incompetently if there were some small burn
marks.   I think thatwould be a bit unkind.

Were there any in this particular case? - A. I have not
commented on any which should mean there weren't any.

What I am driving at - I think you have perhaps taken
my question the wrong way round - what I was trying to
get at was this:  the mere fact you don't see any marks
from defibrillation does not mean either that it was
not done, or if it was done it shows that it was done
competently, whatever else one might say about burn
marks in other circumstances? - A. Yes, I take your
point.   No marks does not mean it wasn't done.

Because this is an electrical stimulation, or an
attempt at electrical stimulation to the heart, it is
one of the things which you cannot find at autopsy? -
A. No.

The electrical conduction system of the heart does not
lend itself to post mortem?   I mean, you can dissect
it out but you cannot tell whether it is conducting or
not by just looking at the specimen? - A. Well, you
certainly cannot tell if a DC shock has been given to
it in the last ten minutes of life.   There is no
technique that I know of that can show that.

     THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser?

     MR. FRASER:    Thank you, sir.   No questions from
the family.

     THE CORONER:   I have left one question out
because I do not think Dr. Denmark can answer that in
any meaningful way.   Do you want me to put it to him?

     MR. FRASER:   I think, sir, for the record,
perhaps a short explanation.
                             THE CORONER:   The point is, Dr. Denmark, and if
                        you feel you cannot answer it then you must say so, is:
                        do you think, looking at this particular case and
                        comparing it with your experience generally, that
                        Victoria suffered above average in this sort of
                        traumatic asphyxia situation, or not? - A. Do you mean
                        by that that I can gauge the length of time that she
                        was conscious?
                    B
                        Yes, that is right. - A. I don't think I can.   I was
                        very interested to listen.   I know it was the previous
                        case, but I think the videos probably tell us more
                        about the length of time when people went unconscious
                        than I could.

                        You heard Dr. Slater say that in his view loss of
                        consciousness in traumatic asphyxial cases was seconds
                        rather than minutes.   Would you go along with that? -
                        A. I would go along with that up to the point that one
                        has to differentiate then between crOsh asphyxia that
                        is going to kill you and crush asphyxia when you are
                        just being crushed, which is very unpleasant but from
                        which one can make a complete recovery.   I think once
                    D   one is starting to get petechia, which is an indication
                        of asphyxia...

                        In a serious way. - A. ...that that is what I am
                        talking about when I am talking about crush.   I think
                        we are talking about seconds then.  Whether we are
                        talking about fifty seconds or ten seconds, I don't
                        really think I can say.
                    E
                             THE CORONER:    Yes.      Mr. Fraser?

                             MR. FRASER:    Thank     you, sir.

                             THE CORONER:    Yes,  I just wanted to check whether
                        I had correctly remembered the intracardiac adrenalin,
                        and I had.    I just wanted to be quite satisfied in my
                        own mind that the hemothorax in your view had nothing
                        whatever   to do with that and also, of course,there was
                        no pericardial effusion,   was there? - A. No.

                        Certainly no blood stained one? - A. No.

                             THE CORONER:   Thank you.       Any questions of Dr.
                        Denmark?  (No)

                             Mr. Hicks, would it help you to talk to Dr.
                        Denmark afterwards?   (Y e s ) He has already indicated
                        that he is quite happy to do so.



                H                             - 7 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
   DETECTIVE SERGEANT BRIAN JOHN McCOMBIE Called

                  By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   Brian John McCombie, Detective
Sergeant in the West Midlands Police.

Yes, Officer. - A. Sir, the initial outline of facts
for Victoria are very much as for Sarah but for your
benefit I will repeat them.

I think we had better repeat them.  Forgive us, but it
is the only way to get them properly into the
transcript and also so the Jury can hear them for each
individual case.   Yes. - A. Sir, on Saturday, 15th
April, 1989, Mr. Hicks, his wife Jennifer and their two
daughters, Victoria Jane Hicks and Sarah, travelled by
car from their home in Pinner in Middlesex to Sheffield
in order to watch the semi final at Hillsborough.

Mr. Hicks was in possession of one seat ticket for the
North Stand and three standing tickets for the Leppings
Lane terracing.

It was mutually agreed that Mrs. Hicks should have the
seat and that Mr. Hicks, Vicky and Sarah would go on to
the terracing.

Upon their arrival in Sheffield at about 1245 and
following a picnic lunch, the family walked to the
Leppings Lane end of the ground where Mrs. Hicks
separated and went to her seat.

At approximately 1355 Mr. Hicks and his daughters
entered the stadium via Leppings Lane turnstiles.
Sarah and Vicky were seen to go through the tunnel
leading into the Leppings Lane terracing area.    Mr.
Hicks went to a nearby refreshment kiosk before taking
up a viewing position in the terraced area near to the
Police Control Box.   I understand from Mr. Hicks that
from this position he was able to keep an eye on Sarah
and Vicky whilst giving them the independence they
enjoyed.

Mr. Shaun Michael Fortune was a spectator in enclosure
3 of the Leppings Lane terraces and at about 1445 hours
he was standing near to the two sisters.   He noted
that Victoria was crying and appeared in some distress.
According to Mr. Jeffrey Rex, who was also in enclosure
3, by 1455 the crush in the pen was so severe he was
unable to move at all.   He says now he saw the two
sisters and could see that Sarah was holding up
Victoria who appeared unconscious.
Mr. Leslie Tudor was standing in enclosure 3 and saw
Vicky and Sarah some two feet in front of him.  He says
that after the two teams came out on the pitch there
was pressure from the crowd behind which caused him to
be pushed forward and he then realised that the two
sisters were now positioned some three or four people
behind him.

Mr. Tudor describes how the crushing continued in
enclosure 3 and how he became trapped from behind by a
pile of bodies before eventually being released and
taken to hospital for treatment.

Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
terraces, Police Constable Peter McGuinness was
assisting casualties.   At about 1521, with assistance
from other officers, he pulled a girl who he now knows
to be Victoria, from a pile of bodies in the pen.   He
carried her to the side fencing where she was passed to
Mr. Paul Turner, a spectator who laid her on the pitch.

In the meantime Mr. Hicks had become concerned for the
welfare of his daughters and had started to make his
way down the terraces in order to find them.  Whilst
doing this he saw the limp form of Victoria being
passed from the pen and on to the pitch.   Upon his
arrival on the pitch Mr. Hicks came upon his two
daughters lying on the touchline to the right of the
Leppings Lane goal.

It would appear they had been laid together purely by
chance.

Resuscitation attempts were made on Victoria by a
number of persons, including Police Constable Marshall,
Fireman Peter Mulcrone, Fireman David Sweetman, Dr.
Alexander Hutson and Police Constable McGuinness.

During this time Mr. Hicks fought desperately to revive
Vicky and had the added torment of helping and making
sure that the best was done for Sarah.

At approximately 1537 Victoria was placed into an
ambulance which had arrived on the pitch.   Attempts
were still being made to revive Sarah at this time.
The ambulance was then driven to the Northern General
Hospital by Ambulance Officer Alan Vevers.   During the
journey to the hospital Police Constable McGuinness and
Marshall, together with Mr. Hicks and Ambulance Officer
Anthony Edwards, continued their efforts to resuscitate
Vicky.

Upon arrival at the Northern General Hospital Vicky
received emergency treatment from Dr. John Calder who
                          was assisted by Staff Nurse Donna Parkin, but after
                          some fifteen minutes Dr. Calder made the decision to
                          stop treatment.

                          PC McGuinness informed Mr. Hicks of this decision.

                          At about 4.00 pm that afternoon Dr. Janet Doore also
                          examined Vicky at the Northern General Hospital and
                    B     certified life extinct.

                          Shortly after eight o'clock that evening, WPC
                          Cruttenden attended at the Northern General Hospital
                          and took charge of Victoria.   She then escorted the
                          body to the gymnasium at the Hillsborough Stadium where
                          a temporary mortuary had been set up.

                          At 9.35 that evening Mr. Hicks identified the body of
                          his daughter to WPC Cruttenden.   This officer later
                          escorted the body to the Medico Legal Centre where the
                          identification was confirmed to PC Wiegold.

                          On Sunday, 16th April, Dr. Lloyd Denmark carried out an
                          autopsy and submitted a report giving the cause of
                    D     death.

                           Can I iust deal with Simon Weigold - this is a crossing
                           of "Ts and dotting of "Is"?    I think I have already
                           alluded to what happened, but we have obtained a
                           supplemental statement to confirm that in fact in
                           certain cases he did not do the identifications and his
                           original statement was prepared on the basis that all
                    E      the pathologists were there together? - A. That is
                           correct, sir.   He had actually been on duty for about
                           twenty-four hours by the time he went home and he did
                           the identification to Inspector Timms.

                        Q- Then, of course, the people who came later he had not
                           done it? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q- One of the people who was with Victoria on the field
                           was in fact another doctor, Dr. Hutson? - A. That is
                           correct, sir.

                          I think, Mr. Fraser and Mr. Hicks, I am going to read a
                          bit out of Dr. Hutson's account, not because I want to
                          upset you but it might help you a little bit, possibly.
                          This is Michael Alexander Hutson.   He says:

                                "Unfortunately, I believe that all the bodies I
                                attempted to resuscitate were dead beyond
                                resuscitation.   I felt it appropriate to attempt
                                resuscitation on every casualty who merited it.
                                Nevertheless, I recall that one man urged myself
                                and other attendants to continue to attempt to
                H                               - 10 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                    resuscitate his two daughters who both appeared to
                                    be dead."

                             I am reading that because you did quite the right
                             thing, of course.   I would have done exactly the same.
                             That was Dr. Hutson's opinion at the time, and he did
                             the right thing as well.
                    B               Any questions?

                                          Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER:

                        Q. From all the various statements you have seen and read,
                           is it possible that anybody within those statements has
                           actually put a time upon the stage at which
                           resuscitation was attempted on Victoria for the first
                           time? - A. I can go to the first statement when she was
                           passed from the pen by PC McGuinness.

                                  THE CORONER:   Inspector Layton, have you got any
                             times on any of the photographic evidence in this case?

                                  INSPECTOR LAYTON:   Not a specific time, sir, but
                    D        I think we can give some indications.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   Who was the first person who...
                             She was passed out to...? - A. PC McGuinness, sir.

                                  MR. FRASER:   I think perhaps the point, sir, is
                             that in paragraph 8 of the summary, PC McGuinness is
                             noted to be assisting casualties:
                    E
                                    "At 1521, with assistance from other officers,
                                    pulled the girl who he now knows to be
                                    Victoria...

                             That is obviously a known time.   I just wondered if it
                             was possible from his statement to identify how soon
                             after he actually saw her some attempts were able to be
                             made to...

                                  THE CORONER:       I cannot recollect seeing anything
                             in the statements:

                        Q. Officer, do you remember anything? - A. No, sir.        There
                           was clearly a time on the photograph where PC
                           McGuinness identifies himself.

                                  THE CORONER:       Well, Inspector Layton will deal
                             with that.

                                    THE WITNESS:     That may be the way to answer it,
                             sir.

                H                                     - 11 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
     THE CORONER:    It would be nice to have the
answer but I don't think we are going to find it.

     MR. FRASER:   It was to try and fit it into the
framework of events, that was all, sir.   Thank you,
officer.

     THE CORONER:    Any questions?    (No)

     DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                    By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   Michael Layton, Detective
Inspector, West Midlands Police.

Yes, Inspector. - A. Sir, would you like me to deal
with that point first?

No, we will deal with it in later. - A. Sir, an
examination has been made of the visual evidence in
respect of Victoria and she has been identified as
being in the enclosure referred to as number 3.  That
is show, sir, on a BBC video tape, referenced MAP.l,
timed at 1438.44.10.   In fact that is the same
reference we have previously given in respect of Sarah.
As I have said, they were together.

On a video tape, again a BBC tape, referenced MAP.7,
1521.55.18, PC McGuinness is shown assisting to remove
Victoria from a terracing of enclosure 3 and the
officer has confirmed that identification.    He has
produced a plan  which has been given the reference
number PJM.l and that shows the location of Victoria on
the terraces.

Paul Winston Turner has viewed a photograph, which is
reference PR.5/17 and that identifies himself assisting
to carry Victoria from the gate of enclosure 2. That
photograph is timed at 1528.

On a further photograph, referenced NGN.2/35 the same
scene is in fact shown.

On a photograph referenced NGN.1/55, Dr. Hutson is
shown in the process of rendering heart massage to
Victoria on the pitch.

Again, sir, Mr.   and Mrs. Hicks have been of assistance
in viewing visual evidence and I have confirmed
identifications made.

NGN.2/35, does that show her being carried...   Oh,
that is right, it does.   The photographic evidence you
                           have referred to, PC McGuinness is seen removing her
                           from the terracing of pen 3 at 1521? - A. That is
                           right, sir.

                        Q. Then Paul Turner who was the receiver,   so to speak,
                           a t ... - A. 1528, sir.

                        Q. That is a difference of seven minutes, approximately? -
                    B      A. That is right, sir.

                        Q. I think PC McGuinness is from the terracing of pen 3,
                           but Paul Turner is at the gate of pen 2.   Does that
                           imply she was passed over the fence? - A. It does, sir,
                           which is the case in other instances.

                        Q. The question is what happened in those seven minutes.
                           We have no evidence for that, have we? - A. No, sir.
                           As I have said before, I am satisfied that the BBC time
                           is accurate.   The PR.5 photograph, as I mentioned on
                           the opening day, could possibly be one minute at
                           variance either way.   As to the intervening time
                           period I cannot give you an explanation.

                    D   Q. There is no doubt that the respective officers say that
                           he passed her to this...   Actually, what Mr.
                           McGuinness says is:

                                "After some time I assisted officers to pull a
                                second girl on to the pitch in front of the stand.
                                As Officers dealt with her I ran to the police..."

                    E      He does not actually say he passed her to Mr. Turner,
                           does he? - A. No, I believe that is right, sir.   I
                           think it is perhaps worth bearing in mind that at that
                           particular time on the video it is certainly apparent
                           that there are a large number of people in enclosure 3
                           and my perception of it is that it would have taken
                           some time to actually achieve what actually took place.

                        Q. That is right.   I am not complaining about it, I am
                           just trying to sort it out in my mind.   Can you just
                           turn to page 61 for a moment? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. This is one of Mr. Turner's statements and he refers to
                           a video map there, MAP.l, timed at 1527, in which he is
                           talking about Victoria? - A. That is right.

                        Q. Is that a correct identification, as far as you know? -
                           A. Could you just bear with me a moment?

                        Q. Yes, of course. - A. Yes, sir, I am quite satisfied
                           that that is correct.


                H                               - 13 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
That would give us an accurate...   - A. Two fixed times,
yes.

The first one is Mr. McGuinness who... - A. Yes.   It
is virtually...   It almost shows the same scene as the
photograph PR.5/17 shows, which perhaps does illustrate
that perhaps that photograph is a minute fast.

I don't think we will be able to take it much further,
will we? - A. I don't think so, sir.

Yes.   Have we got any plans or anything? - A. Sir, did
you want me to just clarify the situation regarding
Mr. Fraser's ...?

Yes. - A. As you have just mentioned, the video
reference MAP.l, 1527.07.11, shows Paul Turner in the
process of carrying Victoria just from the gateway
towards the pitch.   There is another photograph which
we have referred to as NGN.1/55, and although that
photograph is not timed, from the number of people
shown in both the video print and the photograph, I am
reasonably sure it would have been taken very shortly
afterwards.   A lot of the same people are in the same
shot.

What does that tell us?   Remind me what the photograph
is? - A. NGN.1/55, that shows Dr. Hutson in the process
if administering heart massage.

Sir, although I cannot give a specific time, I am
reasonably satisfied it would have been not very long
af terwards.

That was a newspaper photograph? - A. That is right,
sir.   Sir, can I refer you to a plan which has been
given the reference NWJL.108?

That will be C.81. - A. Also a further plan, sir,
MWJL.109.

That will be C.82. - A. Would you wish to refer to any
other plan, sir?

I don't think we need to, no. - A. Sir, if we can deal
with the video identification first in respect of
MWJL.108, it is, as I have already said, the same
location that Sarah was shown in, which in fact is over
here in enclosure number 3.

Also on that plan is a photograph which we have already
referred to which is one that Mr. Hicks in this case is
more than happy that it does in fact show Victoria.
That is in this location h e r e .   In this case he is
quite sure that it is Victoria.

In fact positionally it is very similar to one of the
yellow spots in the other one? - A. That is right.

In the case of Sarah. - A. That is right.   It is the
same photograph, but there is just a slight degree of
difference in the certainty.

It is a slightly better picture. - A. Sir, in respect
of MWJL.109, there are a number of identifications on
the pitch on this plan.       If I refer to PR.5/17, that
shows a location h e r e , sir, on the pitch in front of
gate...  Well, as it were, at gate 3.

Gate 2. - A. I beg your pardon, sir, at gate 2.   Then
there are other references to the photograph NGN.1/55,
which I have just referred to which just shows a
position here on the pitch.   There are two other
references to videos, sir.

But they are all substantially in the same area? - A.
Yes.

You have indicated these as potentially live at that
point? - A. There is nothing to be drawn from that,
sir.   It is purely the fact that Victoria went to
hospital and as such we choose to treat it as...

That is right.   In fact, if anything the implication
might be the other way in the light of Dr. Hutson? - A.
That is right, sir.  We had to make a decision as to
how to do it and we choose to do that.

     THE CORONER:     Any questions?

     MR. FRASER:     No, thank you, sir.

     MRS. NORCLIFFE:   Sir, I wonder whether you might
re^consider giving a "C" number to the plan PJM.l?
This is the officer locating in enclosure 3?

     THE WITNESS:     Sir, it is a plan submitted by
PC McGuinness.

     THE CORONER:   If it would make you happier I have
no objection to given that plan a "C" number.   The
position is virtually identical to the position shown
on MAP.l, but if you feel happier we will give it a "C"
number.   It will be C.83:
                        Could you just demonstrate it? - A. As you have said,
                        sir, it is virtually identical.   This is PC
                        McGuinness's plan and it shows a position h e r e .

                        It does show the position on the video.   Just take
                        your marker off and then re-position it. - A. It is, to
                        all intents and purposes, sir, identical.
                    B           MRS. NORCLIFFE:      I am grateful,   sir.

                                THE CORONER:      Not at all.   Mr. Fraser, anything
                        else?

                                MR. FRASER:    No, sir.

                             THE CORONER:   Just before you address me, Mr.
                        Fraser, would you allow me to say something?

                             You may have noticed, Mr. Hicks, that the death
                        certifications are at the Northern General Hospital and
                        in fact the opening statements were read on that basis.
                        I have already explained to the Jury that although
                        evidentially, and now we have heard it it seems almost
                    D   certain that Victoria was actually dead at the stadium
                        and I think from a practical point of view that is the
                        way one should look at it, when we come to saying
                        whether a person is dead or not, in most cases we take
                        it when some doctor actually sits down and says, "I
                        certify this person is dead , because it brings a
                        finality to it.   That is why those opening statements
                        are worded in that way.
                    E
                                Yes, Mr. Fraser?

                             MR. FRASER:   Sir, there are two matters which
                        arise.   They are not directly related to evidence
                        which you have heard but they are matters which have
                        concerned the family and if I may canvass them briefly
                        before you.

                             The first relates to the taking of blood samples
                        from all the deceased.  That is something which has
                        caused concern across the board I think it would be
                        fair to say to the bereaved families.   Can you give
                        the families an assurance, sir, that was a decision
                        which was made by you and not under the subject of any
                        influence from any force other than your own decision
                        and from your own experience?

                             THE CORONER:    Yes.    I don't want to answer any
                        questions but I can actually reassure you that it was
                        entirely my decision.     I certainly wasn't pressurised
                        into doing it.    There is no question about that.

                H                                  - 16 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
     MR. FRASER:   Sir, the other matter which arises
also has been canvassed before and that is the question
of the families being allowed to see their loved ones
immediately following death.   I know that you have
previously expressed a view about that.   There was
obviously some confusion, to put it mildly, on the
night of the disaster and the families obviously are
concerned that in future, if such a dreadful tragedy
happens again, they can perhaps be afforded the
opportunity to spend some time with their loved ones in
a quiet place.

     Having said that, sir, I heard what you said in
relation to my previous comment.

     THE CORONER:   All I can say is I just hope that I
never, ever, have to face another tragedy of this
nature, but I don't think I can really help add any
more to what I have said before.

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, I will remain briefly on my
feet, if I may.   This particular family has been the
subject of a tremendous amount of press attention since
they lost their daughters.   They have never before
publicly had an opportunity to thank the people who
helped them on the day and who have helped them in the
intervening twelve months.   They want me to do that
publicly through you, sir.   They specifically want me
to thank, without naming any individual because it
would be unfair to do so, those people who tried so
valiantly to save their daughters' lives, even though
with the benefit of hindsight it is now known that
those efforts were in vain on the day.

     Mr. Hicks went to the Northern General Hospital.
He saw Mr. Wardrope there.   He says there was- a
distressing scene but it was quite clear to him that
everything that could be done was being done and that
everything was in a state of complete control at the
hospital and he is grateful for all the efforts that
were made.

     Finally, sir, and it would again be wrong to
identify individual officers of West Midlands Police,
but he feels obliged to name specifically Sergeant
McCombie and Sergeant Appleton for the way they have
reacted towards this family in the past twelve months.
They have been very professional in their approach,
very helpful.   They have spent hours with them in an
attempt to allay their fears and they are most grateful
for that.   To some extent that contrasts with events
which happened prior to the involvement with those
officers, but they specifically want those officers
thanked through you, sir.
     THE CORONER:   Well, I accept the thanks which
have been offered, particularly in respect of the West
Midlands Police Officers.   I don't think I want to
make any comment with regard to the parenthesis with
which you surrounded it.   I think that would be
inappropriate and I think that as far as I am concerned
I have not heard that particular remark.  At least, I
have heard it, but that is all I am going to say.

     Mr. and Mrs. Hicks, to a certain extent Mr. Fraser
has made one of the points I wanted to make as I was
about to close this inquest, but I will nevertheless do
it again.

     You have been in a sense - you have been very
unfortunate altogether, but on top of all your other
misfortunes you have had the added one that your
grieving has been more or less public, because it has
been two daughters, they were girls, there has been an
awful lot of publicity, as you know better than I do.
So you have had that extra added burden of having, in a
sense, to live out your grief in public and I feel for
you in that.

     I think it is also true to say it must have been
an exceedingly - well, it must have been dreadful for
you on the day but I can imagine the time when the
ambulance came and you didn't know what to do, which
way to turn, that I expect you have thought over many
times, did you do the right thing.   Well, it is only
my opinion, but in my opinion you did do the right
thing at the time because I don't know whether you knew
that the man there was a doctor, but it is neither here
nor there, you could see there were people who appeared
to know what they were doing.   You cannot be in two
places at once so I am sure you did the right thing and
you did not let Victoria down, which must be the thing
which has is so painful when one thinks about it.

     Insofar as I can make a comment on that,   that is
my feeling.

     Finally, please accept our great sorrow at your
terrible loss and, of course, to you, Mrs. Hicks as
well.

     Now, ladies and gentlemen, we are going to close
for the afternoon.   Remember, don't discuss the cases
and please be with us again tomorrow morning.

  (The inquest on VICTORIA JANE HICKS was adjourned
                to a date to be fixed")



                     - 18 -
