                                                                                         M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and tim e raised
                                                                           ^
                                                                      gx eys{< \ q                    Num ber

         "31 CSSS'
.Title                      <=>T~    CLU-
^tndude source and any document number i f relevant)                  -Jol.

Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                    Receiver




                                                                                                                    Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                       Indexer
 Indexed as indicated                                                                Cr-V
 No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                             sio
                                                                                                                $
                                                                                                                   M
 Examined - fu rth er action to be taken



                                                                                                                K524
                                                                                                                       Indexer
 Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      (WEST DISTRICT)



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                  STADIUM DISASTER

              ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



              INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                      JOSEPH CLARK




                          Before

DR. S.L.    POPPER,    LL.B, B.MED.Sci,   BM, B S , MRCGP

               (Her Majesty's Coron er )




                            At

              The Medico-Legal Centre,
                   Watery Street,
                     Sheffield.

                            On
                      25th April 1990




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          .Official Shorthand Writers,
      55', Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors'   Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT
                                                                       Pap;e No.

                        PROF. STEPHEN JONES Called
                            Bv THE CORONER ..................
                    B DETECTIVE CONSTABLE PETER GADSBY Called
                             Bv THE CORONER ..................            3
                             Bv MS. NORCLIFFID ................           h

                             Bv MR. F R A S E R .................. .      7
                        POLICE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                             By THE CORONER...................




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L, Harpham Ltd
2 5th April. 1990

          INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF JOSEPH CLARK
     THE CORONER:    Good afternoon.   Please sit down.
     MR. FRASER: Sir, the first case you will hear this
afternoon relates to Joseph Clarlt. Joseph’s mum and
dad are behind me, sir, with his brother and Jackie, his
wife, is here as well with some other members of the
family. I appear in my usual guise as a member of the
Steering Committee on behalf of their solicitors for
whom I act as agent.
     THE CORONER:     Which lady is the wife?Can you just
show me so that I   can see you? And mum and dad are over
there, yes. Good    afternoon to all of you.
     I am just going to describe to you the proceedings
so that you can follow what is going to happen because
it is easier if you lcnow the sequence. What I am going
to do, first of all, is read the evidence which I took
on the 1 9 th April, 1989 and then I am going to just
confirm that that is correct - and I believe it is in
fact - and then Iam going to tell you what     Dr. Forrest's
evidence was with regard to the blood alcohol levels,
and then we are going to ask Prof. Stephen Jones to give
evidence of the pathological factors. When he has
finished the presenting Officer will come and will tell
me what he has been able to summarise out of the evidence
which is appropriate to the present hearings. Inspector
Layton will also give evidence with regard to the visual
evidence and, in particular, when he gives evidence he
will, first of all, there will be loads of numbers
mentioned, references to plans. Be warned, it is a
little bit confusing when you hear that. We need that
so when it is written down we can find the correct
piece of paper in the future should we ever need to
look at it, but when you are listening to it try not to
let those numbers and figures confuse you. You try to
listen to the words at this stage. And then lie comes
over, when he has done all that, and shows us on these
big plans anything else that we need to know. Is that
reasonably clear to you? Everybody who is giving
evidence today has already been sworn so they can just
come up and say their names and give the evidence.
Is that quite clear to you? I believe that Prof. Jones
would be quite prepared and, indeed, happy, if you felt
it would be useful, to talk to you privately after the
Inquest if there is anything on the pathology which
you would like to get from him so that you understand.
I am not sure where to look but I am trying to look at
all of you.
     Mr. Fraser, you will organise that, will you not,
insofar as it is necessary or required?


                          - 1 -
                                       PROF. S. JONES


    MR. FRA-SER:    Certainly, sir.
    TIE5 CORONER:   This is the resumed Inquest which was
opened on the 19 th April, 1989* On that occasion Neil
Anthony Parkin, Acting Coroner's Officer, said:
       "The body which was the subject of this
       Inquest has been identified to PC 2332
       Doyle of the South Yorkshire Police as
       that of Joseph Clark by David Roberts,
       his half-brother. lie was 29 years of age
       having been born on the 26th February,
       i9 6 0 at Kirkby, Liverpool. He was a
       single man and he lived at ____________
                                  L Liverpool.
       He was a fork lift driver by occupation.
       He died at Hillsborough Football Ground
       following an incident there on Saturday,
       15 th April, 1939.   PC Doyle caused the
       body to be removed to the Medico Legal
       Centre and there he identified it to
       Detective Constable Simon Weigold who
       subsequently identified the same body to
       Prof. Jones. It is the family wish that
       the body should be cremated."
     The Inquest was then adjourned and we now resume.
I circulated a form - in fact I think to you, Mrs.
Clark - and, on the 2 9 th April, 1 9 8 9 , you signed it
and returned it to me and the purpose of that was to
check the details and, as far as I know, everything
I have read is correct, is it not? Yes.
     The alcohol was estimated by Dr. Forrest and he
gave evidence regarding the alcohol levels on the first
day of this Inquest in respect of everybody but, in
respect of Joseph, the level which he measured- was
177 mg/ 100 ml.

     Prof. Jones?
               PROF. STEPHEN JONES Called:
                     By THE CORONER:
It is Prof. Stephen Jones, is it not? - A. Yes.
Prof. Jones, if you could tell me a little bit about
this young man and how we know that it is Joseph? —
A. The body of Joseph Clark, which had been designated
the number 25, was identified to me by Detective
Constable Weigold at the Medico Legal Centre here in
Sheffield. My findings were that this was a man of
average stature and good general physique. There
were multiple little haemorrhages, pinpoint
haemorrhages, in the skin, particularly in the region
of the forehead and around the eyelids and also on the
                                       PROF. S. JONES
                                       P. GADSBY


surface of the eyes and the lining of the eyelids.
These little haemorrhages were very characteristic
of death due to asphyxia and there was further
evidence of this on subsequent examination of the
body. As far as external injuries were concerned,
there was a flattened abrasion on the surface of the
right cheelc and another underneath the chin. There
were multiple haemorrhages present in other parts of
the body and there was a superficial abrasion due to
friction of clothing on the front of the right hip
bone. Further examination confirmed the presence of
these little haemorrhages on various organs inside
the body, including particularly the lung and the
heart. The brain showed a moderate amount of
generalised swelling. The injuries that I have
mentioned were, in fact, all of a minor nature and
they did not in any way cause or contribute to death.
The death was, in my opinion, due to traumatic
asphyxia and the changes that I saw were very
characteristic of that. There was no evidence of any
natural disease present.
       MR. FRASER:    The family have no questions, thank
you.
     THE CORONER:   Have you any questions?     (No
questions from the Jury)
       DETECTIVE CONSTABLE PETER GADSBY Called:
                     By THE CORONER:
     THE WITNESS:   I am Peter Gadsby, Detective
Constable in the West Midlands Police.
Yes? — A. The circumstances are that on Saturday, 1 5 th
April, 1 9 8 9 , Mr. David Roberts travelled by private car
to Sheffield with Joseph Clark, his brother, Stephen
Clark and Alan McGlone. They intended to watch the
FA Cup Semi Final football match at Hillsborough
Stadium. In fact, Alan McGlone also tragically died
that day as well, sir.
They entered the stadium at about 1415 hours and
Stephen Clark went to another part of the ground.
The other three men going together into Enclosure 3
of the West Stand terracing.
Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
terracing, Mr. Roberts went onto the pitch area and
saw Joseph Clark still in Enclosure 3 hut he was
unable to reach him.
At about 15^0 hours Police Sergeant 2332 Peter Doyle
went onto the pitch area between the penalty area and
the halfway line and found a man, now known to be
                                                                    F. GADSBY


                             Joseph Clark, being tended by spectators. The officer
                             assisted to place Joseph Clark on a step ladder and,
                             with assistance, carried him into the gymnasium.
                             At 1550 hours Dr. Allan Redgrave examined Joseph Clark
                             in the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.
                             At about 2250 hours Mr. David Roberts identified the
                    B        body of Joseph to Police Sergeant Doyle in the
                             temporary mortuary.
                             Police Sergeant Doyle later escorted the body of
                             Jospeh Clark to the Medico Legal Centre where he
                             confirmed the identification to Detective Constable
                             Ueigold.
                             On Sunday, 16 th April, 1989, following identification
                             by Detective Constable Ueigold, Prof. Stephen Jones
                             carried out an autopsy and submitted a report giving
                             cause of death.
                             Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                             blood sample from the deceased where the presence of
                             ethanol was detected. The witnesses proving
                    D        continuity are Detective Constable Thomas Bardell,
                             Detective Sergeant John Turner and Detective Sergeant
                             James Fletcher. Dr. Robert Alexander Forrest carried
                             out the analysis.
                             Those are the facts.

                    E o, There is a small typographical error in paragraph 5,
                             I think. If you turn to page 12 of your bundle there
                             you can confirm it for me - the last line before the
                             end, it says at 1555 hours Dr. Redgrave attended
                             and pronounced life extinct. 1/e have got 1 5 5 °. It
                             should be 1555, should it not? - A. Yes, sir.
                        Q. And there is one other small point which we ought to
                           just deal with. If you turn to page 6 , second
                           paragraph, this is the evidence of David Roberts and,
                           in fact, he says there, does he not, that Alan and he
                           went initially to pen h but they were not comfortable
                           and so they came out again and went into pen 3? -
                           A. That is true, sir, yes.
                                  MR. FRASER:   The family have no questions, sir,
                             thank you.
                                                By MS. NORCLIFFE:
                        Q.    Belinda Norcliffe for the Chief Constable of the South
                              Yorkshire Police. Officer, there are a number of points,

                H
                                                    -4-
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                    P. GADSBY


                             The first is with regard to paragraph 2, this group
                             entered the stadium at about 1415* Do you have a
                             time of the group arriving at the stadium, please,
                             any evidence as to that? - A, It says on page 4, sir,
                             about six lines down ••••
                        Q.        THE CORONER:   Yes, "Tle arrived at the ground at
                             2,15 p.m."? - A. Yes, and went straight through the
                    B        turnstiles.

                        Q.         US. NORCLIFFE:   Thank you. The second point is
                             is there evidence --- I am sorry, you have just
                             answered that particular point. I was just going to
                             quex’y whether it was actually through the turnstiles.
                             With regard to paragraph 3, I think there is some
                             visual evidence that would suggest at 1450 this
                             group were probably still together and I was just
                             wondering whether possibly Mr. Roberts’ evidence is
                             that they did, in fact, become separated from the
                             wording ....
                                  THE CORONER:     I did not hear the time that you
                             said ....
                    D             MS. NORCLIFFE:  I believe 1450 there is a visual
                             identification. The point is, sir, at paragraph 3,
                                       "Following the severe crushing ....
                                       Mr. Roberts went onto the pitch area
                                       and saw Joseph .... but he was unable
                                       to reach him."
                    E        I wondered if there was anything in Mr. Roberts1
                             evidence that indicated they had been separated after
                             14-50? - A. The bottom of page 4, sir, and starting on
                             page 5 there is some evidence.
                                  THE CORONER:   Yes, I think the answer to your
                             question is actually on pages 4 and 5»
                        Q. Can you read us the last two lines on this page?
                           This is David Roberts speaking? - A. He says:
                                       "Due to the pushing I inevitably became
                                       separated from Alan and Joseph but
                                       subsequently found myself about three
                                       feet nearer the track than them. It soon
                                       became obvious ,... I turned round and I
                                       only saw Joseph who was shouting for help."
                        Q. Yes, he says:
                                       "I managed to get onto the track. I
                                       turned round and only saw Joseph who
                                       was shouting for help."
                H
                             A. Yes.

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                     -5-
                                                                     P. GADSBY


                        Q, And at page •••• he must have been one of the first
                           people out on the track, in fact — page 2. I will
                           read it myself, I think# He says:
                                    "I tried to reach over the fence to
                                    him but could not .##•11
                             that means he was already out,
                    B                »«I ran onto the football field and told
                                     them to stop, that people needed help.
                                     I went back then to look for Joseph but
                                     could not see him."
                        Q.        MS. NORCLIFFE:   One last point - something has
                             arisen in one or two of the others. I wonder if there
                             is actually any evidence as to finding perhaps a half—
                             ticket or a counterfoil? - A. No.
                                  THE CORONER:   You mean whether he had a ticket,
                             is what you are trying to find out, evidentially?

                                  MS. NORCLIFFE:     Yes, sir.
                    D Q. Can you help? - A. No, I know of no evidence that we
                             have found that there was one in his possession.
                                  THE CORONER: But, as I said to you, members of
                             the Jury, it does not mean anything because they can
                             be lost. But I think somewhere, does it not say how
                             they got in? Does it not say they went through the
                             turnstiles? - A. Yes, he does say that he went through
                    E        the turnstiles.
                        Q. And that was at 1415? - A. Yes, at page h he says he
                           went straight through the turnstiles - line 6.

                        Q. Yes, it just says:
                                     "We arrived at the ground at 2 . 1 5 and
                                     went straight through the turnstiles ...•"
                             and then Stephen Clark went off one way and they went
                             somewhere else, but it does not actually say, 'I had
                             my ticket", not in the statement. That does not mean
                             he did not.
                                  Have you any questions? (No questions from the
                             Jury) Mr. Fraser, anything you would like to ask
                             arising from that?
                                  MR. FRASER:      Can you give me a moment, please?
                                  THE CORONER:     Yes, of course.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                      -6-
                                                                  P. GADSBY


                               MR. FRASER:   Sir, it is a matter really upon
                          a correction to the record. I understand that maybe
                          the Officer said that David is Joseph's half-brother
                          in his opening. In fact, the family say that David
                          Roberts is not his half-brother but is just a friend
                          of the family.
                               TIIE CORONER:  The Officer did not say that. I
                          said that in my opening. That was the information
                    B     we originally had but I am quite happy to accept that
                          he is not half-brother.
                                  You have got that, have you not, members of the
                          Jury?     Yes.
                               That is fine. I am glad you pointed it out
                          because we want it to be correct as far as we can.
                          I did not know.
                                  Any other questions?   Anything else arising?
                                  Mr. Fraser, there is a lady behind you not happy.

                                                 Bv MR. FRASER:
                    D
                        Q. Officer, there is nothing mentioned in the summary
                           about a ticket for this young man to go to the game.
                           Are 3^ou able to clarify the position as far as that
                           is concerned?
                               Sir, there is nothing mentioned in the summary
                          about Joseph being in possession of a ticket and,
                    E     obviously, the family is keen to clarify that position.
                          I wonder if the Officer has any information because,
                          if not, I may be able to assist.
                               THE CORONER:   I think we tried to deal with that
                          with your questions and the answer is we could not
                          find any reference to tickets in the statements.
                                MR. FRASER:   No, although I understand, sir,
                           that Jacqueline was, in fact, given Joseph's half­
                           ticket back by West Midlands Officers.
                               THE CORONER:   Is that so? That is interesting.
                          I am sure that is true if she says that.
                                  We will be able to confirm that, hopefully, for
                          you,
                               MR. FRASER:   I do not want to make more of it
                          than is necessary but it is important, sir. You
                          understand, I am sure.
                                THE CORONER:   Yes, of course. Can we go on to
                H          the visual evidence while we get it sorted out?


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                  -7-
                                                                 M. LAYTON


                               MR. FRASER:     Very good, sir,
                           POLICE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called:
                                       By THE CORONER:
                               THE WITNESS:   Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
                          West Midlands Police.
                    B Q. Yes? - A. Sir, an examination of video film and
                          photographic evidence has been made and Joseph has,
                          in fact, been identified in Enclosure No. 3 and also
                          being carried across the pitch.
                          David Roberts, the person you have just heard about,
                          has viewed visual evidence and he ha.s identified Joseph
                          on video and on photographs and, as I have said, they
                          are in Enclosure No. 3. Specifically dealing with a
                          BBC video tape he is shown on a video referenced
                          MAP 1 which is timed at 1450:26:02. On that video Mr.
                          Roberts is shown, together with Joseph, and Alan
                          McGlone. At that stage they are alive in Enclosure
                          No. 3. Sir, on a photograiDh referenced PR1/16A,
                          Joser)h Clark is shown near the perimeter fencing gate,
                    D     that is, the gate to Enclosure No. 3 and that photograph,
                          sir, is timed at 1504 hours. If you can just give me
                          a moment, sir, I just want to confirm --- I believe,
                          in fact, that Mr. Roberts is also shown on that
                          photograph.
                                THE CORONER:   THaile you are doing that I can tell
                           you that you are right. It is actually in the statements.
                    E      Peter David Doyle, in his evidence, lists various
                           things which he had in his possession and it says
                           'ticket for the match*.
                                 MR. FRASER:   That family are most grateful for
                           that (
                                THE CORONER:   That answers your question as well.
                           I am sorry we missed it. I have looked through these
                           as well but it is terribly difficult and one does make
                           mistakes.
                        q. Yes? - A. Yes, sir, Mr. Roberts has actually identified
                           himself on that photograph as, indeed,    on a number
                           of others and he is s hown as described in his statement.
                           Sir, on a photograph which has been given the
                           reference no. FB1/20, Sergeant Doyle of the South
                           Yorkshire Police is shown assisting to carry Joseph
                           across the pitch.
                           Jacqueline Gilchrist who, as you have heard, is in
                           Court today, has in fact viewed visual evidence and
                           she has been able to assist us in confirming the
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  M. LAYTCH



                             identifications made of Joseph.
                             Sir, if I can refer you to a plan which has been
                             given the reference number MWJL/33* that is a plan
                             of the terraces.
                        Q. C104. - A. I think that is the only one ....

                    B Q. Can you show us? - A. Yes, sir.       If we can refer to
                             this plan, this is Enclosure No. 3» ^>Te have got
                             three identifications marked on that plan. The
                             first one which, in fact, has not been referred to in
                             the summary but is shown on the plan, is a photograph
                             referenced DB16/29 and that shows Joseph in this
                             location here in Enclosure No. 3»
                        Q. That is the first sighting? - A. Yes, sir. In fact,
                           I may be able to assist you with a time in a moment.
                           In respect of the video identifications on the BBC
                           tape MAP 1, the identification there is in this
                           position here and then the further identification made
                           on the photograph, referring to PR1/20A, that is the
                           first of the photographs we have already mentioned,
                           the location then is approximately here, almost in
                    D      front of Gate no. 3.
                        Q. And that one is the one that is timed at 1504, is
                           that right? - A. That is right, sir, yes. In fact,
                           you may have some reference to a photograph PR1/16A
                           but they are, as it were, in the same location.

                    E q. Identical, yes.      And the video map is 1450 so quite
                             a big area? - A. Yes, in fact, I will double check
                             but I am satisfied that the first reference on that
                             is timed at 1445 but I would just like to double
                             check that.
                                  THE CORONER:    Yes.
                                  MR. FRASER:    No questions, thank you.
                        Q»         THE CORONER:  Yes, we will just make sure we
                             have got this time right? - A. Yes, sir, that is right,
                             1445.
                        q. So we have three sightings - 14-45, 1450 and 1504? -
                           A. That is right, sir.
                        q. And they are all within that Enclosure no. 3? - A. Yes,
                           sir.
                                  THE CORONER:   Have you got any questions? (No
                             questions from the Jury) Thank you very much indeed.
                                  I do not think we need call the Officer back
                H            because I think we have given you the answer. Are


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                    -9-
you satisfied with that about the ticket?
     MR. FRASER:   Yes, it was obviously something that
concerned the family, sir, but they are obviously
grateful for the clarification.
     THE CORONER: Indeed, and it was raised by your
colleague so it was perfectly correct. ¥e have tried,
as you know, in the summaries to say where we found
tickets but it obviously got missed.
     Now, that is all the evidence we are taking at this
stage. I want tosay to all of you - it is difficult
for me to see youall in one vision so you will forgive
me if I am not looking at you continuously- I want to say
to all of you that of course it is very, very important
that we should get things right and that is why we are
doing it and a great deal of effort has gone into
preparing the paperwork and talcing the statements and
trying to look atthe videos and films and photographs
and what—have—youto try and establish facts. But the
real issue which I try to keep in front of my mind, or
at least at one point in the Inquest to remember, is
that we are dealing with somebody who was very loved
within your family unit and, of course, I do not want
you to think that we are only interested in the darker.
I am very conscious that we are talking about your son
and your loved one. Thank you very much indeed all of
you for coming. TJe will rise for a moment, as we
usually do, and then we will proceed. Thank you.




                         - 1 0 -
