                                                                                                      M I R . 15



                                                                                                                               (o£>
          OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                               Date and tim e raised      \_^1.      O                Num ber

                  'X<20S"
                                             T <5.     CX            &
 ,sfklpcjude source and any document number if relevant)
V*
•fc   .
  v
 'C> j,

      ' Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                                 Receiver




                                                                                                                                 Indexer
          D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

          No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                             Statement Reader
          Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                                 Indexer
          Indexed as indicated

          No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                                        SIO
          Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




                                                                                                                                  Indexer
          F urther action No(s)


          W hen satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
    :          (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


               IAN DAVID WHELAN




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                       At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                       On

               26th April,   1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                                      INDEX


                        OPENING STATE. iEHT rt¥ THE CQROUER


                    B   D:i. S. SIVALQGANATHAu Called

                           By Tae Coroner
                           Cross-exa.nined by ' Ar . Fraser   4


                        POL. IfiSc*. ii. R. SAw'ERS Called

                           iiy The Coroner                    5
                           Ccoss-exauiined by Mr. Fraser      6


                        i)ET. Ii-fSP. ii. LAYTON Called

                           By The Coroner
                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        26th April, 1990


                             It'SOUKS! IKTO THE DEATH OF IAlj PA\/IO »HELAH


                             HR FRASER:    Sir, can I tell you that the request
                        you iaade before you recalled your Jury has been noted
                        and will certainly be acceded to.
                    B        THE COROHER:    Thank you.

                              MR FRASER:   Sir, you will now hear some evidence
                        in relation to Ian iJhelan. Ian's rnuia and dad are in
                        Court this morning. They have travelled fro;a
                        Warring ton.  I appear as the fataily solicitor and
                        obviously as a member of the Steering Coraraittee as
                    C   well.
                             THE CORONER:   Yes. Good corning.    Can I just, as
                        I do for all ay families - you weren't here on the
                        first day, were you? You were, well in that case you
                        probably know what the procedure is, but I tend to
                        outline it so you know what is happening.   In brief, I
                        read what happened on 19th April, 1989, whether there
                    D   are mistakes in it or not, then I try and correct the
                        errors which there may be. Then I tell you what the
                        blood alconol levels were, which I have been told by
                        Dr. Forrest and which you obviously already heard, then
                        Dr. Siva - that is that gentleman over there - the
                        pathologist, will tell us his pathological findings and
                        deal with any points that arise, and then we listen to
                        the presenting Officer, and then we finish.
                    E
                             The presenting Officer gives a lot of evidence
                        with regard to plans and maps and so on with numbers.
                        Please don't let that worry you or confuse you, just
                        try and listen to the text. The numbers we need for
                        the records.

                             who was the presenting Officer in the last case?
                    F
                             DET. INSP. ii. LAYTON:       Sergeant Appleton.

                             THE C0R0HER:   Perhaps we could just retrieve her
                        towards the end of this case, and could somebody remind
                        me, I want to deal with Simon Weigold's evidence.  It
                        is only a sentence that needs to be dealt with.
                    G        This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened
                        by me on 19th April, 1989, and on tnat occasion Heil
                        Anthony Parkin, Acting Coroner's Officer said:

                             "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has
                             been identified to DC 2762 Crowtner of the South
                             Yorkshire Police as that of Ian David Whelan, by
                             Doris Whelan, his mother.  He was 19 years of age,
                H
                                              _   1   _

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  DR. S. SIV A LO G A NATHAN


                               having been born on 11th narch 1970, at
                               Uar ring ton. iie was a single aan and ,ie lived at
                                                           Warrington.   fie was a
                               junior clerk by occupation.

                               He died at Hillsborough Football Ground following
                               an incident there on Saturday 15th April, 1989.
                               PC 106 Goss caused the body to be removed to the
                               tledico-Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                               Detective Constable Si^on tfeigold, who
                    B          subsequently identified the sane body to Dr.
                               Sivaloganatnan.   It is the family wish that the
                               body should be buried."

                          and then I circulated a for.ii to you, I d o n ’t know if
                          you can remember, but I did, and I think you, Mrs.
                          unelan, signed it, and you confirmed that tne name and
                          address and age, and place of birth, was correct, that
                          is so. isn't it?
                               Tne alcohol, the results, which were estimated by
                          Dr. Forrest, and he gave the evidence on the first day,
                          in tne case of Ian were negative.

                                 DR. SOi-iASUHDRUM SIVA LOG A NA T t?A ri Called:
                    D
                                               3y THE COROWER:

                                THE WITNESS:   Dr. Sivaloganathan, Lecturer in
                          forensic Hadicine at the University of Leeds, and a
                          Home Office Pathologist for west Yorkshire, sir.   I
                          perforsaed a post mortem examination of the body of Ian
                          Whelan, aged 19, on 16th April, 1989, at your request.
                    E     The body was identified to me by a Police Officer and I
                          checked the identity with the number and the name that
                          had been written on the body, which was then
                          photographed.

                        0. In fact, it was not Simon Weigold? - A. Mo, it was QI
                           Timms.

                        Q. But quite apart from that identification, you yourself
                           satisfied yourself by looking at the body and the tags
                           and so on? - A. That is right, sir.

                        0. That this was in fact           - A. That is quite right,
                           yes.

                        Q. The lad we are talking about? - A. That is right, sir.
                           During my examination, I found I would describe him as
                           being a well built adult male by which I mean that he
                           was relatively normal and fairly muscular rather than
                           stocky.  iie had numerous petechial haemorrhages, or
                           pinpoint haemorrhages, on the upper part of his body
                           and in addition there were tiny pinpoint marks on the
                           face which I have described as freckles, which could
                    H
                                                   _   1

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                               DR. S. SIV ALOG AHATHA i<




                        Q


                        Q
                    B
                        0


                        Q

                                               lie had no significant natural disease
                    C        which could cause or contribute towards the death.    He
                             iiad a number of relatively minor injuries on his person
                             union again did not have any relationship to the death
                             itself, which was due to traumatic asphyxia from
                             crushing in a crowd, sir.


                    D


                        Q.

                        o.
                    E
                        Q-




                    F




                        Q*
                    G
                        Q. That is right, yes, and I think tne cause of death you
                           gave as traumatic asphyxia? - A. That is right, sir.
                           This is a condition where a person is unable to breathe
                           because of pressure around him, as in a crowd, sir, and
                           very often consciousness is lost within seconds.

                        Q. That is very important, of course. - A. That is right.
                    H

                                                  - 3 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                 DR. S. SIVALOGANATHAtf



                                        Cross-exaaiined by HR. FRASER:

                        Q. Just one point, Dr. Siva.   In the post fiiorteui report
                           there is again reference to some fairly minor bruising.
                           Is it possible for you to say fro;a the bruising whether
                           that iaay have been caused while Ian was conscious or
                           may he have been unconscious? - A. I suspect ne
                           probably was not conscious, sir, because the colour was
                           rather brownish as opposed to being purplish, so I
                    B      suspect that he sustained them after losing
                           consciousness or when the circulation was very much
                           reduced, sir.

                        0. And you describe this onset of unconsciousness as
                           perhaps happening within a few seconds of the severe
                           crushing? - A. That is right, 10, 15 seconds.
                    C   0. And Ian would have known nothing after that? - A. That
                           is quite right, sir.

                        0. I acti grateful, doctor, thank you.



                    D




                                 HR. UliELAiJ:   That is fine.
                    E
                        0.        THE CORONER:   Yes, and I think, Dr. Siva, I will
                             take it, as you have offered with the other families,
                             if this family would like to have a chat witn you, you
                             would be willing to spend some ti<ne witn theai? - A.
                             Yes.
                                   THE COROiiER:  So if you feel that it would help
                    F        you to talk to Dr. Siva after the Inquest ha will be
                             available to do that. Any other questions from anybody
                             else?   (Mo response)

                        Q. Dr. Siva, I will excuse you so that you can go and see
                           the other family, and I think you are in another case
                           later? - A. Another one that is due for 11.30
                    G   Q. Yes, that is right.




                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                               M. R. SAUERS


                                         l'
                                          iATTHE w7   ROBERT SAIjERS Called;

                                                  3y THE CORONER;

                                  TH E u'TTHESS: Matthew Robert Sawers, sir,
                             Inspector, West Midlands Police.

                        0.          THE CORONER:   Good morning.  Can you take aie
                              through the summary, please? - A. At about 0915 hours
                    n        on Saturday 15th April, 1939, Mrs. Doris i/helan saw her
                    "        son Ian David tJhelan leave the family home with the
                             intention of travelling to Liverpool and on to
                             Sheffield.    Ian was known to have a ticket for the cup
                             seffii final football match at Hillsborough.  This ticket
                             was checked on boarding a coach organised by the
                             Liverpool Supporters Travelling Club on which Ian
                              travelled, departing from Anfield at approximately
                             11.30 a.m.
                                  Robert Steen, a senior Liverpool Football Club
                             steward confirms that Ian travelled alone on his coach
                             and that they arrived in Sneffield at about 1340 hours.

                                   Following the severe crushing in the Uest Stand
                             terracing Police Constable 105 Goss saw supporters near
                    D        to the Spion Kop North Stand carrying a casualty on a
                             hoarding.   He assisted to carry the person into the
                             gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had been set up.
                             The Officer could not find any sign of life in the
                             casua lty and so he wrote his number, 106, on the hand,
                             and returned to the pitch area to try and assist
                             others.

                    E             At 1611 hours Dr. Andrew Byrne examined Ian in the
                             temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

                                  At 1830 hours PC Goss returned to the temporary
                             mortuary and resumed responsibility for Ian's body.
                             The Officer later escorted his body, at taat ti.ae
                             unidentified, to the Medico-Legal Centre and identified
                             the body by reference number to Detective Constable
                             weigold.
                                  At 1035 hours on Sunday 16th April Mrs. Doris
                             Whelan identified the body of her son to Detective
                             Constable Crowther here at the Medico-Legal Centre.

                                  On 16th April Dr. Siva carried out an autopsy and
                             submitted a report giving cause of death.

                                  Found in Ian's personal effects was a ticket
                             counterfoil for the match but in the circumstances it
                             cannot be ascertained how or when he entered the
                             stadium.


                H
                                                       - 5 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                            M. R. SAUERS


                        Q. And that, of course, is because he was on his own, that
                           is right, isn't it? - A. That is correct, sir, although
                           there is a reference in Robert Steen, the steward's
                           statement, on page 7, sir.  iie refers to arrival in
                           Sheffield at 1340 as I have said, sir, and at the end
                           of that paragraph he describes a 15 minute walk to the
                           ground.

                        0. In other words, assigning for a iaoaient that Ian had      gone
                           straight to the ground. - A. Yes,
                    B
                        Q. He would have been there at 5-to-2, isn't it, 1355? -
                           A. Yes, I think probably an approximation around 2 p.m.

                        o. I think that on page 9 or 10 - Robert Steen - on page 8
                           - he says that he arrived at the Leppings Lana entrance
                           at about 2 p.m.? - A. Yes, he does, sir.

                        0. Tnat, of course, is evidence as to when Hr. Steen got
                           there, not Ian, but it gives one an indication of what
                           could have happened, but one must not make too .ouch of
                           it, because of course one can't say that is what did
                           nappen in respect of Ian.

                                  THE C0R0HER:    Any questions, nr. Fraser?
                    D                                                           a moment,
                                  HR FRASER:     Sir, will you just giv«   UK
                             please?

                                  THE CQR0HER:    Of course.

                                        Cross-examined by MR. FRASER:

                    E   0. Officer, Ian's parent were not aware that he pay have
                           been killed until something after 4 o'clock in the
                           inorning on Sunday. Are you able to ....

                                  THE CORONER:     I am sorry, I missed the first bit
                             of your sentence.

                        Q.         HR. FRASER:   Ian's parents were not aware that he
                             may have been killed until a telephone conversation
                             about 4 o'clock in the oiorning on Sunday the 16th. - A.
                             I ara aware of tnat, sir, yes.

                        0. Some 12 or 13 hours perhaps after he .aay have died.
                           Are you able to offer any explanation as to why they
                           saay not have been told sooner about the fate of their
                           son?

                                  THE COROiJER:  I don’t know whether the Officer
                             can answer that because he wasn't there, was he? Is
                             there anything in - I can't recollect anything in the
                             statement. There is one statement - let ;ae just find
                             it -

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                         H. R. SAUERS


                                  THE WITNESS:   I can make a brief comment, sir.

                        0.        THE CO ROWER:   Yes, well *nake an observation. - A.
                             This is a matter that Ian's parents have raised with me
                             in conversation, and it is true to say, sir, that I
                             have made a number of enquiries to establish the facts
                             of what I was told, and to seek to establish wnat the
                             sequence of events was in then* being subsequently
                             informed.   I don't think that I am able to take the
                             matter much further than that, sir, given the
                    B        parameters with which you have set these hearings.

                        Q. Yes. Can you just - I think we can just turn for a ^
                           moment to page 5. It is actually within iSrs. Imelan s
                           knowledge, this, because it is her statement. - A. Yes.

                                  THE CORONER:   Bear with me for one moment.    I
                             think I may be mis-remernbering, in fact, the case -
                    C        just one moment. No, I aia wrong, I am thinking of
                             another Inquest, I am sorry.    I thought this was it but
                             I was mistaken, it is not in your statement.

                        0. Officer, you had nothing whatever to do with the
                           organisation at the time, did you? - A. I did not, sir.

                    D   Q. No, and within the statements on this particular file
                           there is nothing to show the time sequence when the
                           parents were notified, or how they found out about
                           Ian's death, is that right? - A. Ho, sir, not other
                           than Police Constable Goss referring to the movements
                           of Ian's body. There are no references in the
                           statements to the sequence of events in informing Ian's
                           parents of his whereabouts and his death.
                    E
                                  THE CORONER:   Yes.  I think this point has, of
                             course, been raised already at the opening, not
                             directly for your case, but for others.   I don't think
                             we can explore it. It is probably outside the scope of
                             the Inquest and it certainly can't be explored with
                             tnis Officer.  It is obviously regretful that people
                             are not told, but I think it is also fair to say that
                    F        when you have a disaster situation on your hands, and
                             indeed emergency lines which nobody can get through, or
                             most people could not get through for quite a long
                             time, presumably because other people are using them,
                             it is exceedingly difficult to have things going quite
                             as smoothly as in an ideal situation we would wish, but
                             I don't think we can take it any further.   Do you v/ant
                             to take further instructions from Hr. and ilrs. Whelan?
                    G
                                  MR FRASER:   Mo, sir.   You understand, I am sure,
                             the parents' anxieties.

                                  THE CORONER:    Indeed I do.

                                  HR FRASER:   That is why I sought to obtain any
                             information the Officer may nave had.
                H
                                                     7
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                              H. R. SAUERS
                                                 H. LAYTON


     THE CORONER:    Yes. My recollection, and I don t
trust a y recollection this morning, I had better have a
look, but this was a case where we did know the name,
didn’t we, because Hr. Goss says that tnere was a
plastic card with the young lad's na;ne on it?

     Mil FRASER:    That is correct, sir, yes.

     THE CORONER:    Ian Whelan, but it doesn't say that
there was any address or anytning else on tnat card and
I don't know whether there would have been. - A. Uy
information from the faraily, sir,' is that there was,
but the Officer does not take the .natter any further,
other than tne saovements of Ian's body.   iie does not
refer to the enquiries that were raade to trace his
relatives.

     THE CORONER:   I don't think we can take this any
further at this stage.  I think we have just got to
leave it tnere, but I understand it aust have been --
well, it must have been pretty bad anyway, but it
doesn't help, does it. Anything else of this Officer?
Any questions?  (No response)   Mr. Fraser, I think Mr.
Whelan has got something ....

     MR FRASER:   Officer, tnere is no record in the
summary of any attempts to resuscitate Ian. Are you
able to say froa any of the information which you have
that any attempt may have been made.  I appreciate the
first signting of this young man was at the opposite
end of the piten, as it were, but is there any evidence
of ...? - A. No, sir, there is not.

That does not mean to say that it was not attempted, it
is just that it is right to say there is no evidence of
it? - A. Exactly, sir, yes.

     THE CORONER:    I think that is the important
point.  Vie can only give what we have been able to
find? - A. Yes.

     MR. FRASER:     Thank you, Officer.

     THE CORONER:     Did   you have any questions? (Ho
response)

          PET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                    By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:    Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
Inspector, West iiidlands Police.  Sir, an examination
has been made of the video film and photographic
evidence and Ian has been identified on enclosure
number 3. Sir, on a video, a BBC video tape, which has
been given the reference number MAP 8, and specifically
                                                                           it.   LAYTOrt


                             referring to a time reference 1449:58:24, Ian is shown
                             alive in enclosure number 3. Sir, on a further BBC
                             video tape, referenced MAP 7, timed at 1520:35:02, Ian
                             is snoi/n, at that stage apparently deceased, and I
                             stress the word apparently, because it is a rear view,
                             sir, but apparently deceased at tne front of enclosure
                             number 3.

                                  Sir, on a photograph which has bean given the
                             reference number AH9, Ian is shown being carried across
                    B        the pitch on a hoarding by a number of spectators who
                             nave not as yet been identified.

                                  Sir, Hr. and Mrs. i.’helan have, in fact, seen
                             visual evidence and they have been able to assist us in
                             confirming identifications which have bean made.

                                  I should perhaps point out, sir, when we come to
                             tne plans, that the point at which tne plans are parked
                             are specific references to video prints, still prints,
                             and it really should be stressed that Ian is obviously
                             seen on other occasions on video, but we are referring
                             specifically to timed prints on those plans.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   In other words, those are frozen
                    D        sections of tape? - A. That is right.  Sir, can I refer
                             you to a plan which has been given the reference number
                             M iJJLS?

                        Q. Yes, C112. - A. That is a plan of the terraces, sir,
                           and a plan which has been given the reference number
                           nsJJL.9.

                    E   Q. C113. - A. Sir, that refers to a plan of the pitch.   I
                           don't.know whether it assists, sir, I know that the
                           family are aware, but in respect of the photograph
                           referred to there, AII9, it does show that at that stage
                           Ian had in fact already been covered over, as it were,
                           so someone had apparently already decided ....

                        Q. Yes.  That of course is an indication that somebody had
                           intervened? - A. Actually looked at him, yes.

                                  THE C0R0UKR:   I think you must look at it, that
                             that is a positive thing actually, if you think about
                             it. Somebody nad seen him and done something, or
                             thought about him.

                        Q. Yes, carry on, Officer. (The witness referred to the
                           large scale plan) - A. Sir, if I can refer you to the
                           plan which has been given the reference number HUJL8,
                           this is a plan of the terraces and the points which I
                           have marked on this particular plan, sir, refer to --
                           in fact, there is a reference to a photograph which I
                           will come to in a second, sir. The reference number
                           given on the plan is DB16/29, and it is in tnat
                H          location there, sir.



J. L. Harpham Ltd
           V



                                                                           ii. LAYTOil


                        0. Yes. - A. I wonder if you could give ‘ne a .noment, just
                           to give you the ti;ae on that photograph, sir?

                        Q. Of course. - A. Sir, that photograph is tiined at 1445.
                           Then dealing with the video identifications,
                           specifically I have referred to two occasions, one at
                           tnis point here, and then another one which I have very
                           recently discussed with the family, whicii refers to an
                           identification shown at 1450:18:05, which is in this
                           position here.
                    B
                        q. Y e s . - A. Sir, in respect of the otner identification -
                           sir, those are both on HAP 1. In respect of iiAF 7,
                           that identification is shown about here.

                        0. That is the rear view which you mentioned? - A. That is
                           right, sir, yes. Sir, in relation to the pitch plan,
                           that is reference tjUJL9, the photograph referred to is
                    C      in this location here, which is towards the Spion Kop
                           end of the pitch.

                                HR FRASER:     Ho questions, sir, thank you.

                                THE CORONER:    Any questions?   (Ho response)

                    D   0. I    inost grateful to you, Inspector.

                                 THE CORQHER:   Ladies and gentlemen of the Jury, I
                           just want to say this, that this point about when
                           people are notified, if you think about it clearly caust
                           - i would love to deal with it because I can see how
                           important it is, but if you think about it, it really
                           falls outside what I told you our job is, whicfi is to
                    E      deal with who the person was, when he died, where he
                           died and how he died, and in that sense anything that
                           has happened after the person nas died becomes part of
                           the post mortem and so on. We have actually gone quite
                           a long v/ay down past the point of death, because I
                           thought it was only right tnat we should let the
                           families know, with a reasonable ambit, things that
                           happened after the event, because otherwise everybody
                    F      is left in tiie air, but the organisation of casualty
                           bureaux, emergency telephone lines and so on, is a very
                           coaiplex matter, and I know frora people who I have
                           spoken to tnat a lot of thought is actually given to
                           this question of how to improve it, because I don't
                           think anybody would argue with the fact tnat there is
                           plenty of rooin for improvement, but it is difficult
                           because of course, when a major disaster happens and
                    G      you give an emergency nuinber thousands of people
                           'phone, and the whole system gets clogged up, but I
                           don't want us to think about it at the moment.

                                That is not to say, Hr. and Mrs. Whelan, that I
                           don't fully - well, I don't understand, how awful it
                           must have been for you.  I aan just thankful that I was
                           not in your shoes, and that really brings me to the
                H
                                                  - 10 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        next point.  I can say that I am very, very sorry, and
                        of course I am, and so I a;n sure is everybody else who
                        is sitting around today, but of course it is almost
                        impossible to put ourselves into your position and I
                        just want you to know that within the li.aits of one's
                        ability, we realise that your particular sorrow is
                        unique and specific for you, at having lost this lad.

                             I am sorry that we have not got m o t e evidence for
                        you.   In sa.se cases there seetns to be a surplus of
                    B   visual evidence and in others there just isn't, and it
                        is a great pity that we have not got people who say,
                        "Yes,"*1 was doing resuscitation", because obviously
                        that would give you an element of corafort, but I did
                        point out to you the fact that the identification
                        whicnshowed Ian already covered meant that so.nebody had
                        dealt with him. Uhat has happened- is that we have not
                        been able to find that person and that, I aan afraid,
                    C   can happen in a situation such as this.     It does not
                        answer your questions, of course, but it aiight just
                        help you if you think about it in that light.     It saight
                        just help you a little bit.     I am not saying that it
                        will, but it alight.

                             Ladies and gentlemen, that is all we are going to
                    D   do today. Ue are going to rise for the briefest of
                        possible tiiaes, and we are dealing witn Mr. Brown next,
                        David Brown, and then we are going to have our coffee
                        break.  Is that satisfactory, iir. Fraser?

                             UR FRASER:   It catches oia a little by surprise,
                        but we will cope, sir.

                    E         THE CORONER:  Thank you.  I atn sorry, I should
                        have warned you about it. tie are taking iSr. Brown out
                        of order - that is provided Hr. Shortland is here
                        because we have made a specific arrangement for hira to
                        cotae. If he has let us down then we will tell you.


                           (The Inquest into the death of IAfl DAVID WHELAN
                    F            was adjourned to a date to be fixed)




                    G




                H
                                              - 11 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
