                                                                                                 M I R . 15




       OTHER DOCUF
                lUMENT FORM                                Date and tim e raised   _                          Number
                        XS
       T itle                               i       CZx-         No t-f—ti         C-f**~              W
        Irialude source an d a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)
    '- S a A

\   i 4Re?jeiver's instructions - urgent action - Yes/No      ____
                                                                                                                           Receiver




                                                                                                                              Indexer
       Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

       No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                       Statement Reader
       Statem ent reader's instructions




        Indexed as indicated

        No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                       0 /M         S IO
        Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                              Indexer
        Further action No(s)


       When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               •(WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL,    1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

             CARL DARREN HEWITT




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER. LL.B, B.MED.Sci,    B M , B S , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                      At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery S t r e e t ,
                  Shef f i e l d .

                      On

                 1st May 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                    A




                    B
                                                            INDEX


                        DETECTIVE SERGEANT JULIE APPLETON

                         By THE CORONER ...................


                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON

                          By THE CORONER ...................


                        PROFESSOR ALAN USHER - Called
                    D
                          By THE CORONER ...................
                          Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER.




                    E
                                                   -   -   00--00




                    F




                    G




                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        1st May   1990

                                   INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF CARL DARREN HEWITT

                               MR. FRASER:   The evidence you will hear this
                          afternoon, sir, relates to the brothers, Carl and Nicholas
                          Hewitt.  Carl Hewitt will the evidence you hear first, sir,
                          and Nicholas will follow immediately afterwards.   Carl and
                          Nicholas' mum and dad are within the precincts of the
                    B     building but they feel unable to be actually in Court to
                          hear the evidence and I am sure you understand.

                                  THE CORONER:   Yes,   indeed.

                               MR. FRASER:   They are able to watch the proceedings,
                          is they choose to do so, by means of the closed circuit
                          television which is available.
                    C
                                  THE CORONER:   Yes.

                               MR. FRASER:   Carl and Nicholas' grandparents are
                          present in Court with a counsellor and Mrs. Hewitt's
                          brother, sir.  The Hewitt family, sir, are represented by a
                          firm of solicitors who are a member of my Group and I appear
                          in both cases as their agent as a member of the Committee.
                    D
                               THE CORONER:   Thank you, Mr. Fraser.    Ladies and
                          gentlemen, I can't remember whether I mentioned it on the
                          opening day but whether I did or I didn't we have a camera
                          up there which is looking at me and I don't know who else.
                          So it was intended for Press in case they wanted to be out
                          there but, of course, it is exceedingly convenient in a
                          situation such as this where you have a family who would
                    E     like presumably to hear but who don't feel they want to be
                          in Court because they can be private and so on.    Mr. and
                          Mrs. Hewitt, I can't see you but you might be able to see
                          me.  Please feel relaxed-    I know this is a distressing time
                          for you but we will do our best to minimise that as far as
                          we are able.  And   you, is Hewitt the surname?

                    F             MR- FRASER:    Mr. and Mrs. Carter.

                                THE CORONER:Mr. and Mrs. Carter, I will explain        and
                           to Mr. and Mrs. Hewitt as w e l l , what we are going to do so
                           that you can follow the format which the Inquest will take
                           and then you will be able to hear the evidence in a moment-
                           We are going to deal with Carl's Inquest first and I am
                           going to read to you what was said when I opened this
                    G      Inquest in order to release the body to the family so that
                           they could have the funeral and when I have done that - and
                           I think that was on the 18th April we did that - I am going
                           to tell you what the blood alcohol levels were and usually,
                           following that, we hear the Pathologist.     The Pathologist is



                H                                          1




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        slightly delayed and so if he is not here at that point we
                        will go to the West Midlands Officer who will present a
                        summary of the evidence and Inspector Layton who will
                        present the visual evidence.    The visual evidence he will
                        talk about i t f first of all, give us all the plan numbers
                        and so on which tends to be a little bit confusing but it
                        usual l'y clarifies itself because he'then comes round and on
                        these big plans which you can see here he demonstrates what
                        he has been talking about.    At that point we will end,
                    B   subject to taking the Pathologist's evidence because
                        hopefully he will be here by then.    We will then rise for
                        just a moment or two and then we will do the Inquest of
                        Nicholas.    Exactly the same format but, of course, different
                        evidence and then we will move and terminate what we are
                        doing this afternoon.

                             This then, ladies and gentlemen, is the resumed Inquest
                    C   which was opened on 18th April 1989.  Let me just explain to
                        you I read to you what is written down in the opening, even
                        if there are mistakes in it and we correct the mistakes in a
                        moment or two.  What happened on the 18th April was this;
                        Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                             "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                             identified to PC 1962 Fiore Hurst of the South
                    D        Yorkshire Police as that of Carl Darren Hewitt by
                             Michael Harry Hewitt, his father.  He was 17 years of
                             age having been born on..."

                        We had a blank:

                             "...at Leicester.  He was a single man and he lived at
                    E                                Leicester.  He was an
                             apprentice cabinet maker by occupation.  On Saturday,
                             15th April 1989, PC 1962 Fiore Hurst caused the body to
                             be removed to the Medico Legal Centre and there he
                             identified it to Detective Simon Weigold who
                             subsequently identified the same body to Prof. Usher.
                             It is the family wish that the body should be
                             cremated."
                    F
                        Then, as was my practice, I wrote to the families to check
                        that we had got the information correct and complete details
                        and Mr. Hewitt on 5th May signed the form, confirmed the
                        name was right, the date was right and the date of birth he
                        gave us as 25th May 1971 and the place of birth as
                        Leicester.  He also confirmed his name was Michael Harry
                        Hewitt and Carl's mum's name was Brenda Mary Hewitt.
                    G
                             Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol levels and he gave
                        evidence of these on Wednesday, when we opened the Inquest
                        and the result in the case of Carl was that the level was
                        less than 10 milligrammes per 100 mils which for practical
                        purposes is negligible.

                H                                    2



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                   D.S.   JULIE APPLETON




                               Prof. Usher has not turned up but we are not too
                          concerned about that.  He knows about the Inquest and he
                          will come.  Can we turn to you please?

                                  DETECTIVE SERGEANT JULIE APPLETON - Called

                                                 Bv THE CORONER;

                    B   Q. Yes. - A. Julie Appleton, Detective Sergeant Julie Appleton,
                           West Midlands Police.

                        Q. Can you take me through the summary please? - A. On
                           Saturday, 15th April 1989, Mr. David. Graham Rees organised a
                           coach to convey members of the Heart of England Liverpool
                           Supporters Club to Sheffield to attend a Cup Semi Final
                           football match at Hillsborough Stadium.   At about 1130 hours
                    C      a number of supporters, including Carl Darren Hewitt and his
                           brother, Nicholas Michael Hewitt, boarded the coach in
                           Leicester.  Mr. Rees had obtained tickets for the party and
                           confirms that Carl and Nick had tickets for the terraces at
                           Leppings Lane.

                                The coach arrived in Sheffield at about 1350 hours and
                    D      Mr. Rees saw Carl and Nick leave the coach together.

                                Following the severe crushing in the Leppings Lane
                           terrace, Mr. Ernest Barry Gillatt, a St. Johns Ambulance
                           assistant, went on to the pitch in front of Enclosure 3.   He
                           went to assist casualties.  Mr. Gillatt saw Dr. William
                           Purcell, who is known to him, giving mouth to mouth
                           resuscitation to a youth he now knows to be Carl.   This was
                    E      on the pitch in front of Enclosure 3.  Mr. Gillatt went to
                           assist the doctor and carried out cardiac massage.   He
                           believes the time to have been around 1520 hours.
                           Dr. Purcell said that the youth was dead and Mr. Gillatt
                           moved on to assist other casualties.

                                Police Constable Steven Fiore Hurst went on to the
                           pitch and at about 1530 hours saw Carl lying in the goal
                    F      area at the Leppings Lane of the ground.  The Officer was
                           unable to find any sign of life and, with assistance,
                           carried Carl to the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had
                           been set up.

                                At 1605 hours   Dr. Andrew Byrne examined Carl in the
                           temporary mortuary   and certified life extinct.
                    G           At about 0315 hours on Sunday, 16th April1989,
                           Mr.  Michael Hewitt identified the body of Carl to Police
                           Constable Fiore Hurst.  This occurred at the temporary
                           mortuary.

                                The Officer later escorted the body of Carl to the

                H                                       3


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                      D.I MICHAEL LAYTON



                          Medico Legal Centre where he confirmed the identification to
                          Detective Constable Simon Weigold-

                               On Monday, 17th April 1989, following identification by
                          Detective Constable Weigold, Professor Usher carried out an
                          autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of death.

                               Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                          blood sample taken from Carl where the presence of ethanol
                    B     was detected.  The witnesses proving continuity of the blood
                          sample are Detective Constable Anthony Winfield, Detective
                          Sergeant John Turner and Detective Sergeant James Fletcher.
                          Dr. Robert Alexander Forrest carried out the analysis.

                               Found in the personal effects of Carl was a ticket
                          counterfoil for the match but under the circumstances it
                          cannot be established exactly how or when Carl entered the
                          stadium.  This concludes my evidence, sir.

                               THE CORONER:   I don't think I have got any questions.
                          Mr. Fraser, any questions for you?

                               MR. FRASER:      No, sir, thank you.

                    D          MR- LIMB:     No, thank you, sir.

                               MR. CATCHPOLE:      No, sir.

                                 DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called;

                                                  By THE CORONER;

                    E   Q. Inspector Layton. - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
                           Inspector, West Midlands Police.

                                Sir, an examination of video film and photograph
                           evidence has been made and Carl has been identified alive in
                           Enclosure No. 3 and subsequently being treated on the pitch.
                           On a photograph referenced MWL10/14A Carl is shown alive
                           outside the ground.   In fact, sir, there is a typographical
                           error on that summary.   It should be 1409.

                                On a video tape, sir, a BBC tape, referenced MAP 1,
                           timed at 1450:53:18 Carl is shown alive in Enclosure No. 3.
                           On a further photograph referenced PR1/14A Carl is shown
                           again in Enclosure No. 3 at this stage further towards the
                           front of the enclosure.   I would say, sir, my perception is
                           at that stage Carl is still alive but it is difficult to say
                           at what stage the process medically he has reached-   Sir,
                           that photograph is timed at 1503.

                                Mr. Gillatt has identified himself and Dr. Purcell on a
                           video, again a BBC video, MAP 7, timed at 1528:59:10 and at
                           this stage he is treating Carl on the pitch-

                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                    D ■I MICHAEL LAYTON




                                   PC Fiore Hurst has signed a plan of the pitch
                           indicating the point at which he actually saw Carl and that
                           plan is referenced SJF 1 - The Officer believes he is shown
                           on a photograph referenced SF1/47 and also a South Yorkshire
                           Police video tape referenced TB4 and timed at 1536:12 and at
                           this point, sir, he is actually carrying Carl across the
                           pi t c h .
                    B
                                PC Neild attempted to resuscitate a youth who was
                           lying on the pitch in the goal area at the Leppings Lane end
                           and he formed the opinion that the youth was dead and left
                           him to assist others.  Having viewed a photograph of Carl he
                           believes he was the youth that he treated and the Officer
                           has signed a plan of the pitch indicating the point at which
                           he actually treated Carl and that plan is referenced R H N 1 .

                                Sergeant France went on to the pitch at the Leppings
                           Lane end and assisted a number of casualties.     Having viewed
                           visual evidence the Officer believes he assisted to carry
                           Carl across the pitch having first tried to resuscitate him
                           and the Officer has signed a plan of the pitch indicating
                           the point at which he treated C a r l . Sir, that plan is
                    D      referenced M F 1 .

                                Philip Bliss is a medical student who was at the match
                           as a spectator and he went on to the pitch to assist and
                           attempted to resuscitate a youth in the goal area, the
                           Leppings Lane end.  Having viewed visual evidence he
                           believes that Carl may be the youth he attended to but, as
                           is the case as you have heard already, sir, he cannot be
                    E      absolutely certain.

                                Carl's father has viewed some of the visual evidence
                           and he has been able to assist us by confirming the
                           identifications where Carl is shown alive.

                                Sir, can I refer you first of all to a plan which has
                           been given the reference number MWJL163, which is a plan
                           outside the ground?

                        Q. Yes, C188.   - A. Then, sir, MWJL45, a plan of the terraces.

                        Q. That will be C189.   - A. Which of these specifically would
                           you like?

                        Q. Can I just have a look?  I think we will just take PC Fiore
                           Hurst's because the others are not identical but virtually
                           identical, aren't they? Very close anyway.   Let us have
                           SJF1  C190, and then we will also use yours MWJL46 I think.
                        A- The one of the pitch.

                        Q. Yes, which will be C191.  The Neild and France are not
                           identical but they are very close.  (moved to pl a n ) - A- If
                           I can refer you first of all to the plan outside the ground
                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                           PROF.   ALAN USHER



                             which is this plan here (indicat ing) and the position at
                             which we believe Carl is shown is actually in Leppings Lane
                             near to the junction with Vere Road in this location here
                             (indicating) - You can actually see the road sign Vere Road
                             on the photograph.  That is the timed one, sir, and I
                             believe it is 1409.

                                  In relation to the terrace plan this is in Enclosure
                    B        No. 3.  Specifically referring to the video identification,
                             the BBC video, the point at which I believe we see Carl is
                             approximately here.  I know we have mentioned it before,
                             sir, but everyone knows the dotted line refers to the
                             barrier.

                                  In relation to the photographic identifications which
                             are later the point at which we believe Carl is shown is in
                             this position here (indicat ing). I think we referred to...

                        Q. Mr. Hurst's? - A. Yes, SJF1.

                        Q. That is right. - A. On the pitch plan, the point at which we
                           believe Carl is located is in this position here at the
                           Leppings Lane end of the pitch.
                    D   Q. That   is a recollection,       isn't it? - A. It is, sir, yes.

                        Q. It is based upon what the Officer remembers? - A. That            is
                           r i ght.

                        Q. MWJL46, sir, relates to a photograph.  On the plan you will
                           see SF1/47 and that refers to a location here (indicating)
                    £      at the Spion Kop end of the pitch which you have already
                           heard evidence of in this summary.

                        Q. That is right and that again shows the movement across the
                           pitch, d o e s n ’t it? - A. That is right.

                                  THE CORONER:         Mr. Fraser.

                                  MR. FRASER:      No thank you, sir.

                                  MR. LIMB:      No,    sir.

                                  MR. CATCHPOLE:         No,   sir.

                                                PROF. ALAN USHER - Called

                                                        Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q-   Prof Usher, would you come forward? Prof. Usher, can I
                             just explain to you as you are walking up that Mr. and
                             M r s . Hewitt are actually watching the proceedings on TV.
                             They are not actually here but they can see me and you as
                             wel 1     If you could bear in mind that they are present so to
                              speak? - A. Yes.
                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                      PROF.   ALAN USHER



                        Q. Prof. Usher, thank you for being here.    You are Alan Usher,
                           aren't you? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. Professor of Forensic Medicine in Sheffield and the Home
                           Office? - A- Yes.

                        Q. You did the post mortem on Carl? - A. I did.

                    B   Q. He was identified to you as Carl Darren Hewitt         and   also by
                           number 44?   - A. Yes, the number was 44.

                        Q. Prof. Usher,   would you be good enough to give me the cause
                           of death and   take me through the appropriate and relevant
                           parts of the   post mortem findings? - A. Yes, I will give you
                           the cause of   death first?
                    C   Q. Whichever way you like? - A. The body that I examined was
                           that of a fair haired young white male of medium build.
                           There were   several small scratches and bruises about him.
                           There were   typical signs of traumatic asphyxia but there was
                           some inhalation of vomit, a considerable amount.  1 found
                           nothing, no natural disease, which could have either caused
                           or contributed to his death and I believe he was a healthy
                    D      young man with an average expectation of life for his age.

                                  I did take blood for analysis but I have not seen the
                             result of that analysis, sir-

                        Q. Less than 10 milligrammes per 100 mils.   - A. It was less
                           than 1O milligrammes?

                    E   Q. Yes. - A. I see-  I therefore give the cause,      inhalation of
                           vomit and traumatic asphyxia.

                        Q. Now, Prof. Usher, as you can imagine Mr. and Mrs. Hewitt and
                           the rest of the family are probably terribly agitated
                           because they think their son might have been suffering
                           terribly through this.  Can you give us some indication of
                           what actually happens in this situation? - A. W e l l , the
                    F      cause of death really depends on the fact that at some time
                           this young man's chest must have been compressed so that it
                           couldn't expand or relax and when that happens then within a
                           very short time, once the chest is absolutely fixed, a
                           matter of seconds, something like fifteen perhaps twenty
                           seconds, brings about unconsciousness and death occurs four
                           to six minutes later but the person would be unconscious
                           within about fifteen seconds.
                    G
                        Q.    So the inhalation which you have been talking about and a
                             lot of the signs which you have described are quite likely
                             tohave happened after loss   of consciousness? - A. Oh yes.

                        Q.   As far as Carl is concerned he would not have been aware of
                             what was happening to him? - A. That is right.
                H
                                                         7

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                             PROF.   ALAN USHER




                                     THE CORONER:     Hr. Fraser,   is that clear,   do you think?

                                     H R . FRASER :   I hope so, sir.

                                                Cross-Examined by MR- FRASER x

                        Q. Professor, perhaps you can just deal with the period in
                           which consciousness would be lost-   I think I am right in
                    B      saying in younger people it sometimes a little more quickly
                           than it might happen with a grown adult because the
                           compression can actually take effect more quickly on a
                           smaller person?’ - A. Well, I think it would be right to say
                           that the frame of the thorax would be more elastic in a
                           young person and so compression on it would be easier.

                        Q. So, in fact, the period before which Carl may have lost
                           consciousness could be less than fifteen seconds-  I don't
                           want to tie you down but obviously it is important for the
                           family? - A. Well, I can only say that it could have been
                           less.  I don't know that it was.

                                     THE CORONER:     Prof. Usher, thank you very     much indeed.

                    D                THE WITNESS:     Kay I be released?

                                  THE CORONER:   Let me just check one thing with Hr.
                             Fraser.  Would the Hewitts gain anything by talking to
                             Prof. Usher?  I do not know whether Prof. Usher is available
                             but I am wondering whether it would help.

                                  MR. FRASER:   I don't know, sir-   I spoke briefly to
                    E        Mrs. Hewitt before  we reconvened and at that stage she
                             didn't exactly know what her emotions were sufficient to
                             say.

                        Q.         THE CORONER:   May I ask you are you in. the building? -
                        A.   I arn in the building for the rest of the afternoon, sir.

                        Q. If it turns out that Mrs. Hewitt would find it helpful,
                           would you give her a minute? - A. Certainly.

                                  THE CORONER:   That is very kind of you.  Shall we
                             leave it that when we have concluded the second Inquest on
                             Michael, if Mrs. Hewitt would like to speak to Prof. Usher
                             he will be available to spend a little time with her.   Is
                             that satisfactory?
                    G
                                     MR. FRASER:      Thank you, sir.

                                     THE CORONER:   Subject to that, Prof. Usher, you are
                             free.     Please leave us.

                                  That is all the evidence we are going to take on Carl.
                             By the way, the name is correct, Carl Darren Hewitt, in that
                H
                                                               8

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                 PROF.   ALAN USHER



                        order? We will rise just for a moment and then we will
                        carry on with Michael, and we are going to change
                        Pathologists anyway.

                            (The Inquest, into the death of Carl Darren Hewitt
                                  was adjourned to a date to be fixed)

                    B




                    c




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
