                                                                                             M I R . 15




                                                                                                          Number
                                                                                                                      "3 X
OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                 Date and tim e raised



T itle                          i q-f     r x -                                                            .   2ojg>H-\qo .
■   (Jndude source and an y docum ent num ber i f relevant)
       *


    Receiver's instructions — urgent action - Yes/No
                                                                                                                       Receiver




                                                                                                                       Indexer
    D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

    No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                   Statement Reader
    Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                       Indexer
    Indexed as indicated                                                    --
    No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                              S IO
    Examined - fu rth e r action to be taken




                                                                                                                        Indexer
    Further action No(s)

    When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Number Form
  HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL,     1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

          GERARD BERNARD PATRICK BARON




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER,   LL.B, B.MED.Sci,    B M , B S , MRCGP

             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery S t r e e t ,
                  S h effi eld .

                        On

                20th April,    1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                           INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT
                A

                                                                       Page No.


                        Opening Remarks                                   1.

                    B
                        PROF. JAMES UNDERWOOD Called
                             Bv THE CORONER


                        POL. CONST. GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called
                             By THE CORONER


                        PET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                             By THE CORONER


                        Closing Reraarks
                D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                         20th April, 1990


                                              INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
                                            GERARD BERNARD PATRICK BARON

                               THE CORONER:    Good morning, everybody.  I hope everybody
                         found their way here and I hope that you are reasonably
                         comfortable.   It is a slightly different atmosphere, isn't it,
                    B    to the Memorial Hall, but once you get used to it I think we
                         will be happier.   I will be happier, I am sure, because I am
                         used to the set-up.    If you do have any problems, members O j.
                         the jury,    speak to Mrs. Taylor or Sergeant Griffiths and as
                         far as we    are able we want to make you comfortable.

                                 Can   you hear at the back there? That is the second
                          thing.   If someone can't hear then you must signal to me so
                          that I know you can't hear.

                                My legal colleagues, are you content and satisfied
                          how you have been placed.  You are a little bit isolated
                          there, I am sorry, it is a matter of space.  Have we anybody
                          here whom I don't recognise from a legal point of view?  I
                          think you have all been here.
                D               I am going to - I forgot to do it yesterday - I am going
                          to ask Sergeant Griffiths each day to just keep a note of who
                          is here from a representational point of view      purely for my
                          information.  It   is of no consequence as far as the inquest
                          is concerned, but you know if somebody says at some point:
                          "How was it?" it   is easier if we have a list,    so ifyou would
                          assist by giving   him your names.  You are not    being signed
                          in or signed out or anything like that.

                                Now before we start with today's cases,  ladies and
                          gentlemen, I want to go back on two inquests which we dealt
                          with yesterday.  One we left the paragraph out of the summary
                          and although it is not a matter of vital importance, I thinK
                          it might be better if we had it in so we have got it complete,
                          and that is the case of James Gary Aspinall.

                                 Mr. Fraser, I realise that your clients aren't here
                          but I take it that you will communicate this to them   and I
                          think they know about the paragraph anyway because they were
                          told I think by you, wasn't it?

                                INSPECTOR LAYTON:   That is correct sir, yes.

                    G           MR. FRASER:  Yes, I have spoken to the Officer this
                          morning, sir.  I am quite satisfied that Mr. and Mrs. Aspinall
                          realise exactly what is going on and why.

                                         POLICE INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                                                    By THE CORONER:
                        Q. Now, Inspector Layton, if you would come forward and this is
                    H      James Gary Aspinall? - A. Yes sir.

                                                       - 1 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                       D.I. M. LAYTON



It is an addendum which all of us overlooked in fact.   Can
you just tell me what it says please? - A. Yes sir, basically
the addendum refers to Detective Constable Fox of the South
Yorkshire Police.  He in fact has viewed visual evidence
and he has identified himself on a photograph which is
referenced MWl/2.  In fact that photograph was referred
to in respect of James yesterday.  This shows D.C. Fox
on the pitch as he is about to place the uniform jacket
that was placed over James' head.  Prior to this Detective
Constable Fox has stated that he did in fact attempt
resuscitation on James but without success.

And I think in fact it is dealt with on page 39 of my summary.
Have you got your summary? - A. I have not sir.

Well I will lend you mine.  I have not marked the paragraph.
It is the centre paragraph and I think you said with about
10 to 15.   Have I remembered it correctly? - A. That is
correct sir, yes.  Do you want me to read the paragraph sir?

 No, I don't think so unless you particularly want to
 it because you have given the sense of it.  I just wanted
 to say the time that he recollects it. - A. That is correct
 sir, 15.10 to 15.15.

       THE CORONER:  Thank you.     Any questions on that,
 Mr. Fraser, or anybody else?

       MR. FRASER:    No thank you sir.

       THE CORONER:  And the second case which I wanted just
 to re-ooen, so to speak and deal with, fortunately I decided
 that I was going to do all the adjournments at the end
 because I suppose in that sense we can take it that they
 are all still open except may be for Colin Wafer where I
 did actually say it, but it is only a technicality anyway.

       This is Colin Andrew Hugh William Sefton.        In fact
 it was you, I think, who raised the point.

       MS. NORCLIFFE:    Yes sir.

       THE CORONER:    So I am much obliged to you for making it.

. I think the point that you raised, Inspector Sawers, was
  there was nothing in the summary which indicated whether
  or not this lad had a ticket.  Is that right?  A.
  INSP. SAWERS: That is correct, sir, yes.

. And just for the record can you actually tell me what the
  answer to that is, did he or didn't he as far as we know?
  - A. I can confirm, sir, that in Mr. Sefton's personal
  effects was found a match ticket which has indeed been
  returned to the family and I would refer you also, sir,
                                                             THE CORONER



                        to the witness Campbell's statement, Anthony Campbell.
                        Page reference sir at the top of page 6. Whilst it does
                        not deal directly with Sefton's ticket it deals with his
                        own ticket and the fact that he and Andrew Sefton were
                        together.

                              THE CORONER:  Yes, that is right and he in fact still
                        has it, hasn't he? Any questions on that? No.     It is
                    B   merely correcting the recording.   Well it is so that it
                        is complete, not a correction.   We will try and remember
                        to deal with that because it is a useful point and I
                        appreciate it.

                              MS. NORCLIFFE: Sir, I am obliged for that point
                        being dealt with.  It will actually arise in the first
                        two of the ones we are dealing with this morning.
                    C
                              THE CORONER:  Yes, and I think the Officers have
                        already researched the points so they should be able to
                        deal with it, if I remember to ask them.  Thank you very
                        much indeed.

                              Ladies and gentlemen, I just want to say one other
                        thing about these tickets.  Be careful.  I will be directing
                    D   you.  When the time comes for verdicts I will hopefully
                        remember to direct you with regard to this, but we mentioned
                        tickets I think yesterday, if you remember.

                              Obviously if a chap or girl has a ticket that is
                        useful information, we know it, but merely because a ticket
                        isn't there doesn't necessarily mean that he did not have
                        one and there is no point at this stage of the inquest in
                    E   exploring that question.  The reason why I say it does not
                        "necessarily mean" is because it could have been lost in
                        the circumstances, but if the matter becomes relevant
                        then if need be we will just go over the ground again in
                        those cases where it may be an issue.  Are you content with
                        that?

                              MS. NORCLIFFE:   I am sir.  I would just like to say
                    F   I am not trying to raise any inference by bringing out
                        this particular point.   It just occurred to me that this
                        paragraph was missing. I do fully appreciate ....

                              THE CORONER:  I quite understand and I am most
                        grateful to you for raising it because it does 'clarify it,
                        but I am anxious that people should not necessarily draw
                    G   an inference but we can't actually say it, at least not
                        at this stage.

                              MS. NORCLIFFE:   Thank you.

                              THE CORONER:  Now this is our first case this morning
                        and it refers to Gerard Bernard Patrick Baron.

                H
                                               - 3 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                              MR. FRASER:  I appear in this matter as a member of
                        the Hillsborough Steering Committee; on behalf of
                        Mrs. Baron's solicitors as their agent.  Mrs. Baron is
                        not in Court but Mr. Baron's daughter and her husband are.
                        They are within the precincts of the building and I
                        understand they wish to be present.

                              THE CORONER:    They do want to be here, don't they?
                    B
                              MR. FRASER:    Yes.

                              THE CORONER:  Well we will wait for them to come in.
                        As it happens I had actually bumped into them so I knew
                        they were here and I could not see them.

                              This is a resumed inquest which was opened on the
                    C   18th April, 1989.

                              Now I think that you probably were not here on the
                        opening day, were you, so you don't actually know what is
                        going to happen.  I am not repeating everything I said on
                        the opening day but I will briefly outline for you what
                        we are going to do.
                D             1 am going to read what was said to me on the
                        18th of April.  There may be a few errors in that.   Don't
                        worry, hopefully we will correct them as we go along.
                        Then we are going to listen to the pathologist.   Then we
                        are going to hear West Midlands Police Officers telling us
                        what is in their summaries and some visual evidence and so
                        on that has been found and then we are going to conclude
                        at this stage.  We will adjourn all these inquests at
                    E   the end when I rise some time in May until such time as
                        we know what we are then going to do in the future because
                        at the moment I don't know, and nor does anybody else
                        quite what the next stage is going to be, but the objective
                        is to try and answer at least some of the issues which
                        families and others are interested in but it is done in
                        a non-adversarial and non-controversial way.   Have I made
                        that clear to you? You have understood that, haven't you?
                    F
                              Now on that opening on the 18th April 1989, Neil
                        Anthony Parkin, my Acting Coroner's Officer said:

                              "The body which is the subject of this Inquest
                              has been identified to PC 1559 Bollons of the
                              South Yorkshire Police as that of Gerard Baron
                    G         by David Richmond his son-in-law."

                        That is you, isn't it?

                              MR. RICHMOND:     Yes.

                              THE CORONER:  "He was 65 years of age having
                              been born on the 25th June 1922 at Preston,
                    H         Lancashire.  He was a married man and he lived


                                                    _   4   _

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                           PROF. J. UNDERWOOD



                               at                                Preston.
                               He was a retired Postal Worker by occupation.
                               He died at Hillsborough Football Ground
                               following an incident there on Saturday,
                               15th April 1989.  PC 1559 Bollons caused the
                               body to be removed to the Medico-Legal Centre
                               and there he identified it to Detective
                               Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently
                    B          identified the same body to Prof. Underwood.

                         MR. RICHMOND:    Excuse me, sorry, but the age is 67.

                               THE CORONER:  I know.  I said there may be mistakes
                         in this but I have to read what was said at the time.  We
                         will correct the errors in a moment.

                                ".... who subsequently identified the same
                                body to Prof. Underwood.  It is the family
                                wish that the body should be buried."

                          That was what   was said to me at the time.   I knew we were
                          going to have   a few errors when we opened these but at that
                          time our main   objective was not to worry about the niceties
                          we could sort   those out later, but to try and enable people
                    D     to have their   loved ones back and have their funerals and
                          so o n .
                                 Now we circulated shortly afterwards a sheet with
                          various information on it and in fact it was signed by
                          Winnie Baron, who I believe is Mr. Baron's wife.   She told
                          us that Mr. Baron's full names were Gerard Bernard Patrick
                          Baron.   She confirmed the address at __________          ^_
                          |         | Preston, Lancashire. She gave his date of bir
                          as 25.6.21, which is in fact the error that you noticed,
                          and the rest of the details were in fact correct.

                                You are happy with that Mr. Fraser, aren't you, as
                          a record of the facts?

                                MR. FRASER:     Yes sir, thank you.

                                THE CORONER:     Professor Underwood.


                                              PROF. JAMES UNDERWOOD Called
                                                    Bv THE CORONER:

                    G   Q. Professor Underwood, you have already been sworn.     - A. Yes

                                 THE CORONER:  Perhaps I should explain to you that
                           nearly all the witnesses have already taken the oath in
                           respect of all the inquests in order to save them having
                           to repeat it each time.  Are you happy with that?   Yes.


                    H
                                                       - 5 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                               PROF. J. UNDERWOOD


                        Q. Professor Underwood, let me just turn two pages.  Thank you
                           for being here.  Now if you could just repeat your name
                           for the benefit of the Shorthand Writer please? - A. James
                           Cressey Elvin Stone Underwood.  Professor of Pathology
                           at the University of Sheffield; Honorary Consultant
                           Histopathologist to the Sheffield Health Authority; Doctor
                           of Medicine and Fellow of the Royal College of Pathologists.

                    B   Q. And this gentleman was identified to you by the name of
                           Baron and reference number 69.   That is right, is it?
                           A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q. And you satisfied yourself with regard to the identity in
                           the usual way, 1 take it? ~ A. 1 am satisried sir.

                        Q. Can you tell me what you describe as the cause of death in
                           this instance? - A. In my opinion, sir, the cause of deai_h
                           is traumatic asphyxia with two contributory fac i_ors wnich
                           are naturally occurring disorders, firstly a bicuspid
                           aortic valve and secondly ischaemic heart disease.

                        Q. Yes, that is traumatic asphyxia under la and the other under
                           2? - A. Indeed sir.
                D       Q. Just deal with the traumatic asphyxial aspects first.    In
                           the way you have alreadydone in your previous case if you
                           could just confirm or tell me on what basis you come to
                           that conclusion? - A. Yes sir, the external appearances
                           were typical of traumatic asphyxia.   The upper part of the
                           body was deeply congested with blood.   There were small
                           haemorrhages in the membranes around the eyes and moutn.
                           Internally there were similar small haemorrhages or bleeding
                           points in the membranes covering the internal organs.    These
                           appearances, sir, are typical of traumatic asphyxia.

                        Q. Now this gentleman was of course somewhat older than a 1o i _
                           of the cases affected.  I think you thought he was 65 but
                           it turns out he is actually 67, and you found I think
                           some other disease processes there, didn't you.   Can you
                           just describe those? - A. Firstly the bicuspid aortic
                           valve.  This is a congenital disorder which is present in
                           a small proportion of the normal population.   In many
                           individuals it causes no problems whatsoever but with
                           increasing age the abnormal valve becomes thickened and
                           rigid and causes resistance to the flow of blood from the
                           heart into the main blood vessels of the body.   Bicuspid
                           simply means that the valve has two cusps instead of the
                    G       normal three, two leaflets instead of the normal three.

                         Q.    Yes, and in this particular case I think you said it wasn't
                              tightly stenotic but obviously that must imply that there
                              was some narrowing of it? - A. The valve leaflets were
                              thickened sir.

                         Q.   And then in addition to that I think you   also found some
                H             evidence of ischaemic heart disease.  Is   that right? ~ A.

                                                     - 6 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                            PROF. J. UNDERWOOD



                          Yes, I did sir.   There was some scarring of the heart
                          muscle and narrowing of the coronary arteries, the blood
                          vessels which supply the heart muscle.   This is a very
                          common finding particularly in men in this age group.
                          The deceased may well have had a heart attack at some time
                          in the past.   It may have been a silent episode, but there
                          was no doubt in my mind there was evidence of ischaemic
                    B     heart disease.

                        Q. And assuming this event had not occurred this could have
                           manifested itself at some point? - A. Yes sir.

                        Q. I suppose it would be asking too much for you to say when?
                           - A. It can manifest itself at any time sir, particularly
                           at moments of stress.
                    C
                        Q. There was not any evidence that you found that in fact at
                           this particular point in time an ischaemic episode had
                           actually occurred? - A. No, I could rind no evidence uhat
                           it had occurred at that time.

                        Q. But would I be right in thinking, Professor Underwood, that
                           if a person becomes asphyxiated and has some valvular
                D          and ischaemic heart problems, his ability to resist that
                           trauma might be somewhat diminished? - A. Yes sir, that
                           is why I believe these may be contributory factors.
                           Perhaps sir one thing I should say is in addition to the
                           findings I have already described today there were several
                           rib fractures.  These may of course be due to attempts
                           at resuscitation.  At this time I have no knowledge of
                           such attempts.  Alternatively they could be further
                    E      evidence of compression of the chest producing traumatic
                           asphyxia.

                        Q. Yes, I think resuscitation was attempted in this case,
                           as indeed in nearly all cases.  So because of his age
                           in this case the pliability - I think we dealt with this
                           in your other case, didn't we - there is a greater chance
                           that the fractures could have occurred as part of the
                    F      resuscitative effort? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

                        Q. But would I be right in saying it is impossible pathologically
                           to actually say "Yes it was" as opposed to fracture due
                           to crush"? - A. Yes, I have no way of knowing whether
                           these rib fractures were due to compression of the chest
                           from the pressure of the crowd or from attempts at external
                           cardiac massage.
                    G
                         Q. I don't recollect whether you say.  Was there any bleeding
                            around the fractures of any moment that you noticed.  Can
                            you say? - A. A small amount sir.

                         Q. Sufficient to say that they were ante-mortem or not
                            sufficient? - A. It suggests that the blood was circulating
                            at the time the fractures were produced.
                H
                                                   - 7 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                        P.C. G. EVANS


                                THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, any questions?

                                MR. FRASER:  No questions, sir, thank you, but just
                          for the record blood alcohol level in this gentleman I
                          believe was recorded negative.

                                THE CORONER:  Yes, all the blood alcohols were done
                          and all the evidence regarding that was given at an earlier
                    B     date but we are recording them in each individual case as
                          well, and in the case of Mr. Baron it was negative.

                                Before you go, Professor, did you understand what
                          Professor Underwood was saying?

                                MEMBERS OF THE FAMILY:           Yes.

                    C           THE CORONER:  Any questions from any of you?
                          (No response)  Thank you.  And you, I am sorry. If you do
                          have a question and I forget to look at you please remind
                          me.

                                 Right,   if we have the Presenting Officer.

                D                 POL. CONST. GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called
                                                  By THE CORONER:

                        Q. Nov/ you have also been sworn, of course, but can you just
                           tell us your name again so that we have got it down? - A.
                           Yes sir.   I am Geraldine Elizabeth Evans, a Constable
                           with the West Midlands Police.
                    E
                        Q. And if you would in the way you have done before take me
                           through the summary please? - A. Yes sir.  At about 1020
                           hours on Saturday, 15th April 1989 Mr. Gerard Martin Baron
                           junior left Preston with his father Gerard Bernard Patrick
                           Baron to travel to Sheffield by private car.  They intended
                           to watch the Semi-Final Football Match at the Hillsborough
                           Stadium.
                    F
                                  Having parked the car they walked to the stadium
                           arriving at about 1315 hours.   They entered via the turnstiles
                           and stood in Enclosure 3 near to the front perimeter fencing.
                           Mr. Baron junior was aware of a steady build up of pressure
                           within the enclosure culminating after some time with a
                           sudden surge of pressure which carried him away from his
                           father.   Mr. Baron junior was injured in the crush and
                    G      received hospital treatment.   He did not see his father
                           again.

                                 Mr. William Mark Duckworth was in Enclosure 3 and
                           behind a man he now knows to be Gerard Bernard Patrick Baron
                           whom he recognised from press photographs.  He saw that
                           Mr. Baron was unconscious and a St. John Ambulanceman
                           identified as Ernest Barry Gillatt tried to give oxygen
                H          through the fence but without success.


                                                     -   8   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                             P.c. G. EVANS

                               Following the severe crushing in the West Stand terracing
                         Police Constable Liversidge went into Enclosure 3 and assisted
                         injured persons.  He found a man he now believes to be
                         Mr. Baron senior at the front of the enclosure and attempted
                         resuscitation but without success.

                               Police Constables Tranter, Whitlam and Hayes received
                         Mr. Baron after he had been passed over the lateral fence
                    B    from Enclosure 3 to Enclosure 2. They carried him across
                         the enclosure and handed him to other persons through Gate 2.
                         These persons to date have not been identified.   Mr. Baron
                         was then carried onto the pitch where he was tended by an
                         off-duty Fireman, Peter Joseph Maher, who attempted
                         resuscitation but without success.  Mr. Mahei. recalled a
                         doctor telling him to leave Mr. Baron, which he did, but
                         the doctor has not been identified.

                                At about 1550 hours Police Constable Bollons was
                          directed to the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had
                          been set up and given responsibility for Mr. Baron.  The
                          persons who carried Mr. Baron to the gymnasium have not
                          been identified.

                                At 1601 hours Dr. Andrew Byrne examined Mr. Baron
                D         in the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

                                At about 0145 hours on Sunday, 16th April 1989
                          Mr. David Richmond identified the body of his father-in-law
                          Mr. Baron to Police Constable Bollons at the temporary
                          mortuary.

                                The Officer later escorted the body of Mr. Baron
                    E     to the Medico Legal Centre where he confirmed the identi­
                          fication to Detective Constable Weigold.

                                On Sunday, 16th April 1989, following identification
                          by Detective Constable Weigold, Professor James Underwood
                          carried out an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause
                          of death.
                                The evidence of Gerard Martin Baron is clear that
                          he and his father were in Enclosure 3 shortly after 1315
                          hours having entered via the turnstiles.

                                This concludes my summary sir.

                        Q. I think in fact you can also tell me whether or not there
                    G      was any evidence whether he had a ticket? — A. Yes, from
                           Mr. Baron's statement- if you refer to page 1 - the son
                           does say that he managed to buy two tickets which were
                           for the West Stand standing area.

                        Q. The terraces,   in other words? — A. That is correct.

                        Q. I want you to turn, if you would, to page 21 of your
                H          bundle.  This is the statement of Ernest Barry Gillatt,
                           that is the Ambulanceman, the St. John s? — A. Yes sir,
                           that is correct.
J. L. Harpham Ltd                                    - 9 -
                                       p.c. G. EVANS

O. The St. John Ambulanceman.  I just really want to pick a
   few times out of it.  If you look about line 6, have you
   found it? - A. Yes sir.

0. Am I right in saying that he says that he came on to uhe
   pitch at about 3.06? - A. Yes sir, that is correct.

Q. And he has timed it in relation to seeing a Policeman
   speak to the referee? - A. Yes sir.

O. Following that he was asked to go to their ambulance to
   fetch an oxygen bottle? - A. Yes sir, that is correct.

Q. And he says then that he ran with one of his colleagues
   to the ambulance behind the South Stand.  Is that right.
   - A. Yes sir.

Q. And he collected an oxygen bottle? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And then went back to Leppings Lane? - A. Yes sir, that
   is correct.

Q. And it was when he got to Leppings Lane he went to the
   front of Enclosure 3. That is right, isn't it in effect.
   - A. Yes sir.

Q. And that is where he started trying to give oxygen to this
   gentleman? - A. Yes.

O. He does not actually say what time it was that he started
   qiving the oxygen but it clearly could not have been before
   6-minutes-past-3, it must have been a little time after
   that? - A. Yes sir.

Q. As far as one can deduce? - A. That is right sir.

          THE CORONER:   Yes.   Mr. Fraser.

          MR. FRASER:    Mr. Baron's family have no questions
    sir, thank you.

          THE CORONER:  Any questions from any of you?
    (No response)  Thank you very much.


                 PET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                           By THE CORONER:

 Q. Inspector Layton, if you would give your name as well?
    This gentleman has also been sworn like everybody else.
    - A. Michael Layton, Petective Inspector, West Midlands
    Police.
          Sir, in respect of Mr. Baron senior, an examination
    of video film and photographic evidence has been made and
    as has already been stated, in fact Mr. Baron has been
                                   D.I. M. LAYTON


identified as being in Enclosure number 3. On a photograph
which is referenced PR1/20A timed at 1504 hours, Mr. Baron
is in fact shown in that enclosure, number 3, at the
perimeter fencing.  Again on a video reference, Map 7,
15:21:50:11, which is a BBC television tape, Mr. Baron
is shown in the same position.

      Mr. Maher has signed a plan of the pitch where he
indicates that he attempted to resuscitate Mr. Baron.
That plan is referenced PJM/1.

      P.C. Liversidge of the South Yorkshire Police has also
signed a plan of the terraces showing the position of where
he first saw Mr. Baron and where he treated him and that
plan is referenced RL/2.

      Mr. Gerard Baron junior has in fact seen visual
evidence and he has confirmed the identifications that have
been made.
Did you prepare any plans in this case? - A. Yes sir.  If
I can draw your attention to a plan which I have given a
reference number MWJL/92 which is a plan of the terraces.

 Yes, and we will call that C22.

       THE CORONER:  Don't worry about all these numbers
 and things.  These are just, I call them technicalities.
 They might be needed at some point but as far as you are
 concerned don't worry about it.

 Sorry, Inspector Layton, I did not mean to interrupt.
 - A. There are other plans, sir, but that is the only one
 in respect of myself.

 Will you just bear with me for a moment.   Can we label
 PJM/1 as number 23 please.

       Inspector Layton, would you be good enough to try
 and show us.  I will give you the plans to save you
 carrying them? - A. Yes sir, if I can perhaps just mention
 at this stage, sir in respect of that plan MWJL/92
 there is a specific reference to a photograph there,
 PR1/19A and that photograph is timed.

. Can you tell me the time.  That is useful to have? - A.
  It will be timed sir at 15 ....   I wonder sir if I could
  just go back to that in a second.   I can tell you the
  next consecutive photograph but I just want to be sure.
  In fact if you could give me a second, sir, I could refer
  to another folder?

. Yes, by all means.  Take your time. - A. Yes sir.  I can
  confirm that photograph is in fact timed at 15.04.

 That is a photograph where it is believed that he was alive.
 That is right, isn't it? - A. That is right sir, yes.
                                                                    D .I . M. LAYTON


                        Q. And in fact perhaps you ought to take this plan as well.
                           That is Mr. Liversidge's plan? - A. Yes sir, that is
                           referenced RL/2.

                        Q. That will be C24.  That actually has two positions where
                           Mr. Baron might have been seen as dead. Is that rignt?
                           - A. That is correct sir, yes.
                    B   Q. I assume that we don't know in which order they are or
                           do we? - A. A would be the first and B the second.

                                     THE CORONER:  If you would just come round and I will give
                              you these and then you can return them to me.  Again I just
                              want to explain.

                                    We are going to show on a big plan where       these
                    C         various spots are so that you know and so that       tne jury
                              know what we are talking about.

                                     (The Officer moves to a visual display board)

                        Q .         THE CORONER:  Yes, start with the live one? - A. Yes,
                              if I can refer then to MWJL/92 which is the one that refers
                              to the photograph that I have just given you the times of,
                D             and if you look at the large scale terrace plan, the
                              position which we believe Mr. Baron is seen is hei.e, actually
                              at the perimeter fence in Enclosure number 3.

                                    If sir we can perhaps go then to RL/2, which is the
                              plan produced by P.C. Liversidge, there are two positions.
                              The first one is in this position here and the second is
                    E         here, again in Enclosure number 3.

                                    Sir, in respect of PJM/1, which is the plan made
                              by Mr. Maher, if we look at the plan of the pitch the
                              position in which he has indicated he was involved with
                              Mr. Baron is in this location he r e .

                        Q. And that is also a position where it is taken that Mr. Baron
                    F      was no longer alive? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

                                     THE CORONER:  Thank you very much.       Before you go,
                               any questions, Mr. Fraser?

                                     MR. FRASER:    No questions sir, thank you.

                                     THE CORONER:  Any questions from any of you?
                    G          (No response)  Ladies and gentlemen, have you followed
                               that?

                                     MEMBERS OF THE JURY:    Yes.

                                     THE CORONER:    Thank you very much.

                                     That is all the evidence we are going to take at
                H              this stage of these inquests.


                                                       - 12 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                          THE CORONER


                              May I say to you that I am glad you are here.
                        Thank you for taking the trouble.  I am very sorry that this
                        tragedy has struck Mr. Baron and I am sure I and everybody
                        else in here feel for you.  Thank you for coming.

                                       (The Inquest into the death of
                                        GERARD BERNARD PATRICK BARON
                                    was adjourned to a date to be fixed)
                    B




                    c



                D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H
                                                 - 13 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
