                                                                                                     MIR.15

                                                                                                                                  3 >
           OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and tim e raised   \ ^1 \              O          Number



V. iTitle
  .   'I      *,         "
                                          g~r                          V ^X C o                               Kc^LL.\STEfi
 y ^ h d u d e source and any document number i f relevant)                                                          2,            o
           Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                              Receiver




                                                                                                                              Indexer
           Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

           No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                          Statement Reader
           Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                              Indexer
           Indexed as indicated

           No(s) o f actions raised

           Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                  SIO




           Further action No(s)                                                                                               Indexer


           When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL,      1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF



           FRANCIS JOSEPH1MCALLISTER




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                       At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                       On

               23rd April,   1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          INDEX




OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER


DR. JOHN CHALMERS CLARK Called

  By The Coroner


PET. SGT. JULIE APPLETON Called

   By The Coroner
   Cross-examined by Ms. Norcliffe


PET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called

   By The Coroner
23rd April 1990


   INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF FRANCIS JOSEPH McALLISTER

       MR FRASER:   Sir, in relation to Mr. McAllister, I
  appear as a member of the Steering Committee to look
  after the family's interests.  The family are, in fact,
  present in Court, sir.

       THE CORONER:   Can you just tell me, were you here
  on the opening day?

        MR. F. A. McAllister:   Yes, sir.

       THE CORONER:   So you know more or less what the
  format is so I am not going to repeat it.  In fact, you
  were here, I think, in the earlier case, so I will just
  start.

       This is a resumed Inquest which was opened on 18th
  April, 1989, and on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin,
  Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

       "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has
       been identified to PC 2947 Liversidge of the South
       Yorkshire Police, as that of Francis Joseph
       McAllister, by Francis Andrew McAllister, his
       father.  He was 27 years of age, having been born
       on 10th October, 1961, at Liverpool.   He was a
       single man and he lived at
       Liverpool.  He was a fireman by occupation.   He
       died at Hillsborough Football Ground following an
       incident there on Saturday 15th April, 1989.    PC
       Liversidge caused the body to be  removed to the
       Medico-Legal Centre and there he  identified it to
       Detective Constable Simon Weigold, who
       subsequently identified the same body to Prof.
       Usher and Dr. Clark.  It is the family wish that
       the body should be buried".

        Now, there is one error that I can spot, and that
   is that the body was not caused to be   removed by PC
   Liversidge but by a D.A. Roe.   This was an error by the
   Officer.  We had a standard form and it is not
   surprising that we made a few mistakes.    It was P.C.
   Roe, David Allen Roe, who conveyed the body to the
   Medico-Legal Centre and dealt with the identification
   to Simon Weigold.

        As has been my practice, the details were checked
   and Mr. McAllister's dad signed them as being correct,
   I think that is right, isn't it, what I have read out,
   as far as names and place of birth and so on.
                                                DR. J. C. CLARK


          The alcohol levels were checked in the usual way
     and the result in this case was negative.

            We will now listen to the pathologist, please.

                 D8. JOHN CHALMERS CLARK Called:

                           By THE CORONER:

          THE WITNESS:   Dr. John Clark, Forensic
     Pathologist, University of Glasgow.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Dr. Clark, you are satisfied that
     the evidence that you are now going to give to me
     relates to this young man, Francis McAllister.  You
     have got the spelling slightly different to what we
     have but the sound of the name is the same.  Would you
     accept that McAllister should be spelt as M-c-A-l-l-i-
     s-t-e-r? - A. Yes.  There are many spellings of
     "McAllister".

0. Yes, indeed.  I just want to correct it so that the
   family know that we have got it right.  Please tell me
   what you found in this case. - A. I established the
   cause of death in this young man as crush asphyxia and
   this was based on the finding of moderate signs of
   asphyxia in his face, the usual congestion and cyanosis
   and little haemorrhages, not only on his face but also
   on the upper part of his chest and also internally, and
   this was consistent with his chest having been crushed
   preventing breathing.

        Other findings included, there were a number of
grazes on this face and a few bruises elsewhere.  He also
had a number of old injuries on the fingers of his right
hand which were covered by plasters, but no other internal
damage at all, so these were just surface injuries.  He
was not suffering from any significant natural disease
which could have played any part in his death.

            THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, anything you want to
     ...?
          HR FRASER:   No, sir, the family have no
     questions, thank you.

          THE CORONER:      Thank you very much indeed, Dr.
     Clark.

                 Pet. Sgt. JULIE APPLETON Called:

                           By THE CORONER:

Q. You have been sworn, but could you just tell us your
   name? - A. Julie Appleton, Detective Sergeant with the
   West Midlands Police.
                                                                        J. APPLETON


                        Q. If you would take me through the summary, please? - A.
                           Robert John Thomas, together with other friends, left
                           Liverpool on the morning of Saturday 15th April, 1989,
                           in order to watch the Cup Semi Final football match at
                           Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield.  Robert had by prior
                           arrangement agreed to meet Francis Joseph McAllister in
                           the Sportsman Public House in Sheffield, prior to the
                           match.'

                                 Francis travelled from London on Saturday 15th
                    B   April and met Robert Thomas in the Sportsman Public House
                        at approximately 1335 hours that day.   Shortly after this,
                        a number of other friends from Liverpool arrived,
                        including Nicholas Peter Joynes who also died in the
                        tragedy.

                                The party left the public house at about 1415
                           hours and made their way to the football ground in a
                    C      number of vehicles.  They parked the vehicles a short
                           distance away from the ground.  They then continued
                           their journey on foot.  It is known that Francis had
                           swapped his stand ticket for a Leppings Lane terrace
                           ticket with one of the other members of the party.

                                Francis, together with Robert, Nicholas Joynes,
                    D      and other members of the party, made their way to the
                           turnstiles in Leppings Lane.   They joined the mass of
                           people waiting to enter the ground and within a short
                           time Gate C was opened.   Francis, Nicholas Joynes,
                           Robert Thomas and other party members entered the
                           ground through this gate.

                                The group then made their way down the tunnel
                    E      towards the terracing.  However, on seeing how crowded
                           the enclosures were, the group, with the exception of
                           Francis and Nicholas made their back out of the tunnel
                           and went into the side enclosures.

                                Shortly after 1515 hours, following the severe
                           crushing in the Leppings Lane terracing Police
                           Constable David Roe went onto the pitch.  He made his
                    F      way to the Leppings Lane end where he saw a man he now
                           knows to be Francis McAllister.  Francis was lying on
                           the ground near to the left of the goal.  There were
                           two civilians with Francis.  These people as yet have
                           not been identified.  The Officer could not find any
                           sign of life in Francis and with the assistance of
                           these people he carried him to the gymnasium where a
                           temporary mortuary had been set up.
                    G
                                At 1530 hours Dr. Allan Paul Redgrave examined
                           Francis in the temporary mortuary and certified life
                           extinct.

                                At around midnight on 15th April, 1989, Mr. Leslie
                        William Guy, one of the party members, identified the body
                        of his friend to Police Constable Roe.
                    H
                                                -   3   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                Police Constable Roe later escorted the body of
                           Francis to the Medico-Legal Centre where he confirmed
                           the identification to Detective Constable Simon
                           Weigold.

                                On Sunday 16th April Hr. Francis Andrew McAllister
                        attended at the Medico-Legal Centre where he confirmed the
                        identification of his son to Detective Constable David Ian
                        Liversidge.

                                Later the same day, Sunday 16th April, Dr. John
                           Clark carried out an autopsy and submitted a report
                           giving cause of death.
                    B
                                Found in the personal effects of Francis was a
                           full ticket for the semi final football match.  This
                           tends to confirm that entry to the stadium was via Gate
                           C.

                        Q. Just a couple of minor points.   You have been referring
                           to Robert Edward Thomas.   The statement I think names
                           him as John.   You have an explanation for this but
                           perhaps you could just give it to me? - A. Yes, sir, my
                           apologies.   The statement was taken in the name of John
                           Edward Thomas, but signed "R. Thomas'*.  As a result of
                           speaking to Mr. and Mrs. McAllister I made enquiries,
                           and the full name is Robert John Edward Thomas.

                    D   Q. I see, so in fact we just missed the first name out? -
                           A. That is right.

                        Q. Robert John Edward? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

                        Q. And the other point that is a relatively small one is
                           the certification of death at 1530.  I think I am right
                           in saying that this isn't actually in any of the
                    E      statements but you have taken it from a "Major Incident
                           Body Book", where it is recorded, is that right? - A.
                           That is correct, yes.

                        Q. And it ties in with Dr. Redgrave's timings, doesn't it?
                           - A. Yes, sir.

                                  THE COROWER:   Any questions?

                                MR FRASER:   No questions, sir, but the only
                           matter I think, with respect, which you have not
                           mentioned is the result of the blood alcohol analysis.

                                  THE CORONER:   Did I overlook it?   I am sorry if I
                           did.

                                MR FRASER:   You asked me on the first day, sir,
                           to remind you if you overlooked it.  I have not
                           forgotten your warning.

                                THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed,    The
                           result was, in fact, negative.

                H
                                                  -   4   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                      J. APPLETON


           MR FRASER:     Yes, sir.

          THE CORONER:   So long as we know, that is the
     important thing, I wanted to record it.  Thank you.
     any questions?  Can you give your name again?

        MS. NORCLIFFE:   Yes, Belinda Horcliffe, for the
Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police.

                Cross-examined by MS. HORCLIFFE:

Q. I wonder if there is any evidence as to what time this
   young man and his friends actually arrived,
   effectively, at the back of these people waiting to
   enter the ground.  I think it is referred to at
   paragraph 4 of the summary.

           THE CORONER:     Which paragraph are you looking at?

          MS. NORCLIFFE:   Paragraph 4, sir - "They^joined
     the mass of people waiting to enter the ground".

Q. I just wondered if there was any evidence available as
   to what time that arrival was? - A. Yes, in Robert
   Thomas *s statement - it is page 3, sir - it says:

           "We arrived there at almost 2.30 p.m.   We all got
           together and started walking to the ground."

Q.        THE CORONER:   Yes, be careful because I think you
     have got to go a little bit further back.   They say
     they left the pub at 2.15 and they drove towards the
     ground in their various cars and minibuses, that is
     right, isn't it? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q.   They then drove to a place called Farr Lane, Sheffield,
     parked near to the Beehive Public House, and the others
     parked nearby? - A. Yes.

Q. Then:

           "We arrived there at almost 2.30 ...."

     - I think that must refer to the Beehive,      the parking?
     - A. Yes, sir, because it goes on to say:

           "We all got together and started walking to the
           ground".

          THE CORONER:   Yes, and he does not actually say
     what time they arrived at the gate but you can work it
     out if you know where the Beehive is.  Does that help
     you?

           MS. NORCLIFFE:     It does,   thank you, sir.
                                                                                J. APPLETON
                                                                                  M. LAYTON


                        Q.        THE CORONER:   Perhaps this will help, page 19,
                             can you turn to that? This is Leslie William Guy*s
                             statement.  It is about line 10 where he actually
                             refers to arriving at the ground.  Can you just say
                             what it says?  - A. It says:

                                  "It was about 2.30 p.m. when we arrived at the
                                  ground and we all split as we were going to
                                  different parts of the ground".
                    B
                                  THE CORONER:     Does that help you at all?

                                  MS. HORCLIFFE:        It does,   thank you, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:     Anything else arising out of that?
                             (No response)

                                      PET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                                                 By THE CORONER:

                                  THE WITNESS:   Sir, Michael Layton, Petective
                             Inspector, West Midlands Police.  An examination of
                             visual evidence has been made and Francis has been
                    D        identified actually in the process of entering the
                             ground via Gate C. Anneiaaria McAllister has identified
                             her brother entering Gate C on a photograph which has
                             been given the reference number MWL10/36A.  It is a
                             rear view but the family are quite certain that it does
                             show Francis and in fact on the same photograph, next
                             to him, is Nicholas Joynes.  That photograph, sir, is
                             timed at 1456.
                    E
                                  Police Constable Roe has signed a plan showing
                             where he first came into contact on the pitch with
                             Francis and this is reference PARI.

                                  Sir, in respect of Francis, this is the case that
                             I mentioned on the first day where at the present time
                             we have not actually been able to find, on visual
                             evidence, which enclosure Francis was actually in.   I
                             should in fact perhaps explain that originally we had a
                             South Yorkshire Officer who believed that he had in
                             fact assisted to carry Francis from enclosure number 3.
                             Subsequently it transpired that the Officer was just
                             genuinely mistaken.  Since then the family have made
                             great efforts themselves again to try to find some
                             visual evidence, but unfortunately we have not been
                             able to.

                                Sir, can I refer you to a plan which has been
                        given the reference number MWJL/138?

                        Q. Yes. - A. Which in fact shows the location of the entry
                           into the ground.
                H
                                                    -    6   -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                            M. LAYTON



                        Q. C53, it is going to be. - A. And, sir, there is a
                           further plan which you may wish to refer to, DARI.

                        Q. Yes, we will give that one C54. - A. The only other
                           thing, sir, perhaps I can help you with is that in fact
                           Nicholas Joynes, we have established that in fact he
                           was in enclosure number 3.

                        Q. We know that? - A. Yes, we know that Francis and
                    B      Nicholas entered Gate C together, and the family have
                           in fact identified Nicholas Joynes, his family,
                           Nicholas Joynes* family, have identified Nicholas on a
                           photograph in enclosure number 3.

                        Q. I see, and we know that they entered together.  They
                           were the only two who proceeded down .... - A. Down the
                           tunnel, that is correct, sir, yes.
                    C
                              (The witness referred to the large scale plan)

                          Sir, if we can deal with HWJL138, that is on this plan
                          here, this is actually Gate C, and that, in fact, is
                          where the photograph is taken, directly in the middle.
                          The gate is open and it is directly in the gateway,
                    D     entering the ground.

                                Sir, in respect of DARI, which is the pitch plan,
                           the position that PC Roe refers is, in fact, in this
                           particular area her e, almost adjacent to Gate 3.

                        Q. Yes, and just on the playing area, in fact? - A. That
                           is right, sir.
                    E
                                THE CORONER:   Any questions, Hr. Fraser?

                                MR FRASER:   No, sir, the family have no questions
                           for the Officer, but I rise because I am specifically
                           asked to express thanks on behalf of the family for the
                           help that the West Midlands Officers have given in the
                           detailed investigation that has gone on and the
                    F      attempts to trace the last movements of their son, and
                           also, sir, to express their gratitude for the
                           assistance that has been given to them by the Social
                           Services Department, with whom they have had contact.
                           They want those particular heartfelt thanks placed on
                           the record of your Court, sir.

                                 THE CORONER:   Well, thank you - you don't mind me
                    G      looking at your clients - thank you very much for those
                           kind words.   I know that a lot of work has been done by
                           West Midlands, and I also know that Social Services
                           have done their very best in many cases and it is good
                           to know that you have noted it and that you have felt
                           able to say it on a day like this.   Thank you very
                           much.
                H
                                                -   7   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                           M. LAYTON



                        Q. I hope you have heard it.    In fact, I know you have.

                               THE CORONER:   Any other questions of the Officer?
                          (No response) I want to say, like I have tried to say
                          to everybody who is here, but in particular now to you
                          how sorry I am that this has happened and how sad you
                          must feel all the time, but perhaps particularly when
                          you have heard some of the evidence which has been
                    B     recounted today.  It must be an awful situation for you
                          to be in.  I wish we could undo it but we can't and I
                          would like you to know that as far as one is able one
                          feels with you and for you.  Thank you.  We will rise.



                         (The Inquest into the death of FRAMCIS JOSEPH McALLISTER
                                   was adjourned to a date to be fixed)




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H
                                                -   8
J. L. Harpham Ltd
