HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)
                                              76
     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Bef ore

S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

         (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                   At

            The Town Hall,
              Sheffield.

                   On

           22nd March, 1991




       TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




 From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
      Official Shorthand Writers,
  55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
             SEVENTY SIXTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                   FRIDAY, 22nd MARCH 1991

    THE CORONER:    Before I begin can I say congratulations.

I don't know whether you knew why we had to postpone but

it was a driving test and I felt that we had to allow

this juror to pass and indeed he did.    Well done.     I

was not going to say anything if he had failed.       No, after

what four months of faithful attendance I did not think it

was right to ask for a postponement.

     Right, now I will press on and if you remember I had

been discussing the issue of the barrier and I think I

had dealt with that and I will now move forward, I hope

slightly faster today.    I am not quite so tired this after­

noon as I was yesterday evening.

     I want to spend a few minutes on the Operational

Order which has been before you and parts of which we have

looked at from time to time.

     I think summing-up the evidence in respect of that

Operational Order one can say this:     first of all it

was in standard form and followed a pattern which had been

in existence what appeared for years and certainly it was

in the same format as the 1987/88 semi-finals and indeed

you saw one or two other Operational Orders in which we

sort of introduced little bits and you can see that the

presentation is the same.

     The Order is drafted in sequential way with an intention

and it is quite clear that the word safety appears in that

intention.   It is part of the intention to achieve both
law and order and safety, and whilst I am on that several

of the Officers whom I asked, and indeed quite often in

cross-examination, said that they did not necessarily

distinguish between law and order and safety.

     Of course the two things are not identical.     You

can have a law and order situation where there is no

safety aspect at all.    You can have a safety situation

where there is no law and order aspect and you can have

a law and order situation where there are considerable

safety aspects.

     Take a fight in the park as occurred in 1988.     They

said 1988 was a wonderful match, went off completely

smoothly, they only had one stabbing.    One stabbing is

quite a big thing to the person who gets stabbed but that

is a law and order and safety consideration if you allow

that to spread, so I think it would be wise, and I think

the evidence is there, that the two things are not mutually

exclusive but overlap to a certain extent but of course

not entirely.

     There is no doubt that the Order does not refer in

terms to overcrowding.     There is nothing that we have

heard from anybody to say that the Order contains those

words.

     In fact I did find the word "safety" in it in at

least one other place but it was only a passing comment

and it is not significant, but it certainly does not

refer to "overcrowding".
       There is no specific reference in the Order as far

as we heard in evidence to monitoring fans, nor is there

anything that we heard of which specifically refers to

diversion of fans at the tunnel.

       On the other hand, as I have said, the Order follows

a completely standard format and has been in use for

years.

       You have also got to remember that it is addressed

to Officers in a Police Force who are familiar with the

drafting of orders, of this form, and who as an in­

numerable number of them told us, are (a) used to using

their own initiative, indeed expected to use their own

initiative, so what you have to think about the Order

insofar as you have to think about it at all, and you

may not, is does it actually matter that the words

"overcrowding" "monitoring" do not appear?

       Theoretically you may say it doesi   In practice

though does it matter, and the reason why I say this

is because of the evidence of people saying that they

had expected to do monitoring.     In fact as far as I

remember there were only two Officers, one Officer

who in fact shielded behind the Order in the sense that

he said - and that was Inspector Crawford - who said:

"My job was at the turnstiles and there was nothing

in the Order to say I should go down the terraces"

which is true, he was quite correct, but he went on to

say:     "In any case I could not have done because I

had my work cut out doing what I understood I was supposed
     The other person who said he had had no specific

instruction with regard to monitoring as far as I

remember was P.C. Bichard/ though he did add, but whether

he had instructions or not, he would have said something

if he thought it appropriate.

     I think nearly everybody else to whom the matter

was put and particularly let's take one example,

Inspector Bullis, he knows nothing about monitoring

there but he was quite clear that if he had seen something

on the terraces he would have acted, and in fact if you

think back to his evidence you will remember that he

did on his evidence, if you accept it.

     The Order, of course in 1989 as I say followed

standard format and was signed by Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield who had only recently been appointed.

     It did have variations in it, mainly of a minor

nature.   The most major alteration was that there had

been a reduction in manpower and that was done after

thought because by looking at what was done in 1988 it

was felt that the numbers of Officers    could be reduced.

I think there was one Serial disappeared but what they

did was they made them slightly smaller.

     In the event, of course, with hindsight we might

have said it would have been good to have had those

70, perhaps another 700, but that would be hindsight.

At the time they were working on what they thought they

needed.
    Mr. Mole when he was here said that although he

did not sign the Order he has no doubt that if it had

been put in front of him if he had still been in charge

he would have done and I think that is an important

factor in thinking about whether or not this Order was

so unusual that there was something odd about it.




                      It was also ...
     It was also, of course, approved formally by

Mr. Jackson, the Assistant Chief Constable and if you think

back to some of the other Officers whom we have heard,

Superintendent Marshall, Mr. Creaser, various others to whom

the bits about the Order were put, nobody in fact said that

they had found anything reprehensible or worrying or

something that they would not wish to operate under.

Mr. Lock, of course, who no longer was a policeman at the

time and who I do not think actually saw the 1989 Order, but

I think he had seen earlier Orders, also, as I understood

him, did not really complain with regard to the format.

     In summary then with regard to the Order and in

particular in regard to its presentation and format, I think

you may feel that whatever criticism one can now make of it

with regard to omissions, contingency plans which were not

in it, not covering this, that and the third thing at the

time, certainly all the witnesses whom we have heard did not

perceive those matters as giving rise to an obvious and

serious risk of injury to anybody, much less that they were

indifferent to it or that they saw it and deliberately went

ahead and took it.

     If that is right it will be possible for you to exclude

from your consideration when the time comes people who were

not present on the day in question, such as, for instance,

Chief Superintendent Mole.
     I have already alluded to the fact that several

Officers in evidence, say, Inspector Bullas, Mr. Murray as

well, Mr. Goddard, Mr. Duckenfield and several others

indicated that if they had seen something which caused them

concern they would have expected to report it.      Indeed the

senior Officers went a bit further and said that there was a

reliance upon the initiative and the capability of the

people within the ground.

     Whether that was a wise reliance one might have to

think about, but nevertheless that was in fact the practice

and that was the evidence, but it is for you to decide what

weight, if any, you put on it.

     I do not want to deal with all the things which could

have been done and which weren't done, but I do want to deal

with this one matter, namely, the postponement of the

kick-off and the principles relating to it.      There seems to

me to be relatively little doubt from the evidence of

Messrs. Mole, Duckenfield, Murray, Bichard and Marshall, and

indeed Goddard, that I can think of and it may be even

Mr. Creaser, I am not sure, that the underlying grounds for

postponing a kick-off in general terms were that if

something happened away from the ground or, as Mr. Mole put

it, which he felt responsible for, such as causing huge

delays on the motorway because of his intensive checking

procedures and where it was clear that the arrival of the

fans had been delayed by matters over which they had no
control, then that might be a case where it would be

appropriate to delay kick-off.

     The corollary to that, of course, is that simple

lateness in itself is not a ground for delaying kick-off.

     We were told various reasons why that should be so.

For instance, if you delay kick-off every time somebody is

late, all they feared would happen and you may think that

was a genuine fear, is that kick-off would get later and

later because people would know if they didn't turn up there

would be a delay.

     You have to balance the benefit to the late-comers

against the disadvantages to the people within the stadium

and you also have to balance the known fact that whatever

you do there will always be some who will be late.

Therefore you have to draw the line at some point and say,

"We are going to start whether everybody is here or not."

     If you look at the total numbers of the people who were

outside at, say, ten to three, a rough estimate might be

3,000/4,000 - say 4,000.   A substantial number, of course,

a huge number in conventional terms.   In relation to the

total numbers in the stadium it was 8%, which, if you put it

like that, becomes a relatively small number.   If Mr. Lock

was right that between 2% and 3% in fact never turn up at

most matches, for whatever reason, and another 2% or 3% are

late anyway, you are approaching 1,500/2,000 people anyway

of that sort of order, taking the stadium as a whole.      Of
course, if you only look at the Leppings Lane end and maybe

it would be fairer if I said that, the percentages, of

course, are doubled for practical purposes in relation to

the Leppings Lane end terraces - 4,200 out of 24,000 - that

is one-sixth, which is definitely more than what I have

said, so I don't want to be unfair on that, but you do have

to take the percentages - at least you can think about

percentages but you do not necessarily have to make too much

of them.

     The effect on what happens within the ground is, of

course, quite an important matter because it is one thing to

say that people within the ground would be a little bit

disappointed, nothing more.   It is another if you consider

there may be uproar.   I thought Officers in this respect

were quite fair because they did not actually go into a

great deal of detail as to what could happen.   They merely

said that problems could arise.   If you can get frustration

outside you can also get frustration inside and so it is

clearly a matter which should be considered in normal

circumstances.

     If that is so, then a discussion or a plan to postpone

kick-off only in certain circumstances to me - it is a

matter for you - but to me in itself merely because it does

not go on to say, "But of course if there is danger to life

and limb the different considerations would have to be

applied," does not necessary make it invalid.   In fact, all
the senior Officers said, and I think it is implicit in the

whole approach, that if a situation arose which necessitated

change from what they had planned, then they would, in the

words of one or two of them, react to it.




            That is the first thing
     That is the first thing.   Secondly, in order to

postpone kick-off there are several things that need to

happen.   First of all you have got to take the decision.

No, that is wrong.   First of all, you have got to

recognise that it is something that you ought to be

thinking about; secondly, you have got to take a decision;

thirdly you have got to be able to communicate it to those

who are going to put it into effect; and fourthly you have

got to communicate it to those who need to know.     It is

the last point which of course is the crucial one because

if you are unable for whatever reason to communicate the

decision, then whatever decision you might take is

irrelevant.

     With regard to the question of communication, and the

only people who had to be communicated with were of course

the people outside the turnstiles, I was interested in

this particular aspect, as to whether or not, how

effective if at all, communications would have been.     You

will remember we heard from several people.   First of all

we heard from P.C. Buxton who said that he had received

the message to come to Leppings Lane.   He had picked it up

on the talk-through and he made his way there.     He then

describes various messages which he broadcast, including

messages about not pushing and getting the mounted

Officers, and although I don't think he actually told us

here, Mr. Marshall told us that he heard subsequently that
Inspector Ellis, whom we did not hear but who also

broadcast from that land rover, did actually, entirely

unjustifiably because he had no back up for it, say that

kick-off had been postponed.     Those are three things.

        We know, I think we know, that those messages were

actually transmitted.     This is where corroboration comes

in because we heard from Mr. Bartholomew.     Do you remember

Mr. Bartholomew?     He is the local resident who worked in

the bakery and he was a very interesting witness.        He was

the one who went to stroke the horses with his young lady

and in the end finished up on a slight mound.     He said

that he could hear the message clear as a bell.        He did

not use those words but that is my summing-up of what he

said.     So we have evidence from him.

        In addition to that there were several other people

who said they heard a message from the land rover.        Some

heard one message.     For example, Mr. Wright did hear a

message about pushing or not going forward, but if you

remember he was the young man whom I asked whether or not,

why did he not stop when he heard the message, and the

sense of what he said as I understood him was, "He didn't

tell me to stop and besides it wasn't addressed to me

personally so I just went forward", but he did hear it so

there is somebody else who heard it.

        Mr. Hewstone heard messages; Mr. Sykes heard

messages; and all these who I have mentioned up to now
actually heard messages,    they saw the land rover, they

heard the message and they understood the words, or some

of the words.

     There are several other people like that:     Mr.

Waring, Inspector or Chief Inspector Waring, he heard

messages but he was very close to the land rover, in fact.

Mr. Creaser did, Chief Inspector Creaser, and P.S. Smith

certainly heard it but it is questionable whether he

understood it.     Mr. Wilson, another witness, saw the land

rover but did not hear anything.     Mr. Lackey saw it and

heard it but did not comprehend the sounds.     That is not a

criticism of him by the way, it is just one of those

things.    Mr. Pitt saw it but he did not distinguish

anything either.    Mr. Marshall also saw it and in fact was

unable to tell us what was said though he did describe the

impression he gained was that P.C. Buxton was, I think he

used the word "imploring" people, but he did not hear.

This is, I think, probably a retrospective impression and

I would not put too much weight on it.     The important

thing about it is actually that he either did not hear it

or he cannot remember what he heard.

     In addition to that I asked I don't know how many

more of the supporters whether they saw, heard or

understood what was said from the land rover, and I will

give you just a few names.     I am not going to read them

all out.   There was a Mr. Murray, Mr. Hinton, A. P. Jones,
Stephanie Jones, Mr. Knowles, Mr. Gould, Mr. Kenworthy,

Mr. Glover, Mr. McMahon, Mr. Ball, Mr. Hollinrake, Mr.

Twydale, Mr. Cully - you remember Mr. Cully, a very

interesting witness he was - Mr. Abbott, Mr. Lloyd.     I

have just taken a few names out.   All of these were there

at the right time.   It is no use asking people who were

there at half-past-1.   None of these, in evidence at

least, were able to tell us that they saw it, heard it or

understood it.

     It does not, of course, alter the fact that the

decision to postpone the match was never taken, but it

does illustrate may be Mr. Marshall's view, which is

first, that even if that decision had been taken it would

have been ineffective because of the problems with

communication.

     In addition to the land rover, of course,   there were

also tannoys outside the Ground and we heard from the

people in the Control Box that arrangements were made or

instructions were given for tannoy messages to be passed

at the Leppings Lane end to request people not to push,

and even fewer people heard it but at least three admitted

to hearing it.   One was Mr. Boardman.   Stephen Boardman, I

thought personally, was a very good and impressive

witness.   Mr. Waring referred to it, and Superintendent

Mackay who was standing near Gate C most of the time.       He

was one of the Detective Superintendents who had nothing
as such to do with the --    he was there to look out for

mal deeds.    He did not catch anybody in the event, he told

us, but that is what he was there for.     So he heard it.

     The only reason why I mention that is because it

confirms again that some sort of message was in fact

passed to those crowds and the question of course is that

if a decision to postpone the kick-off had been taken

would it in fact have been effective?

     I might as well deal with this all in one fell swoop.

We have had quite a bit of discussion as to why Mr.

Duckenfield thought about postponing kick-off at 2.30, and

whether or not this was connected with the discussion and

comment when they looked at the screens at 2.30 and could

see that there was a substantial number of people outside.

Mr. Murray told him that he thought that people would get

in and at around that time Mr. Duckenfield says, and Mr.

Murray confirms it, and Mr. Bichard I believe also says

that he overheard some sort of conversation regarding

kick-off postponement, said words to the effect, "What is

our policy?   What is our understanding?   What is the

arrangement with regard to the postponement of kick-off?",

and Mr. Murray told him what I have just said.




                                           Both of them
                                                                         16
            Both of them I think went on to say that they treated

       postponement of kick-off as flexible and not as inviolate

       policy.     You may feel that, in fact, the basic principle was

    B I the policy and what you were being told was, "Yes, that was

       our policy but we might be prepared to change our mind if

       circumstances dictated it.     Mr. Duckenfield could easily have

       said they were related and I, for one, would have nothing

       particularly reprehensible about that because if you are

       looking at a crowd and saying, "Can we get them in?" it does

       not necessarily take much thought to think, "If we cannot get

       them in or something goes wrong what shall we do about

       postponing kick-off?" and he did not say that in fact.     He

       said he could not remember any specific connection but it may

       well be that whether he can remember it or not one thought

       may have sparked the other.

            He also said that he did consider the possibility later

       on and his description of later on was words to the effect he

       had a vision or recollection of a semi-circle of

       photographers near the players' entrance and the players were

       either just out or were about to come out and he discarded
       the idea.

            You also heard, of course, from Sergeant Goddard about

      PC Buxton.     In fact PC Buxton made that request.   He said,

       "Postpone the kick-off" and when he came through Mr. Goddard

      replied, "It is too late.      The players are already on the

      field", and that was the end of the matter.     He could not do

      any more than that.




H
        There are two things about this.    Mr. Murray quite

clearly described Sergeant Goddard as a reactive man and he

responded to matters quickly.     When we saw him I thought that

was quite a good description.     Superintendent Murray, very

properly I thought and honourably, with regard to this

particular comment of Sergeant Goddard's which probably

exceeded his authority to say "Too late" but Mr. Murray

accepted it in Court here.     He said,    "I was next to him.    I

heard him.     I could have countermanded him if I had wanted

to.     I didn't because I thought that decision was right".          I

must say I liked that.     I thought that was an honourable

thing to do but whether it is honourable or not is neither

here nor there.

        What I think important is, what time was it when the

request came through because that is a much more significant

factor.     If Sergeant Goddard was right and there is no

evidence to say he is not and, in fact, it ties in with what

Mr. Duckenfield says, that the players were on the pitch then

the gates, Gate C at least was already open for at least two

minutes.     The main opening I mean at 15.52, players come on

the pitch at 15.54, and that is two minutes.       Apart from the

fact that he may have got his reasoning wrong he probably was

right that it was too late to postpone the kick-off at that

time.     It might well have been an option if it had been taken

at an earlier time, that is true, but at that time it is up

to you, of course, entirely when you weigh the evidence,         it

may well have been too late.
                                                                               18
                 I now want to turn just very briefly to the rest of Dr.

         Nicholson's evidence.       I have already dealt with the barrier

         and the only thing I did not mention was his leaning crowd

    B I m o d e l.    Do you remember that?      It was a very interesting

         idea.       The point about it is that it is a mathematical model.

         Somebody has sat down and worked out and said,         "If you lean a

        piece of metal at       10 degrees and it weighs 70 kilograms    and

        you stash so many       behind all leaning at this angle, how   many

        do you need to break a barrier which will break at a certain

        strength?"       Then you just count how many people you have,

        both this way and       across and you then see whether you can fit

        them into the gap       that you have.

                 What he was saying was at the densities which we had you

        could fit that number of people in and so the barrier could

        have broken even if there had been no movement.          That was the

        point of it.       Whether that is true or not nobody knows

        because until you actually get your bits of metal and lean

        them you cannot really tell.       You heard Mr. Toulson and all

        this argument as to whether one had allowed for the length of

        the feet and where was the centre of gravity and so on.          You

        can see what tremendous mathematical problems there are in

        working it out quite apart from the fact that it assumes you

        have a completely homogenous unit all leaning at 10 degrees

        all at the same time.

               It was interesting because it demonstrated something

        about the barrier and that is why I think it was useful.             Dr.

        Eastwood, of course, pointed out that he had been to places

        where barriers had it much lower, I think 2 kilonewtons, and




H
why on earth those did not break, if that model is absolutely

right, it is difficult to explain but I do not think we need

concern our heads about it.

     Dr. Nicholson did two other things as well.     First of

all, he worked out how many people had entered through

turnstiles A to G and how many had entered through Gate C.

Do you remember how he described it?     They had actually

counted.     It must have been a thankless task but that is what

they did and they compared the entries.     They had a

yardstick.     They could tell whether they were doing it riglrt

because they knew how many people had come in according to

the computer count through the turnstiles.     Not, of course,

through the gate because that was uncontrolled.     By and large

their counts tallied pretty accurately with the computer

counts except for one turnstile which, when they examined it,

they discovered had a fault on it.     So they took their figure

which was higher.

     What they worked out on the best estimate, and they gave

us three figures, was 9,734, the maximum that would have got

through.     The count was actually 9,267 and then they added

what looks like about 500 on for possible errors and then

they said that the absolute maximum it could have been would

have been 10,124.    Let us just take the best estimate of

9,724 because it is near enough.     They did not count the

people who came in through Gate B.     That was because they

could not.    They were no pictures and you cannot do it unless

you have the video evidence.    They did not count the people

who came in through Gate A either for the same reason.        Gate
B numbers we do not know exactly but Mr. Ridge, who

gateman there, estimated them at around 500.




                                 /Gate A we will.
     Gate A we will come to in a little while but there

is some dispute as to where they went.

     Mr. Hurst you will remember said - he was a Programme

Seller - he said they were diverted into the North-West

terrace and terracing concourse.

     Sergeant Higgins who formed a cordon said:      "No,

they were not, they went straight down behind the

North Stand".

     It is an irreconcilable difference because

Sergeant Higgins was quite clear that they had their

cordon across the exit into the terracing; Mr. Hurst

was quite clear that they didn't.

     Although it is irreconcilable I was not entirely

convinced by Mr. Hurst's account for two reasons:      first

of all his timing was not terribly accurate.     Secondly -

in fact in the beginning it was abysmally wrong, he said

2.15 but he then when we showed him his statement, as we

did with many people and I don't blame him for getting

his timing wrong, it is two years on - but secondly I

was not entirely convinced for two reasons:      first of

all if the people who were going through Gate A were

in fact people outside turnstiles 1-16, which they were,

they were supposed to go either into the Stands or to

the North Stand, so there was no particular reason

for diverting them.   That is the first thing.

     The second thing is what was going to happen to

the people who were coming through the turnstiles anyway?
     Mr. Hurst dealt with it.   He said they were sort

of dammed up and held back or they wormed their way across

the flow, but it strikes me as odd that if you are taking

people in through an area which is directed towards

Stands and turnstiles that people will just - if they

have a North Stand ticket - just go somewhere else

without saying a word.   Because they may not have had

tickets and indeed if Mr. Cobb is to be believed, do

you remember Mr. Cobb, he was the gateman there who

gave the most graphic account of what was going on

outside his gate, he certainly described a substantial

number of fans who were shaking his gate and who were

waving cash at him, you know, with a view to getting in,

so there may have been a mixture there, we don't actually

know how many.

     If you take 500 say through Gate B and I don't know,

say another 500 through Gate A who finished up on the

North-West terrace and the terrace, if you add that to

the best estimate you get about 10,700 which is over

capacity but not so greatly over capacity, it is less

than what it used to be before the Safety Certificate

came into force.

     It is interesting because it raises the question

as to what about all these ticketless fans?    Where were

they or how many were there?    If you remember we spent

a good bit of time thinking about ticketless fans as

well.
      Ticketless fans:   again a very difficult question

in this particular disaster.    There seems to be little

doubt that there were quite a number about and indeed

to a certain extent it is to be expected at any big match

and they said so.   If you have ticket touts then you

are going to have ticketless fans and vice-versa and

there were some and we know    one was arrested, do you

remember, and they told us how many tickets he had, I

have forgotten now, about £700 and 34 tickets, something

like that and there may have been more, so there must

have been some ticketless fans.

      A ticketless fan is actually only significant

if he gets into the stadium without a ticket, on the

assumption of course that he is not using forged tickets

or that people are not going in with forged tickets

and there was not any evidence that that was occurring.

      If I am a ticket tout and I have 100 tickets and

I meet 100 people who have not got tickets and I give

them to them then I have not multiplied, I have not

increased the allocation, I have merely redistributed

it from those who ought to have come in with those

tickets to those who are now advancing upon the

turnstiles with them.    The fact that it ihay cause

congestion, block the footpaths, cause law and order

problems in effect does not have anything to do with the

capacity in the stadium.    Ticketless fans is simply

significant if he gets in without a ticket, in other
words if you have a huge influx of people who should not

be there because they have no authority to enter the

ground, the authority to enter the ground being the

ticket.

      Now as I say I have had a little look at this

because it interested me to a certain extent and there

were a lot of people who said they were approached,

Mr. Hewstone.     I will just pick one or two names.

You may find that I tend to pick the same names because

where there is no controversy there is no reason why

we should not pick them.     Mr. Creaser saw them.     He

estimated them at around 200.     I think Mr. Marshall

estimated them at about 600, you remember.     That was

the highest estimate that we had from anybody.       Various

people estimated them between 150, 70, 20, all different

sorts of numbers.    What you must not do is add them all

up because one ticketless fan may be seen by 100 ticketed

people and indeed we have heard from several people

say, Ruth Cobb the Officer near the Penistone Road, she

said ticketless fans were actually walking against the

stream and I think Mr. Hewstone said that as well because

if you think about it that is what you want to be, you

want to walk against the stream in order to approach

people and say:     "Have you got a ticket?   Have you got

spares?" or whatever it is that you want to ask,

so not only can't you say, sum them, but in addition

we had at least one witness who told us, his name
just escapes me, it may come back to me in a little while,

but they were in a group of five and one of them did not

have a ticket and all five of them went out looking for

this ticket, so you had five people saying "Spares", they

only wanted one ticket, so the problem of deciding how

many true genuine ticketless fans there were is one which

I don't think we will be able to resolve satisfactorily

except to say there were, I am sure, some.

       I will come perhaps in a little bit more detail

to this in a moment or two.

       So you might ask if there were a lot of ticketless

fans   and if they all came in or      some of them came in

through the gates, how is it that the capacity was not

exceeded or not exceeded to any substantial extent?

If we use Dr. Nicholson's figure it was not exceeded at

all,   that is disallowing Gates B and      C.

       How come that that should be?    You may   think that

the answer to it is that in fact ticketed people were

actually kept out and we know that is in fact the case,

at least when we say "we know" we have heard evidence

- you may not believe it - but we have heard evidence

and that was Sergeant Lomas and I think one or two

others but certainly Sergeant Lomas said that when he

came down to the ground after the call had gone for

people to get in, and I think Inspector Waring said

it as well, they shut the gates and they would not let

people in and so there were latecomers or if you like

real latecomers who were kept out.      We don't know
exactly how many but that might be an explanation for

this anomaly.

       Be that as it may of the 10,000-odd people that

should have come through the turnstiles 2,240

according to Dr. Nicholson came through Gate C and

they came through at a considerably faster rate than

they   would have done if they had come through the

turnstiles.     I am not    talking now about them rushing

in or anything like that, that is not what I am saying,

I am merely saying because of the aperture of the gate

and because there was no obstruction by a turnstile

or anything else, people could enter faster. I think

it is probably about 3-1, so for those five or six

minutes when that gate was wide open there was not

only a substantial number coming in but they were

coming in at a comparatively fast rate in relation to

the turnstiles.

       Don't misunderstand me.       I am not talking about

people running in headlong or anything like that.        I

think the evidence if you look at the video and indeed

all the evidence for virtually everybody there was an

initial rush, which was not surprising, and you can see

it actually on Dr. Nicholson's graph there is a little

blip on it and after that the inflow was steady but

it was substantial.        That is what he told us with regard

to that.

       The other thing he did was he did sums as to how
many people were in Pens 3 and 4 and unluckily for us

the quality - the photograph is over there, we will give

you that the big one to take in with you so you can see,

it is turned the wrong way now but you remember it, it

is a big enlargement - unluckily for us the photograph

which he had to work with for 14.52 which would have

been a most interesting comparison, the quality of that

photograph was not of a standard which enabled him to

say with confidence that the figure which he calculated

from it was accurate, and the figure at 14.52 that he

did work out for Pen 3 was 678 and for Pen 4 was 821.

      I repeats    Dr. Nicholson was not happy with those

figures and did not want reliance placed upon them and

what he was in effect saying was that the figures

probably are on the low side.    He was not saying that

they were too high.    I think what worried him was that

he had not, because of the angle and the obstructions

and things, he could not be sure that he had actually

managed to get all the noses.    You remember he was

counting the noses.    Nevertheless you could take those

as minimum    figures with that restriction but don't

treat them    as gospel, but he did count the numbers   in

the pens at 15.03 or was it 15.02, anyway, 15.02 I

think, and    the figures he came up with was 1,576 which

gave you a    density of 8.4 on average for Pen 3, and Pen 4

he calculated at 1,115 and I think the density was

comparable.    Do you remember he discussed that.
                                        /I am sorry ....
I am sorry, that is wrong, the pen 4 number was 1,607.

Clearly on his figures the capacity - there were no

capacities for the pen, do you remember that?    There was a

capacity for the terrace - 10,100 - but there wasn't a

specific capacity for each pen.    Of course you could sit

down and work it out because, if you got a ruler and

measured it and worked out how many square metres, how many

barriers, what allowances for slope, and so you could work

out what the capacity would have been if that had been the

total terrace.    However, at the time there wasn't one.     If

you applied a 5.4 number of people per square metre then the

capacity was exceeded by around 45%.

     Indeed, I think when he wa*s being cross-examined by

Mr. King with regard to figures, he confirmed that the

bottom - do you remember, he did it in horizontal sections -

the top three rows they could do fairly well, but the bottom

one they made a guess.   They said, "We will take a packing

of 10," because they tried 10 and they had found you could

get 10 people into a square metre without any particular

discomfort and they thought that was a fair figure.

However, if you increased that to 16 per square metre, which

apparently is the absolute top limit you could get into that

space - obviously a lot more than 5.4, three times as much,

then the total number of people in pens 3 and 4 had gone up

to about 3,800.   That would give an even higher level of

overcrowding.
     Now the reason that I have spent a few minutes on this,

although Dr. Nicholson wasn't very happy with his figure on

pens 3 and 4, at 14.52 of 680 and 821, which were the two

figures in round terms, that is 1,500.      If you were to

subtract that figure from your 3,800 approximately, which

would be the maximum you would have in that pen at that

time, it leaves you 2,300, which is remarkably close to the

total number of people who came in through Gate C.

     If you were to accept the view that the majority of the

people who entered when Gate C was opened, and do not

forget, of course, people were coming in through the

turnstiles as well and the turnstiles were working at that

stage at about 1,000 an hour, again Dr. Nicholson showed us

that on the graph, between 800 and 1,000 an hour and there

were seven of them.     You can work it out for yourselves.

If you accept the proposition that the majority of people

went down the tunnel then you may feel that Dr. Nicholson's

figures for 14.52 are not that far out.    If, of course, you

take the view that the majority did not go through, then you

are back with Dr. Nicholson's original estimate.

     It is   very important to think about this.   You   may not

be able to   resolve it but at least you ought to ask

yourselves the question, because it becomes terribly

relevant when you come to the issue as to what the pens

looked like when people were observing them, particularly

the track Officers.    It is obvious that, isn't it?     If you
took this view, which I have just summed, if you like, what

the figures seem to show, then you may form one view as to

what the terrace looked like.      We have got photographs as

well and if you add it all up together you may be able to

make some judgment as to what it looked like at the time,

together with - a point which I have not yet got to - the

evidence of the people who were actually within the pens.

We will deal with those in a little while.

     If I can just summarise and then we will stop for ten

minutes.     What Dr. Nicholson is saying is this:    a

substantial number of people came through Gate C, 2,240 on

his best estimate.      Altogether through Gate C and through

the turnstiles about 9,000-plus.      The capacity of the

terraces at 15.02 were substantially exceeded, whichever way

you look at it.      The packing of the terrace at 14.52 was

different.    He was not entirely happy with his figures, but

he did look at some photographs and he did agree that

although he was not willing to estimate numbers, that it

looked different, but you can do that for yourselves.       You

do not need Dr. Nicholson to do that for you.

     He also dealt with the barrier and its testing which I

have already dealt with.      That is Dr. Nicholson's evidence

- important because it is independent.       We will have ten

minutes.

                       (Short adjournment)
        Before I move on to what I was about to do, I think I

ought just to mention and go back and retrace my steps to

the Safety Certificate.          I have already dealt with it to a

certain extent but I just want to refer to Mr. Bownes and

Mr. Butler whom we heard for about three and a naif days

altogether.

        Mr.     Bownes is or was, I do not know what his present

position        is, Chief Licensing Officer.   He was in one of the

departments of the Council and when South Yorkshire County

Council disappeared Sheffield became the responsible

Authority and the safety at sportsgrounds just landed on his

desk.         It is another licence and he has got to deal with

it.      I have no doubt he did to the best of his ability.

However, it was not the only licence he was dealing with,

that was perfectly plain.          He had many, many other tasks to

do.

        The second thing     is, of course, that although he wasn't

a qualified lawyer         he was in a legal department so not

unnaturally he would approach a document as most of us would

do who are lawyers, which is to say, "Let's look at the

wording, and if we don't like it we will amend it."              In

fact at a relatively early stage, 1987, he decided, very

sensibly,      to write around and find out how many other people

drafted their certificates, with a view to upgrading this

Certificate.        His emphasis was, and he quite clearly told

us this, was on the wording.          He wanted to get the text
right.   He was not particularly interested in the schedule

and, of course, in some respect the schedule is the most

important thing in the light of what we now know.

     He was in the further very disadvantageous position in

that he had taken over after five years' run.      The

terracing was divided by lateral fencing and there was

nothing on the Certificate to show that it had been amended

from its original form.    It is true there was correspondence

in the file about the installation of the lateral fencing

and so on, but he probably took - and I cannot see how you

can blame him for this - the view that if the previous

Licensing Authority had approved the situation, had not felt

it necessary to make a change to the Certificate, why should

he when he took over?     He very sensibly, initially at

least, took the view, "We change nothing until we know what

we are doing," or words to that effect.      Then, as I say, he

was trying to get this wording right.

     It took a long time, and in fact it had not been done

by the time the disaster occurred.      Now I am not saying for

a minute that if it had been done it would actually have

made any difference because if all that would have happened

would have been to change the wording and put the old

schedule in, we would have been in exactly the same position

as we are in today, or as it was then.     Of course there is

a new one now, needless to say, with a new schedule.
       He, of course - I will call him a lawyer.      He is not

technically a lawyer, an administrator would be a better

word, and so he was dependent upon input from the Officers'

Working Party;    of which he was a member as well because he

attended meetings, if you like, a scribe, administrator,

secretary, chairman, though he did say it was his

responsibility to be in charge.     His department was the

senior one, if you like.     Nevertheless, he was in this

situation that if he did not get the information fed to him

there was nothing he could do.     If he went round the ground

and looked at it and people said that looked OK, he was in

no position to say it wasn't.     If there was a discussion

that a barrier should be removed he had no expertise to say

it shouldn't.    I suppose he could have insisted on the

Certificate being amended, but it would not have altered the

facts on the ground.    He had to accept what people told

him.    He had basically the Fire Service, Mr. Butler, or

people in that part of the Local Authority.        It wasn't

always Mr. Butler.     In fact we were a little unfair to

Mr. Butler, I think, on reflection.    He wasn't the most

senior person we could have got, but we did, and in a way he

had quite a hard time with us.    There was that, the

engineering side if you like, the input from that.        There

was the Fire Service and there was the Police.       That is
     He did make some changes.   He changed the visits from

twice a year to once a year, for reasons which are not

entirely clear to me apart from that presumably saves time.

Also I think he tended to get people to go individually

rather than collectively and to communicate either by

meetings or by writing.

     Well, that is good in some ways and bad in others

because you lose time and you also lose interplay.




      Although he would not accept
Although he would not accept it when I put it to him, my

overall impression was that there was a risk that things

might fall between two stools because it was difficult to

know where the demarcation line was.   They did try, they

had schedules and they said, "That is your primary

responsibility.   Consult us on this", but it is not an

easy task when you are doing a complex matter such as the

requirements under the Safety Certificate, or the Act, to

make sure that nothing gets overlooked.

     I think it may well be that mistakes were made with

regard --   certainly what we now seem to think is pretty

plain, that these lateral fences do segment the terrace in

a very decided way, does not as far as I can tell seem to

have impinged itself with any great moment on anybody in

that Officers Working Party, or Mr. Bownes, and I say this

because if it had then no doubt they would have taken some

steps to say hang on, we can't do this.   I admit that both

Mr. Butler and Mr. Seamen took the view that the Police

were supposed to man those gates, but I have already

reminded you a little bit of that evidence so I am not

repeating it.

     Now, apart from the fact that Mr. Bownes dealt with

it and whenever he was asked what would have happened he

said that the Council would do this or the Council would

do that, or the Council would do the third thing, the

Council of course are strictly speaking the elected
representatives, who work in committees and in council

meetings, and to whom papers are passed up by Mr. Bownes

or the people in his department, and then they take

action.   As far as I could see from the evidence which we

heard, apart from two or three initial communications

acquainting the Council with the fact that they were now

responsible under the Safety in Sports Ground Act and that

various administrative and reform matters would be put in

hand, but as I say it looked mainly towards legal drafting

rather than anything else,   the Council as such had next to

no knowledge of what was going on.

     In some ways that does not surprise me because if you

think about the Council being a group of elected

representatives, in a specialist matter like safety in

sports grounds it is very difficult to see what useful

contribution they can make, apart from saying yes or no,

unless they happen to have a real expert in the Council

who says, "Hang on, I can see something here which is

wrong", it is difficult to see what --- they have to rely

upon their staff.    I don't see how they can avoid it.

     The point that I want to make with regard to the

Council is this.    If that is right, that they were not

aware of the details of what was going   on, and if Mr.

Bownes was not the directing mind of the Council, which I

am certain he was not, then I think it must follow that

the Council as such, and indeed the City of Sheffield,
cannot itself be held to have been reckless in respect to

this particular event.

     Now what about the rest of them, Mr. Bownes, Mr.

Butler, the people in the Officers Working Group, the

people who acted?     In a nutshell it seems to me quite

clear that all of them, and I have already mentioned Dr.

Eastwood yesterday, but all of them including the Police

who were associated with this Group, did not prior to this

event see the Stadium or the way it was constructed, or

the signing or indeed anything else as constituting a

serious and obvious risk of injury to anybody.     They did

not as far as one can tell and from the evidence, ever

contemplate the possibility that people might enter

through exit gates.    That was not within their

contemplation, and you may feel that was not only not

within their contemplation,   it was not really foreseeable

realistically.   If that is so, and despite whatever

criticisms one might want to make about slowness and

falling between two stools and people perhaps interfering

to a greater or lesser extent more than they should have

done, taking decisions as to moving barriers and so on, it

might have been wiser to have dealt with it in other ways,

it seems to me that all these people who were not on site

on 15th April are, apart from anything else, too remote in

a causative sense to be considered, when you come to

consider the issue of whether or not any of the deceased
died by way of unlawful killing or being unlawfully

killed.

     I want to make it absolutely clear that if I say

that, why on earth am I spending time talking about all

this to you, and the reason is of course that we are not

actually just thinking about unlawfully killed.     I told

you right at the beginning that a coroner's inquest is a

fact finding exercise not a fault finding exercise, and

not only   is it right therefore that we should find out

what the   facts are, it does not matter whether or not

somebody   is to be blamed, even if nobody was to be blamed

you still want   to find out the facts, and so it is only

right that one should deal with that.    Secondly, even as I

mentioned to you if you were to consider say accidental

death and misadventure,   it is important to know what has

gone before because that is something which you may have

to take into consideration when you weigh that particular

verdict, if you get to it.

     The third and may be most important point of all is

that just because I say "x" or "y" should be excluded fro r.

your deliberation when it comes to thinking about

unlawfully killed, does not mean to say that the

construction of the Stadium, the fact that there was a

Safety Certificate,   that there were numbers fixed, that

the terraces were treated as a whole by all these people,

that nobody had seen or foreseen any particular
difficulty,    that may well be very, very important when you

come to consider the issue in respect of anybody whose

conduct you could consider in such a way as to ask

yourself the question, or the seven questions which Lord

Justice Watkins listed, the main one of which, if you

remember, is was this person reckless, did he do or omit

to do an act which was both obvious and where there was an

obvious and serious risk of injury, and when he did that

act or omission was he indifferent to it, or did he

recognise the risk but nevertheless go on to take it?

Just so that you don't worry about the legal definition,       I

am going to repeat this to you later on sometime, very

slowly, so that you can write it down.     Not all two hours

of what I said, just the core, the seven bits basically,

so that you have got it with you if you want it.     You

don't have to write it down if you can remember it, but if

you want to write it down I will give you the chance.

     I now want to move on.    I think that is enough on

that, and I want to just talk for a moment or two about

Dr. Nicholl.    Dr. Nicholl was the statistician - do you

remember him?    He came on the 14th.   I am not going to

weary you with all the figures.    There is absolutely no

need for me to do this, but I am going to summarise for

you as briefly as I can the substance of what he said.

The first thing I want to say, because I know this is an

important point, the word alcohol is going to be mentioned
and it is not always popular but it has played a part in

these proceedings and it is absolutely essential that we

deal with it correctly and properly, and that we give it

no more and no less than its appropriate weight in the

story as a whole.

     What I want to say with regard to the point about

alcohol is this.     Dr. Nicholl you remember chose 80

milligrams per 100 millilitres as the demarcation point.

In fact, everybody has taken that figure - Dr. Forest did

as well - because we all know what it is.       We all know

that below that limit you are allowed to drive a car and

above that limit you are not.       It is easy, that is all

that figure tells us.     What it does not tell us is to what

extent --     no, start again.    It is definitely not illegal

to walk around the streets with say 100 milligrams or 120

milligrams.     It may be if you are rolling drunk then

somebody might arrest you for that, but there is nothing

illegal or improper even in having, so long as you are not

driving, in having more than 80 milligrams per 100

millilitres in your blood.       So I do not want you, just

because we have used that as a cut off point, to say well

anybody above 80 is so inebriated that he is awful, but

you have to recognise it as simply a useful demarcation

point.

     I have often taken the view, and I may be wrong on

this, that the reason why one has a demarcation point at
80 is because at that point it can be statistically shown

that there is certainly a fall off in quality of response

and manoeuvrability and so on, but it does not necessarily

mean that it is perceived by the driver.     In other words,

he may well feel okay in himself and yet objectively, if

he were to be tested, you would be able to demonstrate a

falling off, and that is why after no doubt a lot of

research somebody chose that particular figure.

     Dr. Forest when he was here and he gave us all the

figures on the people who had died, was asked as to what

he thought about the levels, at what level did it become

significant, and he replied, as all good scientists do,

with excessive caution.    In fact, it is fair to say that

there is actually very little research on the behavioural

aspects of alcohol.   I think that if I had been able to

find a really good expert on this subject I would have had

him, because I would have been interested quite apart from

anything else.   It is only fair to say that there is not

very much work that I have been able to discover, in fact

I have not been able to discover any.

     What Dr. Forest said was this.     First of all he said

that give or take a smallish man and all things being

equal, 2% pints or so equals about 80 milligrams.




                          Then he was asked what effect
       Then he was asked about the effect this might have and

his response was that people vary enormously; that studies

done by the Road Traffic Research Laboratory had shown that

people with blood alcohol content between 20 and 40 had some

impairment to their ability to respond to a novel situation,

and so in fact levels considerably lower than 80 milligrams.

On the other hand, he had met people with 200 to 300

milligrams of alcohol in their blood and who on casual

conversation you would not have known there was anything

wrong with them at all.     He also gave us an example, on the

other side of the coin again, of one young man who died due

to alcohol problems with less than 80 milligrams.      So, it is

exceedingly varied, the effect.

       Therefore, when we look at the figures and say, "So many

had more than 80 or so many had less than 80", be careful how

much value you put on it.    You are the jury and so your own

experience and common intelligence is why you are here.      You

can bring to bear some of your own knowledge of people you

have seen.    I hesitate to say it, yourselves,   if you have had

a certain amount to drink.    I say that because I do not want

you to make a mistake on this.    All right?   So what have we

got?

       First of all, Dr. Nicholl dealt with age and sex

distribution.    In a nutshell, what he was able to demonstrate

from the figures was that there was a difference between the

group of people who had been identified as entering the

stadium before 2.30 from the group of people who had been

identified as entering the stadium after 2.30, excluding 13
where nobody knew what time they had come.        So he basically

worked on a slightly smaller number and what he had done, if

you remember, we had them split into Gate Cs and so on but he

had compared the various columns and he had found that all

that group were homogenous.     They were all basically the same

class.   The interesting thing he found was that the earlier

group tended to have more ladies in and more of the really

young people.     That is not to say, of course, there were not

really any group of young people in the second group as well

but statistically speaking there were more in the early

group.

     So there was a difference in age distribution and you

can remember he did some clever tricks by excluding women and

so on to see if it was ladies or really young ones who caused

this difference and he said,    "No, it didn't.    Even if you

excluded those and excluded the obvious different ones there

was still a difference between the groups".       He also showed

that there was a difference between the likelihood of

somebody having had a drink as compared between those two

groups and it is not really entirely surprising if you think

about it because if you are outside on what was a beautiful

day until say 2.30 and then you come to the ground, unless

you happen to just arrive in your car the chances are that

you are going to have a drink somewhere because you are going

to be thirsty, if nothing else.     So it is not entirely

surprising.     This is the interesting thing, that he was able

to demonstrate this statistically.
t



                                                                             44
                The other thing he was able to demonstrate because of

          this statistical methodology and because of the figures which

          he worked out was that a surprising number of the people who

     B|   died had entered after 2.30 and that relatively few, 19

          positive ones, had been in early.    Now I find that

          interesting because one's first thoughts about when one

          thinks about what happened is that it was the people who were

          in the pen who died and, in fact, that does not appear to oe

          the case.    That may be quite an interesting and significant

          finding when we have a look at the evidence a little bit

          further.    Have you understood what I have summed up for you

          as to what he said?

               The last point he made was that provided no one had died

          from alcohol poisoning - and nobody had because we heard from

          the pathologist on that - then it was possible in view

          statistically to take that group of people and relate it as

          being a representative sample of the crowd as a whole.      What

          that means is that you can take, say the 19 people who came

          in early, and you can say that they represent;   they are

          similar in distribution, age, sex, alcohol intake and what

          have you to all the people who came in before 2.30 and

          similarly for the ones who came in later.   Now that is also,

          if that is correct, and my understanding also of his evidence

          was that he felt that the statistics were fairly sound but,

          of course, statistics are only statistics, which is why I

          said to you earlier that you must take things with a degree

          of caution but that is what he said and there was no reason

          why he should say - that is what he worked out and it is a




    HI
                                                                         45
       matter for you to decide to what extent, if at all, you

       accept it.

            I will remind you of some of the evidence which to a

    B| certain   extent supports his findings or, putting it another

       way, his findings support some of the evidence which various

       people have given to us.   Have you understood what I have

       said about Dr. Nicholl?    I do not want to say any more unless

       - yes, I do want to say one other thing.    We spent a lot of

       time discussing how many people have had no alcohol, whether

       the majority had had a drink or not and so on and, of course,

       it all depends how you add up the figures, does it not?      If

       you want to add the under 80 milligrams into the people who

       had over 80 milligrams then you get a higher percentage of

       people who had had a drink, if you turn it the other way

       round and say, "So what, you can't really complain because

       they would even have been allowed to drive a car?" then you

       get a figure going the other way.

            I think that the easiest way of thinking about this is

       to ignore that middle group when it comes to saying what is

       what because that is the movable feast.    You can put it in

      wherever you want to place your argument and we are not here

       to argue about niceties.   I think you can summarise his

      evidence that of the later entrants, the 2.30 pluses,    43 per

      cent had had nothing to drink or negligible amounts - I call

      that nothing - and 22 per cent were over 80 milligrams.     So

      that is a fifth in round terms of the people who were there

      who died who had had more than 80.    Of course, some may have

      only been 81 but then some of the ones under 80 may have been




H
79.     So we will ignore that.   The early entrants, the

percentages are that 68 per cent had had nothing to drink and

5 per cent were over 80.     So you can see there is quite a big

difference in those two groups.

        It is very interesting because you may recollect

Superintendent Mackay, he was the Detective Superintendent

who was standing somewhere around, and he was asked about

alcohol and people drinking and he gave an estimate.        He

said,    "I thought about a fifth", about a thousand,   I think he

said people,    "had had perhaps a little bit too much to

drink".     That is remarkably close to Dr. Nicholl's figures

and Mr. Mackay did not, of course, have those figures.           Dr.

Nicholl did not do any work on this until fairly recently.

That, I thought, was quite interesting.

        I now want to turn to the events of the day.    I will do

it as briefly as I can.     We did not, in fact, deal with it in

so many words but there was the possibility that the reason

that people arrived at Leppings Lane after 2.30 was becaus*

they actually got to Sheffield so late.     In other words,

there were such delays on the roads or whatever that th«y

were just delayed.     As in every situation there were peopl*

who did arrive late.     You may remember once I think I twigged

this point I asked nearly everybody,    "What time did you

leave, what time did you arrive, what time did you get to

Leppings Lane?" and I asked in fact nearly everybody but I

was more interested in the ones who came by coach.

        Out of about 20 which I have written down, I am not

saying I have got every single one, seven of these coaches
arrived after two, and one is five past two, but there were

some who did not get in until 2.40.   So clearly there were

some that got in quite late but the rest of them, 13 out of

those 20 that I know of, arrived before two.   In fact, in one

of them there was a group of five and that was Mr. Langley

who was a coach driver.   He was a very interesting witness

because he gave a very clear and calm account really of his

approach to the ground and getting through the turnstiles and

then he gave that very, very moving and graphic description

of what it was like within the pen.   It was not much use f^r

finding out times and so on but it did give feeling to the

situation.   That was Mr. Langley.

     So if those figures are right - and those are all the

figures we have got to work on - then a large number of the

coaches did come before two o'clock either to Sheffield or to

the environments.   If somebody stops off at Barnsley and gets

there at twelve then I treat that as if it were Sheffield.

In fact, if you look at the individual people, again a large

number of people if you remember, they were either in

Sheffield or within its environment relatively early.




                                        /That is not to.
That is not to say that there weren't some who, for

whatever reason, were delayed and arrived in town so

to speak late.

      Irrespective of what time they arrived in Sheffield

it seems incontrovertible that the large number of

people got to the ground at 2.30 or after and you can

demonstrate this.     You can certainly demonstrate it from

the number of people who entered the turnstile.       Do you

remember Dr. Nicholson produced a graph.     It is a straight

line and you read it off.     At the bottom is the time and

the cross side are the numbers and you can work out from

that exactly what time somebody, you know how many people

had been through.     Less than half, it would appear, got

through by 2.30 so the definition of the other half

or plus were outside and that seems to be the evidence

of nearly everybody who had anything to do with the

organisation of the ground.

      Sergeant Lomas, do you remember him?     He was the

chap up Catchbar Lane.     I did not think his estimations

were all that good.     I think like everybody else

estimating numbers may not necessarily be his strong

point but he used a graphic expression, if you remember.

He said "it looked as if a tap had been turned on at

2.30, as if the crowd just suddenly came down" and

certainly if you look at the video whatever might have

been happening at the turnstiles, however slow or

otherwise it might have been, that did not affect the
numbers of peole whom you can see coming down the roads.

        You have got the videos; you have got the

compilation; you have got the split screen video and

you have got the shortened version and the photographs

in those bundles where you can look at them whichever

way you wish.

        Indeed not only is that what Lomas; Creaser;

Marshall; Waring; the mounted Officers say, but in

addition to that a large number of the fans say it of

the ones whom we have had.    They say, you know:    "We

got to the ground at 2.30.    We got to the ground at

2.35.    We got to the ground at 2.40."    They may say,

for whatever reason, but that was a time they got to

Leppings Lane and I don't think it is necessary for me

to remind you by name because I don't think it would

help you much if I read you long lists of supporters*

names saying that is what they said.      You will remember that,

I think, quite clearly from the evidence, the import was

the same.

        There is considerably more variation and argument

as to what extent if any alcohol had been consumed by

those people.

        Now it is important to remember that Dr. Nicholls

is only working on a sample, so when one thinks about

what other people have had to say, you can measure their

evidence against the statistical analyses and vice-versa.

        I thought it was quite interesting because you
may remember perhaps we had a few too many, but we had

quite a few Licensees in the beginning and the upshot

I think of all their evidence was this, barring one and

we subsequently had somebody else along to give us an

adjustment to the figures, but if we exclude that parti­

cular bit of evidence the evidence of all the Licensees

was that consumption was in the range of 3-4 pints, on

average; that the behaviour of the fans was good, it

might have been boisterous and so on but they were

excited and apart from one Licensee who was in a small

pub who said:    "I was not displeased to see them go"

and even he did not say they had done anything particularly

heinously wrong, he just thought that perhaps if they

stayed a little bit longer they might have another two

pints and that might have been too much, so he was happy

to see them go and it was only a very small pub on the

outskirts I think, Mr. Knight, but the vast majority

of the publicans had no real complaints.    It is important

to recognise that.    On the other hand their pubs were

full.

        We also heard from a whole load of people who

live in the neighbourhood or who were in the streets

and of course what one person perceives as boisterousness

another person perceives as aggression and I tried to

match, if I can use that term, some people who felt

there was absolutely nothing to be seen and others

like Mrs. Guilland-Cumming, she found the atmosphere
threatening.    Make of that what you will.     I don't

think that it     is terribly significant.   It may be

that she   just is not used to large crowds.

      We   also asked quite a lot of people as to whether

they saw people      carrying or drinking out of cans     and

we got a distribution from those who said:       "I did not

see a single one" which you may treat with a certain

degree of caution, I think.     It may be that they did

not see a single one but it is highly unlikely that

there was not a single person drinking any alcohol, to

those who said they saw at least 50% and we got a nice

spread of opinion.

      Of course you don't walk around thinking:          "How

many people are carrying cans?     I must count them all

up" and Mr. King on several occasions, quite rightly,

managed to demonstrate that very well, but if you take

it overall I think the upshot of it was that there were

clearly people who were in pubs and were drinking; there

were clearly people who had gone to off-licences who

were drinking; there were clearly people who were walking

down the street who were drinking.      I think the exact

percentage is not that important but if we take

Dr. Nicholls as a yardstick, a fifth would probably be

about right and that is in fact, as I have told you,

what Superintendent McKay estimated, which I think was

very smart of him.

      It was also very smart of Mr. Creaser because
he described the people whom he saw as "3 pint men" which

fits in exceedingly well with what I have just told you

the people who were selling the drinks were saying, and

it also fits in exceedingly well with Dr. Nicholson's

figures, if you think about.

         There were of course some who had more.   I can

mention, there are several people whom I could mention.

There was one young man, perhaps I won't mention him by

name, but he had on his own admission two pints and six

cans and he was one of those young people who when he

entered through Gate C (a) had to hold on to his friend

and (b) was terribly concerned about his footing.

Now he attributed that to the fact that he was being

carried along by the crowd.     That may be so but of course

it does not fit in very well with a lot of the other

evidence which was that within the concourse area

there was not a big surge of people, unless he happened

to be right in the beginning, but it might well go along

with the possibility that eight pints    or thereabouts

has something to do with your ability to stay steady.

         Do you remember that little girl who seemed to

spend all her afternoon running in and out of her

house?     She saw people who obviously had had a bit too

much to drink.

         Now the difficulty is that to try and determine

what effect, not the people who had had a bit too much,

we know another one, was it P.C. Best he had to go and
arrest somebody.   He said he had to do it for his own

safety, he just had to take him away because he was

so disruptive, but nobody else could stand him there

any longer, but I am not really concerned about those

people, the real problem is trying to decide whether

or not that percentage, and let's take it as say 20%

and you may not accept that figure, you can discard it,

you can say:   "No, I don't agree with that.   I think

it was less.   I think it was more" but let's to make

my life easier say 20% and let's take it that they were

the "3 pint people".   What effect if any did that have

on their behaviour and in particular on their response

or otherwise to direction and on their mood in the

sense of increasing their frustration; decreasing

their frustration; increasing their aggressiveness;

decreasing their aggressiveness, or what effect did

it have?

      The best that one can do is one can marry together

the evidence of Dr. Forest, which as I say is ambivalent

in many respects but he does say it depends on the person,

plus, and this is where you have to make the fine judgment,

the evidence of Mr. Marshall and Mr. Creaser and Mr. McKay

and other people, Mr. Sykes, who were making judgments

and assessments as to the effect that this had played,

the effectthat alcohol had played on this particular

group.

      Mr. Marshall was quite clear.   He did not say
the whole lot were drunk.     On the contrary, he said there

was a minority, a significant minority he said, but a

minority he said who were affected by alcohol.

      I think Mr. Hale asked one of the Officers:      "Is

it the man who is really drunk who is the problem or is

it the man who has just had a relative amount which does

not incapacitate him but which makes him perhaps a little

bit less amenable to somebody telling him:      'Don't do

this or do do that?'"

      You have to think about that and when you think

about it you can also think about the other people whom

we heard about.    We heard from, what is her name, the

name just escapes me, the carpenter, the lady in

Leppings Lane.    She obviously had a very bad experience

with the behaviour of some fans.     It does not really

matter whether there were 50, 100, 200, it is neither

here nor there, she had a bad experience.      Others did

as well.   We heard from various others.

      On the other hand we also heard from Mr. McGauley,

do you remember him?     He was the one with the baby in

the window in Wadsley Lane.     His description of the fans

was totally different.      In fact if he is right these

fans were exemplars of good behaviour.      He saw absolutely

nothing wrong at all.     He saw no alcohol.   He saw no

misbehaviour.     On the contrary, he contrasted it in

a most favourable way with the behaviour of other people

in his area.


                                   He was just up the road
        He was just up the road from where Sergeant Lomas was,

who told us almost the exact opposite.      You have to decide

when you weigh all these people's evidence together whom you

believe, basically, with regard to that.      In the end we

are, I think, talking of what appears to be a minority

within this group of people who were outside Leppings Lane.

The big problem is what effect, if any, can that minority

have on the group?      We have all had experience that if you

get one person in a group who is loud or misbehaves or does

something, that one person can actually cause a

disproportionate amount of disruption and that is the

problem.       You may well find that you get caught up in a

situation which may not necessarily be of your making but

which you cannot do anything about because of activities of

various other people.

        I could give you names - I don't know how many I have

got - of people who could smell alcohol in the air, people

who said they saw nothing, who said they were happy, but I

do not think we need go through it.      Perhaps I will just

mention a couple just so that you know I haven't grasped

this bit of the summing up entirely out of the air.        I have

mentioned the licensees.      Olive Mayhew I thought was an

interesting one.      That is the petrol pump lady.    She was

confused in many respects, but the one thing she did know

was how many cans she had to pick up and how many black

bags.      Also she used a very interesting word.     I thought
it was probably the best word that anybody used.       She said

it gave them courage.     I understood what that meant.        I do

not know whether you did as well, and that may well be

significant.

     Then there was Mr. Bartholomew again, whom I have

mentioned.     He saw people.     There was Louise Jane Hinton.

She was a fan.     She described people as being happy.

There was somebody called Kevin Carroll.       He saw people

with cans but he said nobody was visibly drunk.      Stephen

Boardman who was one of my favourite witnesses.       He was

young, innocent in a sense, and I thought he gave very good

and concise evidence.     He said that a few fans were

drinking from cans, or words to that effect.       As I say, I

could go on and give you more, but I am not going to.

     I have already dealt to a certain extent with

ticketless fans and the difficulty of estimating their

numbers, but I am now working my way through the day

basically.

     On that day it is clear there were some there.        It is

exceedingly difficult to work out how many, as I have

already said, in my view.       The best people whom we could

have had would have been the turnstile operators.        If we

could have had hard evidence from them, because after all,

except for the people who went through the gate, everybody

else went in through a turnstile and the majority still went

through turnstiles.     We did hear quite clearly from various
people that people went through these turnstiles, towards

the end anyway, they jumped them and various things

happened.      The first thought is, "Goodness, me, they have

all got to be ticketless.      Why should they do it

otherwise?"       However, if that is correct, and you may feel

the evidence is that the people near the front really had no

choice but to go forward, rightly or wrongly, people with

tickets may have been included in that group who jumped the

turnstiles.

     That is why when I was questioning the turnstiles

operators I tried to squeeze out of them how many of them

offered money, because if somebody offers you money then

they are not likely to have a ticket in an all-ticket match.

It was difficult.      For instance, one of the turnstile

operators said he thought 150 to 200 went through without a

ticket.     When I pressed him he said maybe 30 to 50 offered

money.      Another one said that 70 went through in his

estimation, and of those only 20 offered money.        Now I

think those are more realistic figures.      There was another

turnstile operator who said 150 went through, and I have not

got a note as to how many he claimed offered money.

     Even if you add all these together, the maximum -

forget about the money side - you are still only talking

about 300 or 400 people.     That is a lot but not a huge

amount out of 24,000.
     The other thing we spent an awful lot of time on was

the question of filters.     Do you remember?    In 1988 things

were totally different because people had been filtered and

checked for tickets and not allowed to approach the ground.

The strange thing is that nearly all the people who were

engaged in the policing exercise were not aware of this as a

routine thing, but we had evidence from various people.

There was Dr. Flenley, for example.      He said in 1988 when

he came down Catch Bar Lane he was checked.      In fact he

said the road was blocked by barriers but when I quizzed him

a bit harder he said it could not have been because there

was traffic flowing and so it could only have been the

pavement

     Then there was Mr. Jolly.    He also said he had been

stopped.   In fact, there was a young man called, I think,

Steven Barrie - Mr. Barrie anyway.      He said he saw people

turn back at Penistone Road roundabout in 1988.      I was not

entirely happy with his particular evidence because he did

not go down Leppings Lane.    That year he was going to the

other end of the ground, so I was not sure whether he had

really seen it.

     There were others as well.      Mr. Thomas said it too,

that he had seen people at Catch Bar Lane who were held, who

were milling around.   I think that was the term he used.

When I pressed him he said they went away.
      Then there was Mr. Lloyd, T. W. LLoyd.      He said he had

his ticket checked and as Mr. Jolly said, he had his ticket

checked, and he also said people were turned back.

      However, most of the people who claimed they had their

ticket checked in 1988 did not actually see anybody being

turned away, because they had tickets and so they went

through and presumably most of the other people also had

tickets and went through.

      As I say, Inspector Waring, Chief Inspector Creaser,

and   indeed Mr. Marshall and Mr. Mole,   said that they were

not   aware of any formal ticket filtering system.

      Perhaps I ought to mention one other person and      that

was   Mr. Hutt.    He said his ticket was checked at the

perimeter gate.

      You have to assess this evidence to the best of your

ability.      If all of them are right then there were tickets

checks at Catch Bar Lane, ticket checks at Penistone Road,

tickets checks at the perimeter gate, quite apart from the

turnstiles.       To assume that everybody had their ticket

checked at three locations - at least two locations - plus

the turnstiles, unless people were coming in very, very

small numbers, that seems exceedingly difficult to achieve.

That in fact was the argument of the Officers.       If you want

to do it properly then you need an enormous numoer of

people.    Indeed, if you are checking tickets and also

searching for alcohol and also checking for weapons you need
far more people, far more manpower,    than turnstiles, because

it must take longer to do that than allowing people through

a turnstile with a ticket.

        Also - and this is my personal view - I question in

fact whether, as indeed the Officer said, if they had no

power to stop people going down because they have no

tickets, which they haven't.      So long as you are behaving

yourself they cannot actually stop somebody going down the

road.      It is very questionable whether you should ask them

to do it.      I also find it questionable whether if a person

has come from a great distance,    say, Liverpool, having spent

a good bit of money on travelling if when he is asked by an

Officer, "Have you got a ticket?"      "No, you haven't, go

away," he will just turn like a lamb and disappear.

        Therefore, even if it were done, the effectiveness of

it, I am not sure.      However it was certainly the evidence

from a lot of the fans that that did happen in 1988 and did

not apparently in 1989.    What did happen in 1989, at least

we know in one place it happened, Penistone Road and Catch

Bar Lane, Ruth Cobb - not the gateman Cobb, the

Policewoman Cobb whose job initially was to park the coaches

in Clay Wheels Lane and then she with her Serial came down

and they did set up what I think a lot of these fans are

describing.     They stood on the pavement, as I understood

her, and as fans passed them, they said, "Drink up here.

Any weapons?"     However, she said they did not check for
tickets.    In fact her answer to that question was that

nearly all the people who did not have tickets were coining

the wrong way.      She was the lady who said they were coining

up the hill.

     Sergeant Lomas, who was at the other end, at Catch Bar

Lane, he clearly said they did not check for tickets in 1989

because he did not think there was any need.      He did not

see how anybody without tickets could possibly get into the

ground because they had to pass the turnstiles.

     In addition, although nobody was checked for tickets as

far as one can tell from the evidence in 1989 on the ground,

that is not to say that tickets weren't actually checked

because particularly on the coaches quite a lot of people

said that when the coaches were stopped - not all coaches

were stopped, but those which were stopped, quite a lot of

those people who were on the coaches said that Officers came

on board.      In some cases they merely asked.   In some cases

they just checked for alcohol but in other cases they seemed

to have done a pretty thorough search, including requests

for tickets.     As I say, whether they were justified in doing

that, and what they could have done...      In fact I asked

Mr. Mole what they could have done.      What can you do if you

find a ticketless fan in the coach?      Unless you have a

whole coach full.     However, that is so unlikely to happen.

However, for some reason they did it anyway.

     Now I am told I must stop for a few minutes.      What
time can we start on Monday?
     MR. ISAACS:      Sir at whatever time you say.      If you

think half past nine or nine o'clock.

     THE CORONER:      Is it inconvenient if we were to start

at half past nine?      I mean, it may be inconvenient, but is

it feasible?

     MR. ISAACS:      Certainly from my point of view, and if

it is not feasible to anybody else no doubt they will say

so, but half past nine is...

     MR. KING:      Sir, in consideration of the late start we

had today I see no objection to starting at 9.30 on Monday.

     THE CORONER:      Is it all right with you?      We are going

to go on until five today.     If at all possible I want to

finish so you have got a reasonable amount of time on Monday

to be considering your verdict.      The trouble is I have got

to take a decision within five minutes as to whether or not

you are going to go out on Monday, but if we can start at

9.30 on Monday I think we just about stand a chance.         We

will have a break now.

                       (Short adjournment)
     THE CORONER:      It has been mentioned to me that the

9.30 start is going to be difficult for some people.      I

have also been reflecting on it, and if I try and get you

out on Monday it will mean either that I have got to rush

and feel pressurised, or when I come to do each individual

deceased I will have to do that at a gallop, and I don't

want to do that.     I want to do it properly, so to speak,

or decently at least.     I think I will not aim to let you

go out on Monday, I will let you retire on Tuesday, so

that is the day to bring the toothbrushes in case of need.

That does mean that we do not have to start at 9.30 on

Monday.     Shall we start at 10?

     MR. KING:      I would have thought that 10 o'clock was

sensible.

     THE CORONER:      Let us say 10 o'clock.   No

toothbrushes on Monday then, but Tuesday instead.      You may

not need them but the point is that I do not know how long

you are going to take so I have to assume the worst, that

you will not finish, in which case you will have to stay

overnight somewhere.

     I was talking about the filtering and the fact that

it did not take place in 1989.      Whatever you might think

about that, as I say I have got my own personal views, and

in fact I explored them to a certain extent with Mr.
                                           #


Marshall and one or two others as to whether it was a

feasible proposition to do it, but apart from the
searching that we discovered on the coaches and which I

have already mentioned to you, what I called the chicane

at Claywheels Road/Penistone Road roundabout by Ruth Cobb

and her crew, and she was not the only one who said that

happened.     There was Mr. Lackey,   the gentleman I have

already mentioned,    the coach driver, he saw it and I think

there was another person, at least one other who went

through it and actually saw it work, so it did occur at

that place.

     There does not appear to have been any particular

formal checks for tickets prior to the turnstile entry.

Bearing in mind that each year you get different people

doing different jobs, you are bound to get variance and I

would find it very difficult to believe that failure, if

it was a failure and I am not saying it was, to check

tickets at a distance can be causative of a disaster

inside the Stadium.

     We now turn to the immediate vicinity of the Ground

and this is both more emotive,    to a certain extent, and

also begins to become much more relevant.       If I can just

deal with the turnstiles 1-16, which we did look at very

slightly because I wanted to get an over view of what was

going on, but we heard from at least one Police Officer, I

think it was P.C. Horsfield, and he described how he had

considerable problems once he had closed the outer --- his

perimeter gates.     As you know there are dozens, well not
dozens but a good number of perimeter gates.     On the

section which leads to A-G there are at least three sets.

There is the big double one, there are the River Don side

and there are the ones nearest to the centre wall.        It

was, I thought, sometimes very difficult to actually work

out when somebody said a gate was shut or a gate was open,

which one of these various gates they were talking about.

Horsfield certainly seemed to have said that (a) people

were climbing over and (b) in the end he could not hold it

and the gate opened and people entered into the area

outside 1-16.

     Also Mr. Cobb gave pretty graphic evidence of what

was going on outside his gate and he and I think Mr. Hand-

Davis and I think Mr. Marshall and possibly others as well

- I am not sure about Mr. Creaser - described how the gate

was moving backward and forward.     Gate C, apart from Mr.

Thorpe who thought that the gate was in danger, but the

people who were actually at the gate did not perceive any

danger in relation to Gate C but Gate A was, of course, in

a different position.     If you think back to the model or

when you look at the plan, you will see that Gate A is

right next to the turnstiles so people who are heading

towards the turnstiles are automatically at the gate

whereas Gate C is round the corner, so to speak, and out

of the way.     Gate B is another gate, that did not seem to
be moving, nobody mentioned that, but certainly Mr. Ridge

said there was a lot of banging which was unusual.

     Whatever the situation, when Sergeant Higgins got

there - not ex-Sergeant Higgins the other one, the

Sergeant Higgins who came with Inspector Delaney (we did

not hear Inspector Delaney but his name was mentioned),

the evidence is that they were sent round to Leppings Lane

but they never got further than Gate A because Sergeant

Higgins said when he got there there were not any

Officers, or not very many, and he stayed because he could

see assistance was required by the gatemen.     He, in fact,

radioed through and said "We have got to open the gates or

somebody will be killed".    It is very interesting that he

should have said that, bearing in mind that Mr. Marshall

had said more or   less the same     thing in relation to all

the gates, or at   least in relation to the crowd outside.

Sergeant Higgins was only interested in his one gate,

namely Gate A.

     We have heard a lot of --     there are discrepancies

between his account, Mr. Cobb's account, and his account

and Mr. Hurst's account.    Mr. Hurst was the programme

seller immediately behind Gate A.    Mr. Cobb, if you

remember, did not like the idea of the gate being opened

when he was asked, and he   said     he would not do it until he

had sent the man   away and told     him to come back with

authority, because he was worried - Mr. Cobb was - that
the people would get into the North Stand, or

alternatively they Would get behind the North Stand where

they would not be able to see anything, so he was not

happy about opening the gates.     What he wanted was he

wanted it sorted out from the front, but in the end he was

overruled.     Hr. Higgins said, "I didn't go away, I just

told him he had to open the gate and he was a little bit

reluctant but in the end he did do it".     So in that sense

the accounts coincide but there is this slight

discrepancy.     I don't think this particular discrepancy is

of any moment but I just draw it to your attention.

     There is also the discrepancy as to where the people

went, because Mr. Hurst, as I have already reminded you,

thought that they had been diverted - I have reminded you

of this haven't I, or have I just thought of it?     I will

remind you again.    Mr. Hurst the programme seller said

that he could see the two lines of Policemen but they were

diverted into the concourse area which led to the North

West Terrace and the Terracing, whereas Mr. Higgins said,

"Not at all, we had our line which actually blocked off

that gate and they were diverted towards the back", or

"towards the North Stand".     I did remind you, and I said

that was really an irreconcilable problem and I was a

little bit doubtful about Mr. Hurst's account.     Of course,

in the end that is clearly a decision for you, insofar as

it is relevant.     It is not terribly relevant apart from
building up the picture and also when you piece together

what was going on in the Control Room, namely that at a

point in time a request appears to have been made for

people to be sent to the North Stand in order to cope with

people coming in.    If that in fact happened then it is

much more likely that Mr. Higgins' account is right

because there is hardly any point in sending people to the

North Stand to cope with a potential in rush if you have

diverted them somewhere else.

     I don't want to deal with the Control Room side at

the moment apart from just mentioning it at this stage.

     In fact, the odd thing is that in some respects there

seems to have been more, certainly if you look at the

gates, more - I will use the word violence.    I don't want

you to take that in the wrong way but if the gate is being

moved in and out, it is being pushed by some means or

other.   There seems to have been more of that in

turnstiles 1-16 area than there was at the A-G end,

certainly at the gate areas.    I also find it a bit more

difficult to understand, we know that the number of

turnstiles allocated for the 10,000-odd people was only

seven, and even if we take 1,000 an hour, which was the

rate which appears to have been the assumed rate, it would

still have taken, what, an hour and a half or so to get

them through, assuming that they had all come nice and

evenly spaced.   The other lot were, of course, slightly
more.     They were 14,000 people but they did have 16

turnstiles and that would have meant that it should have

been possible to get those through in less than an hour,

so why was it you might ask yourself, that there was such

a crush and      all these problems outside those turnstiles as

well?     That   might help you when coming to   assess the

evidence as to what time people arrived, which I have

already dealt with and I remind you that in this respect I

think the pictures do actually help, particularly the

videos.

        If you   turn to the other half, so to   speak, the bit

that we are      really interested in, the A-G section, I have

already said that there was a limited number turnstiles

and that has been criticised and it does not take very

long to demonstrate that at "x" number per turnstile you

can only get so many through and therefore if you have

more than half or less than half, or whatever figure you

happen to choose, and whatever time you happen to choose,

you can or you cannot get people through on the assumption

that the rates will be 750, 1,000, it does not matter what

rate you work out.




                                    I think one has to be
     I think one has to be realistic in these circumstances.

If it is true it is necessary or that the only way this match

could have been staged would have been by segregating the

supporters so that one could only use the Leppings Lane

turnstiles then the inevitable consequence is that you have

only got a limited number.   If it is right, as it appears to

be, that in 1987 and in 1988 when capacity crowds attended,

when the same turnstiles were used, we have heard not one

word of evidence that there were any problems outside the

turnstiles in either of those two years.   So it is difficult

I think to - or, if you like, you may ask yourselves the

question, if that is true then was it such an unreasonable

assumption to take it that this year the turnstiles would

work in exactly the same way as it had done in 1988 and 1989?

There is argument as to the filling of the terraces and

whether 1988 was actually identical with 1989 and I have

already alluded to that, and I will no doubt come to it

again, but we have heard absolutely nothing to suggest apart

from this one point that fans were filtered at a distance ®nd

that their tickets were checked.

     From the 1988 video it would appear that the perimeter

gates outside A to G, the middle ones, and the Don the other

side, appear to have been shut for longer so that people

tended to go only straight to the funnel bar rather than have

freer access.

     Those seem to be the major differences.   It is a matter

for you to decide but the question you have to ask yourselves

is whether those two differences could account for the
                                                                         71
       differences in the performance of the turnstiles between say

        1988 and 1989.   I venture to suggest you may feel that they

       cannot but, as I say, it is a matter     in the end for you.   In

    B| addition,   leaving aside the question   of whether or not a

       crush might develop if you have the outer gates open, which I

       will come to in a moment, if the flow of fans is steady, say

       if you look at the video of 1988, I do not think it would

       make any difference how many gates were open because the

       number of fans who were entering, it would appear, were

       spread over a longer period of time.      It is the same number

       but dispersed so far as one can tell more evenly.

            A lot has been said, and a great deal of time, was spent

       on questioning Officers as to two matters basically (1)

       whether the perimeter gates were shut too late and should

       have been used as filters and (2) whether or not fans should

       have been stopped at a distance to the ground and presumably

       held so that you would block off not just Leppings Lane to

       traffic but block off Leppings Lane to pedestrian traffic and

       that you would let people through in segments from a distance

       up to the perimeter gates presumably, on to the turnstile

       area and so on.

            The third thing which was canvassed at great length with

       several of the witnesses was whether the problem should have

       been tackled from the rear or from the front.    In other

      words, do you peel the people off at the back if you have got

       a crowd or do you try and persuade them to move back from the

      front or from the side I suppose.    The first question then




H
                                                                             72
         that you have to deal with, and you have to consider the

         evidence, is the closure of the perimeter gates.

                Do you remember Mr. Gillam?   He was the security

    B|   officer.    When he first came along I initially was not so

         sure about his evidence because he seemed to say that the

         gates were shut at 2.30 and stayed shut until 3.       The one

         thing that he was very impressed, if you remember, was that

         he said there was this young Police Officer who stood in

         front of a gate and that was it.     He said,   "I don't know how

         he did it because I was scared when I was on the inside" or

         words to that effect.

                I think in common with anybody who gave any time

         information who had not actually looked at a watch or had

         some outside yardstick, he was almost certainly wrong with

         regard to his timing but there were Officers who stood

         outside the gate.     I think it was an Officer called PC Taylor

         who may well have been the one, we do not know, but he said,

         "I went out and I closed the gate and I stood outside it".

         There were others, Mr. Scholey, Sergeant Proctor and Mr.

         Best, who went up and made attempts to shut the gate.      The

         problem is, was that too little and too late?      Before you

         say,   "Yes, it was both too little and too late" you have to

         ask yourselves the question as to whether or not there would

         have been any point in shutting the gate before 2.30 if there

         was no problem.     If there is no pressure for people to enter

         there is hardly any point in having barriers.      You only need

         a barrier when you realise that you have got more than you

         can cope with within a certain area.




H
     In fact, the fascinating fact about the turnstile area

is that it is almost a mirror image of the terraces, the

tunnel and the concourse if you think about it.     If you think

about the terrace it has got a perimeter fence with a little

gate in it, then you have got your terrace, then you have got

your tunnel and then you have got the concourse which is a

big open space.   Think of the area outside.    You have got

turnstiles which is a wall with little holes in them.      You

have got the terrace which is the area within the funnel bar,

you have got the narrowing which is the tunnel, and you have

got an open expanse which is Leppings Lane.     It is, I

suppose, not very surprising because of the way things are

constructed but it is actually in some ways a mirror image.

It is not only that but it has actually got a radial gate at

the back if you want to draw the analogy a little bit

further.

     The problem, of course, with the turnstile area is

exactly the same as with the terrace.     There is no counting

mechanism.   There is no way of knowing how many people you

have got in the area.     People are just coming down the road

and somebody at some point has to make a judgment or

assessment that "There are too many people in here.      We had

better shut the gates".    Just let me finish the sentence and

then we will stop.   In fact, I will not finish the sentence

because I have lost my train of thought.    We will finish it

on Monday.   We will come back to this business of the

perimeter gates and the turnstile area.     I think one of you

is not feeling well, is that right?
     In fact we have finished earlier than we thought.    I

hope you feel better soon.   I was going to say definitely by

Monday but I hope you feel better very much sooner than that.

So shall we start then at ten o'clock on Monday and

toothbrushes for Tuesday morning.

                 (The Jury retired from Cour t )

       THE CORONER:   I am sorry but I was warned that she
  was not feeling very well and the Sergeant said he
  would keep an eye on her for me if he thought she was
  wilting and she was.   So I thought it was wiser to
  stop. I do not thirk there is anything we need to
  discuss or do and so I wish you all a very nice
  weekend.   The plan is still to finish before Easter and
  I think we will still make it with the Jury out on
  Tuesday morning and that will give them enough time
  hopefully.

(The Inquests were adjourned until 10 am the following Mon da y)
