HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)



      INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

   VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

          ON THE 15TH APRIL,            1989




                       Before

. S. L. POPPER,    LLB. B.MED.Sci.           BM, B S , MRCGP

          (Her M a j e s t y 1s C o r o n e r )




                          At

                The Town Hall,
                  Sheffield.

                          on

               28th March,        1991




         TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J. L. Harpham L t d . ,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55 Queen S t r e e t , Sheffield, SI 2DX.
                           Errata

Day 78

Page 36B   For "Bebbington" read "Bebington

Page 42B   For "1932" read "1942".

Page 40F   For "Oxmore" read "Oxmoor".
                II    II     II      II
Page 48E

Page 46F   For "Woddfarm" read "Woodfarm".
               EIGHTIETH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                THURSDAY,   28th MARCH 1991

     THE CORONER:    I have not come back because the Jury
have asked me.   I want them back for my purposes.

        (The Jury returned to Court at 10.31 a . m .)

     THE CORONER:   I have asked you to come back because
I have been checking through the transcripts and looking
at the Inquisitions - we have got photocopies of those -
and we found one or two minor corrections wh ic h I want to
draw to your attention on the typed version so that you
can, if you agree, adopt them and make the necessary
amendments.  That is why you need a sheet of paper so that
you know which of the ones I am talking about.    Some of
them are just typographical errors.

      You will remember what the Inquisitions look like and
you will remember that they have got numbers down the
side.   The first one which I want to draw your attention
to is David Hawley, and on the second line where it says
on the 19th, in fact it should be the 18th.   I opened that
on the 18th.   None of this is a matter of moment but we
might as well have it right.   The next one I need to
mention to you is Joseph Clark.   At the bottom, under
(5a), which is the registration particulars, we have
misspelt Kirkby - it has to have a "k" in it, not "Kirby".
In the case of Henry Thomas Burke, in the fifth line there
is a typing error on his middle name.   It has an "e"
instead of an "a".   It is correct in all the other places,
but it is not correct there.   You decide, of course, but I
draw your attention to the errors.

     The next one is Philip John Steele, and in paragraph
(5e) I have had typed in Hillsborough Football Ground,
Sheffield.  The convention I have followed is that all the
people who got to the hospital, I have named the place of
death as being the hospital, and Philip is one of the
people who got to the Northern General Hospital, so you
may wish for consistency's sake to substitute it.  I ought
to tell you that my normal practice is to say "found dead
at" the hospital, but I have given this matter a lot of
thought and in the end I thought it was probably more
convenient not to use that expression, but you can use it
if you wish - "found dead", or "certified dead", or just
the name of the hospital, whichever it most convenient.
That does not apply just to Philip, it applies to
everybody with the exception of Lee Nicol who of course
did die undoubtedly at the hospital.  Exactly the same
position arises with regard to Philip Hammond.  This was
another young lad where for some reason we put
Hillsborough Football Ground and if we follow the
                                                                                2




                     convention it should say Northern General Hospital.  There
                     is one case which I cannot recollect now where Bebington
                     is spelt with two "b"s in the middle but I think if you
                     see it or I see it when we deal with it I will correct it
                     then.

                          That is all the amendments as far as you are
                     concerned.  We have got a few little amendments on the
                     transcripts as well (see separate errata s h e e t ).
    B
                          These are not vital points but we might as well deal
                     with them now so that when eventually you are ready I do
                     not have to raise it then.

                                  (The Jury retired at 10.43 a . m .)

                          THE CORONER:   While the Jury are out can I just say
                     something else about the death certificates?  I could do
                     this right at the end but I might as well take the
                     opportunity now because you might want to know what the
                     procedure is.  When the Inquests are concluded I have got
                     to do another load of forms.  I can't use these
                     inquisitions, all this has got to be transferred on to
                     another form.  Those are then sent to the Registrar of
    D                Births and Deaths who in turn has to send them down to
                     London because the deaths having taken place more than a
                     year ago, he has to be authorised by somebody down in
                     London.  Then they come all the way back to Sheffield and
                     the Registrar then sets about preparing the death
                     certificates.

                            The procedure, I understand, is that he will then
    E                contact or send a letter to you or to your solicitors.   We
                     have tried to give him names and addresses so that he can
                     do that, and I have had a word with him and I think the
                     best advice I can give you is that if you have not heard
                     by the end of six weeks - it may be that you will hear a
                     lot sooner than that but let's say six weeks - then get in
                     touch with the Registrar of Births and Deaths here in
                     Sheffield and find out what has happened in case the
                     letter has gone astray, so that you can get your
                     c er tif i c a t e s .

                     ^    If I tell you what the address is and the name and
                     'phone number, then it may help you.  I am hoping that
                     this won't happen but life being what it is there will be
                     somebody's letter which won't arrive.  It is:

                          The Registrar of Births and Deaths
                          Surrey Place
                          Sheffield      SI 1YA

                     The gentleman to contact is Mr. Rigby, he is the
                     Superintendent Registrar who is in charge there, and his
    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                        3




                     'phone number in case you want to ring is 0742 735320.   We
                     will put the address and 'phone number on the board at the
                     back so anybody who did not get it and wants it can copy
                     it down, and you can always get it from the 'phone book
                     anyway.  I have no control over that at all but I hope it
                     will work smoothly.  We have done our best to clear the
                     lines on that side.

                          I think it is a matter of waiting.         Yes,   Mr.   Fraser?
    B
                          MR FRASER:   Sir, it is more a matter of thinking
                     aloud than anything else,  We on the front row realise, of
                     course, that once the Jury are out then they stay out
                     until they have a verdict,  The Easter weekend approaches,
                     sir, and I wonder what is in the Jury's mind in relation
                     to the four day break?  I would not like them to feel that
                     they felt they were going to be incarcerated for four days
                     if they could not come to a decision today.  Had it gone
                     through your mind, sir, to explain that they could, of
                     course, if they could not reach a verdict today return to
                     Court at any time over the weekend?

                          THE CORONER:   Indeed.  I have not told them that yet
                     but if at the end of today they still have not come back
    D                with a verdict then I will do the same as I did yesterday.
                     Around 4 o'clock I will call them back, I will find out
                     what the position is and then I will explain to them that
                     we will carry on through Good Friday, and if need be we
                     carry on through Saturday, Sunday, however long it takes.

                          MR FRASER:    Certainly we understand that to be the
                     position, sir.   I just wondered what might be in the
    E                Jury's mind.   It is impossible to know, but they will
                     realise the weekend is coming up and we would not like
                     them, I am sure you would not, to feel under any pressure
                     because of that.

                           THE CORONER:   No, indeed not.  I don't really think
                     it is necessary for me to call them back and tell them
                     that.   Perhaps I might bring it forward to 2 o'clock this
                     afternoon if they have not come back by then, and say to
                     them that there is no reason why - I am quite happy to be
                     here tomorrow and Saturday if need be, however long it
                     takes.   I am concerned that if I say to them, "Tomorrow is
                     a Bank Holiday", it may have the exact opposite effect.

                          MR FRASER:     Sir,   I appreciate that.

                          THE CORONER:     To what you are trying to say.

                          MR FRASER:    It is trying to make the best of a
                     difficult decision, I understand that.   It was just
                     something that had occurred to those who instruct me and

    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                     it is something we wanted to clear the air about,    that i
                     all.

                          THE CORONER:   Obviously the Bank Holiday may
                     concentrate their minds but if I bring it to their
                     attention it may have the exact opposite effect and that
                     is why I felt it was better not to say anything at this
                     stage.  Whether it is the right decision or not, who
                     knows, because I do not know what is in their minds
    "                either.  Does anybody else have any views on this?

                          MR. ISAACS:    I think the only view that I have,
                     sir, is that bringing them back at 2 o'clock would be a
                     good idea.

                         THE CORONER:    Yes,    I think that is probably right.

                                        (The Court A d j o u r n e d )




    D




    E




    F




    G




    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                     4 A




                          THE CORONER:   I understand that the Jury have given
                     you a note for me, usher.   Could I have a sight of it
                     please?   The note reads:

                          "We have reached a majority verdict."

                          I am going to ask the Jury now to come in and we will
                     find out what they have in fact achieved.
    B
                                    (The Jury returned at 12.08 p m )

                          Mr. Foreman, would you please stand?    I have got your
                     note which I have read out.   I want to ask you one question
                     before I ask you anything further.    Have you reached a
                     verdict on which you have all agreed?

                          THE FOREMAN:   No.

                          THE CORONER:   Have you reached a verdict on wh ic h at
                     least nine of you have agreed?

                          THE FOREMAN:   Yes.

                          THE CORONER:   You will remember there were two
    D                sections on the form.   Did you accept the typed versions of
                     the form or did you re-write them from scratch?   Can you
                     answer that question?

                          THE FOREMAN:   Accepted the typed version.

                          THE CORONER:   You will remember there were two
    E                sections on that form, paragraph 3, I think it was, and
                     paragraph 4.  Did you reach a verdict in respect of each and
                     every single one of the deceased persons?

                          THE FOREMAN:   Yes.

                          THE CORONER:   Is the wording in paragraph 3 in respect
                     of each and every single person the same or does it differ?

                          THE FOREMAN:   It is the same.

                          THE CORONER:   Can you tell me - have you got the forms
                     with you?

                          THE FOREMAN:   No.

                          THE CORONER:   Have you got the wording in your pocket?
                     Do you know what it is or do you want to go out and fetch
                     the forms?

                          THE FOREMAN:   We haven't got the forms,      the actual
                     verdict.

    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                    5




                          THE CORONER:   OK.   Tell me what wording you have
                     decided to put into paragraph 3?

                          THE FOREMAN:    Nine/two majority:    accidental death.

                          THE CORONER:   That was in fact paragraph 4.    Can you
                     tell me what you decided to put into paragraph 3;  the
                     section where you have to describe the circumstances.    Have
    B                you formulated any wording for that?

                          THE FOREMAN:    Do you mean the traumatic,

                          THE CORONER:   Yes, was it at Hillsborough Football
                     Ground...   What I would like you to do with regard to that,
                     I think you had better withdraw and write down what it is
                     you actually want to say and then come back with it written
                     down and that will be easier, and with the forms.    We can
                     do the filling in for you or he lp you to do it, but I need
                     to know what wording you want to use.    I gave you various
                     alternatives, if you remember, and I want to know whether
                     you have used one of those or whether you have used our own.

                           Ladies and gentlemen, I think the Jury had better
                     wit hdr aw so they can formulate that part of their verdict
    D                correctly.

                                    (The Jury   retired at 12.12 p m )

                          THE CORONER:     What I propose to do as soon as I...    I
                     could help them and do the formulation for them, but I
                     prefer them to tell me what wording they wish.     As soon as
    E                we have it, as soon as I know the form of wording they wish
                     we will adjourn because they have not hand written it on to
                     the forms themselves.     That is perfectly in order.   In
                     fact that is the normal practice but I wanted to give them
                     every facility to do it in any way they liked.      We know
                     what they want in paragraph 4 and we will find out what they
                     want in parag ra ph 3, we will then complete the forms for
                     them and date them and we will resume, depending how long
                     they take, at 2.00 or 2.30, whatever time I consider
                     appropriate.     I will then formally read the Inquisitions in
                     respect of each and every single person, as I think it
                     right, and then I will conclude with a few additional
                     remarks which I feel I have to make.

                                    (The Jury returned at 12.15 p m )

                          Mr.   Foreman, if you would stand and what    Iwant you to
                     tell me   is what you wish to go into paragraph    3, which is
                     headed,   "Time, place and circumstances at or in which injury
                     was sustained."



    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                  6




                          THE FOREMAN:   Died on the 15th of April, 1989, as a
                     result of a crush injury sustained at Hillsborough Football
                     Ground, Sheffield.

                          THE CORONER:   That is the same for each and every
                     single one, is that correct?

                          THE FOREMAN:    Yes.
    B
                          THE CORONER: Paragraph 4    you have already told me is
                     accidental death, is that right?

                          THE FOREMAN:   Yes.

                          THE CORONER:   May I have the forms?    Yes, I see, you
                     have actually written it on all of them.   What we are going
                     to do is that we will fill in "Accidental Death" for you.
                     We will fill in the dates.   We will make sure they are all
                     in the correct order and we will resume at half past one.
                     That will give you an opportunity to have...    You will have
                     to stay together.   I do not want you out of that room and I
                     will tell you what will happen when we finally conclude and
                     I will be addressing you as well.   So lunch in there.   At
    D                half past one we will come together and by that time we
                     should have finished all the insertions.   Thank you very
                     much indeed for your care and attention to the matter.    I
                     will deal with it in greater detail later on this afternoon.

                          We will adjourn then until half past one and then we
                     will resume with the Jury and we will deal with the matter
                     formally.
    E
                                    (The Jury retired at 12.18 p m )

                                         (Luncheon a d j o u r n m e n t )




    G




    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                              7




                          THE CORONER:   Can I say two things before I have the
                     Jury back in?  I quite understand that this is a very
                     emotionally charged time, for me as well, but it is
                     absolutely essential that behaviour in Court must be
                     impeccable, in the interests of the Jury.   If when I bring
                     the Jury in there is any outcry I will immediately re-
                     adjourn it and send them out, pause for quarter of an
                     hour, try again, if it happens a second time I will clear
                     the Court and we will do it with just the lawyers.   I know
    B
                     how tense a lot of you must feel but you must also
                     understand I have a duty towards the Jury who have also
                     had a very difficult task to do, and it is only right and
                     proper, whether we like the decision or not is neither
                     here nor there, that they must be protected, and I do
                     intend to protect them.

                          What we are going to do is I am going to bring them
                     back in.   I am going to give them the forms which we have
                     now put in correct order, so to speak, and completed with
                     dates.   I will then ask them to take them out again, and
                     for the nine Jurors who have agreed to sign the form.    As
                     soon as they have gone out we adjourn.   When they have
                     finished signing we will come back in and then I will sign
                     them and complete the Inquest s and tell you what else I
    D                will do at that stage.

                             (The Jury Returned to Court at 1.37 p . m .)

                          THE CORONER:   Good afternoon.  Ladies and gentlemen,
                     this is the bundle of forms and you will recognise them
                     because they have got your handwriting on them.  We have
                     completed them with the wording which you have told us,
    E
                     and we have inserted the date.  I am going to give them
                     back to you now.  They need to be signed by the nine of
                     you who have agreed on the verdict.  I want you to take
                     them back out into your room and sign them, starting with
                     the Foreman on the top line, and then whichever order you
                     like, leaving that line for me to sign.

                          Take your time, as long as you want, sign them, when
                     you have finished signing them knock on the door to tell
                     the Usher that you are ready, and then I will ask you to
                     come back, I will sign them and then complete the
                     Inquests.  There are various other things that need to be
                     done and then I will be telling you what the next stage
                     is.  Please try and keep them in order if you possibly
                     can.  We have pencilled numbers in the corners, 1-95, so
                     that it is easier for you.   Is that clear?

                          THE FOREMAN:   Yes.

                          THE CORONER:    Signature there for the Foreman, then
                     everybody else who has agreed, so there should be nine

    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                    8




                     signatures on here,    and then when you are ready let me
                     know.

                                   (The Jury Retired at 1.39 p . m .)

                          THE CORONER:   I imagine it will take about 20
                     minutes to do the signing   so again I am afraid we must
                     adjourn until we are ready for the next stage but
                     hopefully we will then be able to proceed and complete it.
    B
                                           (The Court A d j o u r n e d )

                              (The Jury Returned to Court at 2.10 p . m .)

                          THE CORONER:    May I just outline what we are going
                     to do so that people know    what my intentions are? I am
                     going to sign each one of    these forms and as I do so I am
                     going to read out the name of the person in respect of
                     whose inquisition I have signed and unless you, Mr.
                     Fraser, particularly want me to do so I do not intend to
                     read out all the causes of death again, because we heard
                     them a few days ago, but I am quite happy to do so if you
                     think it would help.

    D                     MR FRASER:    I don't think that is necessary,     sir,
                     thank you.

                          THE CORONER:   When I have signed them all I will
                     express in respect of each and every one the conclusions
                     of the Jury with regard to paragraph 3 and paragraph 4,
                     collectively so to speak.

                          When I have done that there are a number of points
                     which I want to comment on under Rule 43, which I will
                     deal with, and then there are a few supplemental remarks
                     which I need to make, and I intend, to conclude the
                     Inquests - when I have finished with what I need to say,
                     and have given an opportunity to anybody else, if I have
                     forgotten something, to remind me of that - to ask
                     everybody to stand and we will stand for one minute in
                     silence as a mark of respect.   When that min ut e is over I
                     will walk out and the Jury will walk out at the same time,
                     so that we leave at the same time and when I am out of the
                     door the Inquests will be over.

                          I will give the findings         first:

                          The Jury have found in respect of the 95 names which
                     I will now read out the following facts, that the time
                     place and circumstances at or in which the injury was
                     sustained in respect of each one of these 95 was that he
                     or she died on 15th April, 1989, as a result of crush
                     injuries sustained at Hil lsborough Football Ground,

    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                             9




                     Sheffield, and the conclusion which they have come to is
                     that the conclusion as to the death was accidental death.

                         The first person I am going to mention is Colin
                         Wafer.
                         The second person is Stephen Francis O'Neill.
                         The third is Simon Bell.
                         The fourth is Roy Harry Hamilton.
                         The fifth Christopher Edwards.
    B                    James Gary Aspinall.
                         Derrick George Godwin.
                         Colin Andr ew Hugh William Sefton.
                         David Hawley.
                         Martin Kenneth Wild.
                         Gerard Bernard Patrick Baron.
                         Adam Edward Spearritt.
                         David William Birtle.
                         Stephen Francis Harrison.
                         Gary Harrison.
                         Gary Collins.
                         Peter McDonnell.
                         Henry Charles Rogers.
                         Gary Philip Jones.
                         John McBrien.
    D                    Stephen Paul Copoc.
                         Francis Joseph McAllister.
                         Stuart Paul William Thompson.
                         William Roy Pemberton.
                         Tracey Elizabeth Cox.
                         David Leonard Thomas.
                         David Leonard Thomas.
                         Peter Andrew Harrison.
                         Paul Clark.
                         David George Rimmer.
                         Kevin Tyrrell.
                         Carl Brown.
                         Arthur Horrocks.
                         Sarah Louise Hicks.
                         Victoria Jane Hicks.
                         Paul Anthony Hewitson.
                         Andrew Mark Brookes.
                         Inger Shah.
                         Gordon Rodney Horn.
                         Christine Anne Jones.
                         David John Benson.
                         Joseph Clark.
                         Peter Reuben Thompson.
                         Thomas Steven Fox.
                         Colin Mark Ashcroft.
                         Ian David Whelan.
                         David Steven Brown.



    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                               10




                         Vincent Michael Fitzsimmons
                         Anthony Peter Kelly
                         John Paul Gilhooley
                         Henry Thomas Burke
                         Christopher Barry Devonside
                         Jonathon Owens
                         James Robert Hennessy
                         David William Mather
    B                    James Philip Delaney
                         John Alfred Anderson
                         Christopher James Traynor
                         Martin Kevin Traynor
                         Philip John Steele
                         Marian Hazel McCabe
                         Steven Joseph Robinson
                         Thomas Howard
                         Thomas Anthony Howard
                         Graham John Roberts
                         Kester Roger Marcus Ball
                         Eric George Hughes
                         Raymond Thomas Chapman
                         Lee Nichol

                          In the case of Lee Nichol, the Jury found that he died
    D                on the 17th of April, 1989 as a result of crush injuries
                     sustained at Hillsbor ou gh Football Ground, Sheffield, and
                     not on the 15th as is the case of all the other people.

                         Paul Brian Murray
                         Brian Christopher Matthews
                         Graham John Wright
                         Michael David Kelly
                         Carl Darren Hewitt
                         Nicholas Michael Hewitt
                         Peter Francis Tootle
                         Nicholas Peter Joynes
                         Kevin Daniel Williams
                         Philip Hammond
                         Patrick John Thompson
                         Eric Hankin
                         Gary Christopher Church
                         Joseph Daniel McCarthy
                         Paula Ann Smith
                         Paul William Carlile
                         Carl David Lewis
                         Peter Andrew Burkett
                         Richard Jones
                         Barry Glover
                         Alan Johnston
                         Carl William Rimmer
                         Alan McGlone



    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                11




                          Keith McGrath
                          Ian Thomas Glover
                          Paul David Brady
                          Barry Sidney Bennett

                          I have already reminded you, and given you the Jury's
                     findings so I do not propose to repeat them.

    B                      Now I explained to you, ladies and gentlemen, that you
                     were not allowed to add any riders to your verdict.
                     Indeed, I am not allowed to do that either, but under
                     Rule 43, if I think there is any matter which I should refer
                     to someone for their consideration then I am entitled to do
                     that.    What I propose to do is that I do think there are
                     one or two matters whi ch I think could usefully be thought
                     about by various bodies.    Indeed, they may already have
                     thought about them.    I make no recommendations with regard
                     to them because most of these are matters of expertise as
                     opposed to mere commonsense and there may be problems which
                     I am not expert enough to be able to deal with.    However, I
                     feel there are one or two matters which I do want to draw to
                     certain persons' attention so they can apply their mind to
                     them.    Whilst I would not wish to add riders or, indeed,
                     make recommendations, I just propose to outline the main
    D
                     topics which have occurred to me as I have been sitting
                     listening, together with you, to evidence which we have
                     heard.

                          The first matter that I think concerns me is the
                     problem which I think was illustrated by the fact that if
                     you have people looking in one direction particularly
                     intently to watch an event, as indeed one would get at a
                     football match or, indeed, at ot he r major events, it may
                     prove very difficult to turn them round, if I can use that
                     term, so that they use escape routes which are at the back
                     or at the sides.     That is the first thing.

                          The second thing is that I know, because we made
                     inquiries, that a lot of work has been done in connection
                     with aircraft disasters, particularly arising out of the
                     Manchester air disaster, on people escaping from aeroplanes
                     in stress situations and what happens with regard to gates
                     and when they move forward and so on.     A great deal of work
                     has been done by Dr. Han na h Muir and others at their
                     research establishment.

                          I think it would be beneficial if one could bring
                     together information from different sources which may have
                     applications in other fields and so I intend to write to the
                     appropriate authorities, for example, the Fire Service and,
                     indeed, Dr. Muir and see whether or not there isn't some
                     scope whereby information can be pooled and perhaps
                     improvements made with regard to future safety.
    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                         12




                      The second thing that concerns me is the Safety
                 Certificate.  I am, of course, aware that there is a new
                 one in force, and we have not been concerned with that,
                 but one of the factors which we all became aware of was
                 not only that there were problems on the terraces but that
                 there were problems within the turnstile areas, and it
                 seems to me that some additional thought maybe is required
                 to see whether there is not some way of more effectively
                 controlling ingress, because at the moment, of course,
    B            there is no system of counting, as far as I understand,
                 into the turnstile area, so one is in fact left with
                 exactly the same position as one was before, namely that
                 you have to estimate the numbers  within that area by eye.

                      Whether that is a situation which can be overcome or
                 not I do not know, but I do intend to write both to the
                 Local Authority, as the enforcing authority, and indeed
                 also to the Club, to ask them to  apply their minds to that
                 part of the Ground. We have tended to think of simply the
                 terraces and the pens but I think one has to go a little
                 further and think about the area without.  There may be no
                 solution, I don't know, but I feel that it is a matter
                 which I would like to think I had drawn to somebody's
                 attention.
    D
                      With regard to the Safety Certificate, I am of course
                 aware that Lord Justice Taylor spent a great deal of time,
                 in fact much more time, with regard to recommendations
                 than I have done, and he did make recommendations with
                 regard to inspectorates, but it seems to me, and I intend
                 to write to the Home Secretary on this, that with a matter
                 such as safety in sports grounds it might perhaps be worth
                 looking at not simply an inspectorate but possibly an
                 homogenous, national, licensing, appraisal, inspecting
                 organisation or service, because at the moment, of course,
                 the Safety Certificates are issued by local authorities,
                 there are many of them, and each one of them has a
                 relatively small number of sports grounds.  However hard
                 the people within the authorities may try and however
                 competent, their experience will be limited and I would
                 like some thought to be given to whether it would not be
                 better in the interests of safety if a body of expertise
                 could be built up which (a) applies more uniform
                 standards, and (b) would be in a much better position to
                 assess risk and so on at any particular stadium, so my
                 intention is to write to the Home Secretary and ask him to
                 consider that.

                      In addition such a body would have - and this is a
                 further point which I wish to draw to his attention - or
                 maybe some other body, the facility for ensuring that
                 there is both proper training and the establishment of
                 continuity of information from one person to another, in
                 order to try and ensure that practice which is good and
    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                        13




                 sound is passed on and continues to be applied and be
                 developed, but even if such a body was not set up, of
                 course, within each organisation that may be involved in
                 staging major events where loads of people come together
                 great effort should, I am sure, be put into both training
                 and the need for continuity of some sort or another.

                      There is another aspect which I want to write on - it
                 all happens to be the Home Secretary because it happens to
    B            be his department, including the first point.  One has to
                 ask oneself the question as to whether or not the
                 involvement of the Police in the activities within the
                 Stadium is a proper use of both their training, expertise
                 and abilities, and I would like to suggest to the Home
                 Secretary that this is something which needs, in my view,
                 addressing as a matter of relative urgency, to make some
                 decisions as to who, in fact, on the safety side should
                 have (a) the ultimate authority, (b) the expertise and (c)
                 the responsibility.

                      It is a matter of considerable regret to me to say
                 that whilst we were sitting during these Inquests, and
                 without me making any effort to keep abreast of events, I
                 read in the paper of one football disaster in South
    D            Africa, where about 40 people died as a result of crush
                 injuries.  There were at least two other non football
                 situations that I remember, one was abroad where numbers
                 of people were injured and killed, and although in the
                 event nobody was seriously hurt, just last Saturday in the
                 town in which I live there was a crushing incident at a
                 football match.  So although it would be nice for me to
                 say we have had all this inquiry, we have discussed it and
                 everything else, it will never happen again, unless there
                 is considerable, continuous vigilance and perhaps even a
                 change of attitude with regard to matches, I fear it will
                 happen again and it will be, of course --- well, you know
                 how awful it has been once but to have it again would be
                 just that much worse.  How you solve it - the only safe
                 stadium, in my view, is an empty one.  As soon as you
                 bring a substantial number of people together you run
                 risks, and whether it is possible to have terraces where
                 people stand without risk I have doubts.   So I intend
                 again to draw these thoughts to the Home Secretary and see
                 what, if anything, he can or wishes to do.

                      Finally, and I am cheating a little bit because this
                 is not actually a safety matter, I do intend to write to
                 the Home Secretary and ask him to seriously apply his mind
                 to the inter-relationship between coroners' inquests and
                 public inquiries in major disasters of this type, because
                 I think somebody has got to grasp the nettle and sort out
                 the situation, which I do not think is entirely
                 satisf act ory.

    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                               14




                          That is the broad outline of the matters whi ch occur to
                     me at the moment.   If something else were to come to me at
                     some time in the future and I thought it right, then of
                     course I can always write.   Indeed, anybody can wri te to
                     the Home Secretary if they wish.

                          I want to turn to you, ladies and gentlemen.   I want
                     to say first of all that you have had an infinitely harder
    B                task than I had imagined.   I knew it was going to be pretty
                     hard for you but in fact it has been harder.   I want to
                     thank you for your perseverance, for your interest, for your
                     attention, for your courage in reaching decisions and
                     announcing them,   I admire you.   What more can I say!
                     thank you.

                          It is within my power to excuse you from jury service
                     in Coroners' courts.   It is not in my power to excuse you
                     from other courts, but as far as I am concerned, subject to
                     a proviso which I will mention in a moment, I intend to
                     excuse you from Coronal jury service for the rest of your
                     lives.   I think you have done your bit.   The only proviso I
                     have is that if any of you do not wish me to do that, please
                     write to me at the Medico-Legal Centre, because I would not
                     want to excuse you if it wasn't something you wanted, but if
    D                I do not hear to you I will write a letter to you in due
                     course, or at least my Jury Off icer will write you a letter
                     to confirm that so you have got it.

                          I want to remind you that right at the opening on the
                     18th of April, 1990, when you first came together, I drew
                     your attention to the fact that this would be stressful,
                     that things might get to you.   If you remember I reminded
                     you that one of the good things was you had yourselves and
                     that you could support one another.   I did at that point
                     allude to the possibility that if external help was needed
                     because you had problems yourselves with coping with the
                     situation, then one should seek it.   I want to repeat that
                     but I want to add one or two additional points.   When we
                     have finished today you will, of course, be splitting up and
                     in that sense you will lose the fellowship of the eleven of
                     you which you have built up over several months.

                          I do not want to suggest for a minute that you are
                     going to need any co unselling or any help or anything of the
                     sort, but you may do and there would be no shame if you did.
                     If you do, remember that your GP is the first port of call.
                     You may not like him, don't go to him, but he should be in a
                     position to he lp you.

                          In addition, I know because I have heard from them,
                     that the Family and Community Services Department in
                     Sheffield, that is the social workers if you like, at
                     Redvers House, Union Street, Sheffield, are both available
                     and, indeed, anxious to help you with any personal
    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                               15




                     difficulties that you may need, with counselling and
                     assistance and support.   If you do wish to take advantage
                     of that then the person to contact would be
                     Mr. David Webber.   He is the senior principal social worker
                     and I give you the 'phone number, it is 734855 or 734856.
                     He has indicated to me he would be more than wil ling
                     entirely confidentially to either counsel you or point you
                     in any way that he thought could be of help.   Whilst I have
    B                no particular skills in this regard, if none of these things
                     worked, if you wished to write to me at the Medico-Legal
                     Centre I may not be able to help you personally but I may be
                     able to guide or direct you or find somebody who could be of
                     help to you.

                          What I want you to know is that you do not have to be
                     on your own.   It has been a hard task.   That does not mean
                     to say you go out and discuss what happened in the jury room
                     because discussions in the jury room are confidential, but
                     if you yourself need support, seek it.   If you don't, so be
                     it.   Neither way is a criticism of you.   What I am anxious
                     about is that you should know it is available and it has
                     been offered and freely offered.

                          I want to very briefly thank a number of people.   I
    D                have already thanked you.   That was first and foremost and
                     I meant what I said.   I have the greatest admiration for
                     the way you have handled yourselves and dealt with this
                     problem.

                           I would also like to record my thanks to the Town Hall
                     staff, senior, junior, everybody - the tea ladies, security
                     people, cleaners.    The big bosses who made all the
                     arrangements, anybody who has been involved.    In particular
                     I want, of course, to include the Lord Mayor, the Leader of
                     the Council and all the Councillors who have given up this
                     chamber to us for very much longer than anybody imagined.
                     Their co-operation has been appreciated by me and I thank
                     them.

                          I want to again thank the West Midlands Police Team who
                     have been of invaluable assistance to me and I would like to
                     commend them for what they have done.

                          I also want to take the opportunity of thanking all the
                     legal representatives.   Not all of them are here today but
                     Mr. Fraser I am very pleased to see you because you were
                     here on that first opening and I am very glad to see you
                     today.   All of you - sometimes we have crossed swords,
                     sometimes I have agreed with you, sometimes I have not, but
                     I think I have been exceedingly fortunate in having you and
                     not just the front line.   I would like to thank the
                     instructing solicitors and everybody else who has been
                     involved in trying to make these Inquests go as smoothly as
                     in fact they did.   Thank you very much indeed.
    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                            16




                      I want to say that although Mrs. McBrien, of course, is
                 not a lawyer, I do recognise her very, very great endeavour
                 and strength of character to be able to sustain what must
                 have been an exceedingly hard task for her for very many
                 weeks.

                      Perhaps I could just say, although I think most people
                 know it, I would like to add my congratulations to
    B            Timothy King's appointment as a QC which was announced
                 today.   It is entirely fortuitous that it should have been
                 announced on the last day of these Inquests, but I am very
                 pleased indeed for him.

                      In a moment or two I am going to conclude, but before I
                 do so I just want to say one other thing.    I can see how
                 painful all this is, has been and no doubt will continue to
                 be for very many of the people in front of me and also for
                 the very many people who are not here.    I would like to
                 think we have had the Inquests, whether that has been
                 exhaustive I don't know, but it has certainly been
                 exhausting and I would like to think that the time has come
                 when some healing can be found within the hearts and minds
                 of everybody.   If it can't, it can't, but nevertheless I
                 would like to think that that could now take place.
    D
                      Is there anything else I need to say or do that anybody
                 has noticed I have forgotten?

                      MR. ISAACS:   I was looking to my learned friend Mr.
                 Payne but his reluctance to stand, perhaps he feels that he
                 has stood up more than everybody else, I don't know.  I
                 think speaking on behalf of everybody on this bench and
                 immediately behind, we would like to thank you, sir, for 80
                 days now of this particular stretch.  During the whole of
                 that period and indeed before then you have shown us
                 unfailing courtesy, sometimes when your patience must have
                 been sorely tried,.but we thank you for that and we also
                 thank the Shorthand Writers because they have been not only
                 efficient but they have been highly skilful and their skill
                 has aided us, and indeed I know all those behind us, with
                 keeping abreast of everything that had happened from day, to
                 day, to day.

                      Of course, you have already menti on ed the West Midlands
                 Police tame, and to Mr. Jones and that team we would also
                 like to give our thanks, because again through their skill
                 and efficiency they have made our task that m uc h easier, so
                 for all those things, sir, we are very grateful indeed.

                      THE CORONER:   Thank you.  I am very glad that you
                 reminded me about the Shorthand Writers because I should
                 certainly have included them.  Please forgive me that I did
                 not do so, but I am very, very conscio us of the enormous

    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                     17




                     amount of work that you have done and I would not have
                     managed without it.  Than k you very much indeed.

                          MR. HALE:   It was customary when we started this
                     Inquest that Mr. Maxwell was instrumental in expressing
                     almost as every witness came how sorry we all were and our
                     great sympathy for them.  Obviously that could not continue,
                     there were so many witnesses, and it rather dropped off.
        B
                          I am specifically instructed by Superintendent Marshall
                     to say that his sympathy has been wit h them all the time, it
                     remains with them now.  He is a father himself, he tries to
                     understand how they feel and he wishes that to be known.   He
                     feels no sense of elation today, a sense of relief, of
                     course, but at the same time he does wish it to be known
                     that he does extend his most sincere sympathy to everyone
                     who suffered a loss.

                          THE CORONER:   Than k you, Mr. Hale. We will now rise
                     and stand for one minute as a mark of respect and when we
                     have done that, at the end of it, we will walk out.

                          (The Court stood in silent tribute for one m i n u t e )
        D                              (The Inquests were closed)




        E



#
        F




        G




        H




    J. L. Harpham Ltd.
