    Transcript created by Merrill Legal Solutions




Owning Organisation:        South Yorkshire Coroner

Title Memo:                 Mini Inquest cassette - [Coroner’s notes on running order/w hat
                            he intends to say]

Description:


This transcript was produced in April 2011 by Merrill Legal Solutions from the digitised version
of the audio cassette copy of this recording, after enhancement by BR Consult to reduce noise
and improve audibility of the incoming radio transmissions.




 MERRILL
 LEGAL SOLUTIONS
    Digital transcript of Wordwave International, a Merrill Communications Company
                      101 Finsbury Pavement London EC2A 1ER
                   Tel No: 020 7422 6131 Fax No: 020 7422 6134
        Web: www.merrillcorp.com/mls        Email: ukclient@merrillcorp.com
00:00:04

CORONER:                   Opening remarks:

                           1) Expression of regret at the tragedy which has occurred.

                           2) Acknowledgement of the work done by the police after the tragedy,
                           with specific reference to the fact that I make no comment with regard to
                           either pre-match, or peri-incident activity, as that of course is subject of
                           the public inquiry and to a certain extent that of the inquest.

                           3) Explain the quality of the (inaudible) and thank particularly not the
                           senior officers as such but the very many police constables who had the
                           task o f dealing with the identification and were in effect the first contact
                           with the relatives.

                           4) Thank the ambulance service for their cooperation in transporting
                           bodies and for doing it willingly, efficiently, without any fuss.

                           5) Acknowledge and thank the teams of pathologists, technicians and
                           other members of the Medico-Legal Centre for the incredible effort which
                           was put in to enable the post-mortems to be completed so that the
                           inquests could be opened so quickly after such a major disaster.

                           6) Mention specifically the advantage of this purpose-built building,
                           without which we probably could not have coped in the same manner
                           with such an incident.

                           7) Acknowledge and thank the two hospitals in Sheffield who not only --

                                                       [BREAK IN AUDIO]

                           8) -- but it is easy to overlook that these ordinary cases which receive no
                           publicity are in (inaudible) a similar personal pain as no doubt is
                           experienced by the families of the deceased at Hillsborough.

                           9) Note that it is easy to forget the individual sorrow of each family when
                           looking at a large number of casualties, and there is a danger of
                           forgetting that pain.

                           10) Acknowledge the work with the relatives which has been done by
                           many individuals and many organisations, who have given much time
                           and effort and emotional commitment to this. Mention the overall
                           cooperation from everybody and not least my officers.

                           Would you please do a letter to Mr Dominic J Burke, Third Floor, Martins
                           Bank Buildings, Water Street, Liverpool, L2 3SP. Re: Hillsborough.
                           Thank you very much for your letter of 17 April. You will of course be
                           aware that Mr Justice Taylor’s been appointed to head a judicial inquiry
                           and indeed the other inquiries, including my own, into this incident. I
                           have no doubt that the points which you make will be fully looked at by
                           the appropriate inquiry teams.




w w w .m errillcorp.co m
                                                                                                       2
